S/PV.7740*

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7740th meeting

Tuesday, 19 July 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bessho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Seck
Mr. Gasso Matoses
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)
Security Council working methods
Letter dated 1 July 2016 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2016/585)

* Reissued for technical reasons 4 December 2018.
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-22488 (E)
*1622488*

S/PV.7740

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/507)
Security Council working methods
Letter dated 1 July 2016 from the Permanent
Representative of Japan to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2016/585)
The President: In accordance with rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite the representatives of Argentina, Australia,
Belgium, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Estonia, Georgia, Germany, Guatemala, Hungary,
India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy,
Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein, Mexico, Norway, Pakistan,
Panama, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea,
Romania, Singapore, South Africa, Switzerland and
Turkey to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/585, which contains a letter dated
1 July 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Japan to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a concept paper on the item
under consideration.
All speakers, Council members and non-Council
members alike, are asked to kindly keep their
interventions succinct and within four minutes.
Speakers who wish to do so may circulate the text of
a more detailed statement to Council members and
participants, without making oral statements that
exceed four minutes. The microphone light will start
blinking at the 3-minute, 30-second mark. At the
4-minute, 30-second mark, the President will urge
speakers to kindly wrap-up immediately, as necessary.
I would like to appeal to speakers to deliver their
2/42

19/07/2016

statements at a reasonable speed so that interpretation
may be provided accurately.
I wish to inform all concerned that this open debate
will be suspended during the lunch hour.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Japan.
Let me begin by expressing my sincere appreciation
to all the Member States that are participating in what
I believe to be an important and timely open debate
to share their valuable views. I should like to take the
floor first so that I can provide the broad context of
this debate.
The Security Council’s working methods are crucial
to its ability to fulfil its responsibility to act promptly
and effectively on behalf of international peace and
security. That is why Japan has attached great importance
to codifying, improving and implementing the working
methods of the Council. In 2006, the first note 507 by
the President of the Security Council (S/2006/507) was
compiled. It set forth clearly the Council’s practices at
the time to enhance the transparency, efficiency and
inclusiveness of its working methods. Today marks the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of that note.
Over the past decade, the Security Council has made
further progress in codifying and improving its working
methods, most notably in the form of the revised note
507 of 2010 (S/2010/507). We are pleased with much
of the positive feedback on the note 507 as a useful
handbook, particularly for newly elected members. Yet,
it is important for the Council to review the progress
periodically and make necessary adjustments. In
the coming months, the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Matters intends
to work towards a revised note 507. Some measures
may need to be revisisted and adjusted; some others
may need further efforts for enhanced implementation.
Decisions contained in a number of separate additional
notes may need to be consolidated and streamlined.
I have convened this open debate today because
I thought that the Council would benefit greatly from
listening closely to the views of the wider United
Nations membership, in addition to accumulating best
practices within the Council. That is not to say that the
Council has not made progress. Let me refer to some
concrete examples.
To take full advantage of the elections of the
non-permanent members being carried out from this
16-22488

19/07/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

year on, Japan as Chair of the Informal Working
Group has proposed that the Working Group revisit
the transitional arrangements for the newly elected
members of the Council. I am delighted to draw
attention to the fact that, after intensive discussions,
on 15 July the Council adopted the new presidential
note S/2016/619, which makes improvements to the
transitional arrangements. Within that note, the
newly elected members are now invited to observe
the Council’s meetings from 1 October. The process
for selecting the Chairs of subsidiary organs will be
carried out in a more transparent and inclusive manner.
I am convinced that this will benefit not only the newly
elected members by helping them to prepare more
efficiently, but also the Council as a whole by allowing
it to function much more effectively right from the
beginning of the year.
Enhancing transparency is another area in which,
although it may not be fully satisfactory to the wider
membership, the Security Council has made consistent
efforts in recent years. As President of the Security
Council, I have been conducting a press stake-out after
every session of informal consultations, though there is
a limit to the contents that I can share. I also welcome the
holding of informal wrap-up briefing sessions, which
have become a regular practice in recent years. In an
effort to continue and build upon that good practice, on
29 July I will hold an informal wrap-up briefing session
with the participation of several other Council members
as briefers. I look forward to seeing many Council
members, as well as non-Council members there.
The participation of many Member States in
today’s debate reflects the strong interest of the wider
membership. The voices of all States Members of the
United Nations are valuable in making the Council more
effective. As Chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Matters, I
intend to listen to them closely and will follow up on
their specific, practical suggestions in the process of
revising note 507.
I should like to conclude my remarks by stating
that improving working methods is not the end of the
story. An enlarged Security Council that reflects the
geopolitical realities of the twenty-first century could
be more effective in dealing with the unprecedented
challenges we face today. Japan will continue to work
with all Member States towards that goal.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.

S/PV.7740

I now give the floor to the other members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): I have the honour to deliver
this joint statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council: Angola, Senegal and
my country, Egypt. I would like to begin by making
two generals remarks.
First, today’s open debate bears testimony to the
genuine interest of all United Nations Member States in
enhancing the transparency, inclusivity and openness
of the Security Council’s work so as to ensure that
it truly acts on behalf of the entire membership, in
accordance with Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations. Secondly, Security Council members shall take
advantage of the several notes and improvements that
have been agreed over the past years. My joint statement
today is one further step taken the three African
members of the Security Council in that direction.
While there is a need for additional improvements
in many aspects of the Security Council working
methods, this statement will focus only on three key
areas where our collective efforts are most needed, as
requested by the President of the Council. The first area
is the preparation of the Council’s outcomes or the socalled penholdership, and in that regard I would like to
stress the following.
The work of the Council is a collective
responsibility. It is fundamental to ensure the equal
participation and contribution of all Council members,
permanent and elected, in the conduct of activities and
the formulation of outcomes as penholders. In May, five
elected members, in a unique exercise, jointly drafted a
resolution and conducted extensive consultations with
other Council members and all relevant stakeholders,
leading to the unanimous adoption of resolution 2286
(2016), the first of its kind, on the protection of medical
personnel. This indeed demonstrated the benefits of
collective work in enhancing the credibility of Council’s
decisions. In that connection, we believe that the Chairs
of the sanctions committees, who acquire considerable
expertise on the country situations with which their
respective committees are concerned, are particularly
well positioned as co-penholders to contribute to the
drafting of relevant Security Council outcomes.
This leads to our second area of focus, which is
the work of the Security Council’s subsidiary organs.
In that regard, we welcome the recent adoption of the
President’s note S/2016/170, which, among other things,

16-224883/42

S/PV.7740

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

enhances the transparency of the consultation process
through which the new Chairs of the subsidiary organs
are selected, and enables the newly elected members to
be prepared to assume their responsibilities.
As a considerable amount of the Council’s work
takes place in its subsidiary bodies, the need for greater
transparency is self-evident. One example is the need
to allow the country to which the sanctions regime
is applied more timely access to the reports of the
panels of experts and other documents of the sanctions
committees, especially in light of the fact that that
country is the most concerned with those documents.
We encourage the Chairs of the sanctions committee
to continue to conduct field visits in order to better
engage with countries under sanctions and countries of
the relevant region, as well others stakeholders.
The third and last area is the engagement between the
Council and other relevant stakeholders. We stand firm
in favour of a more robust engagement with the wider
United Nations membership, including and foremost
those countries particularly affected by a particular
situation under consideration, as well as troop- and
police-contributing countries. We also stress the need
for practical and more meaningful partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations, particularly
the African Union (AU), not only in managing conflicts
but more importantly in preventing them. The Security
Council should build upon the two informal dialogues
held this year with the AU Peace and Security Council
by advancing more frequent and timely consultations,
as well as collaborative field missions with it. The
Presidents of the Council should be encouraged to
organize meetings that would promote such cooperation.
Lastly, and before I conclude, I would like to
reaffirm the commitment of the three African members
of the Security Council to continuing their efforts to
improve the working methods of the Security Council,
thereby enhancing the inclusivity and credibility of
its work.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to commend Japan’s consistent and fruitful efforts
during its previous and current memberships of the
Security Council to streamline the work of the Council.
In recent years, we have seen some positive trends
within the Council in the area of its working methods.
First, taking into account the upcoming election of a
new Secretary-General, it is important to make the
election process in the Security Council as transparent
4/42

19/07/2016

and democratic as possible in order to facilitate the
election of the best candidate who will advocate
uncompromisingly for the full and unconditional
implementation of the Charter of the United Nations.
In that regard, Ukraine is encouraged by the approach
introduced through General Assembly resolution
69/321, as well as by the joint letter of the Presidents
of the Security Council and the General Assembly of
15 December 2015. Keeping in mind the importance of
the selection result and the political responsibility for
it, we believe that preserving the practice of making
ad hoc decisions on many aspects of the process is not
an option.
We also welcome the adoption of President’s
note S/2016/170, aimed at providing newly elected
non-permanent members of the Council with sufficient
time to get properly acquainted with the Council’s work
before joining the Council. In addition, it is important
that the document has introduced more concrete
guidelines on the process of appointing Chairpersons
of the Council’s subsidiary bodies.
The question of the veto is another subject that
I would like to touch upon. Ukraine belongs to the
group of States that supports both the code of conduct
regarding Security Council action in response to
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes, and
the French-Mexican initiative on suspending the use of
the veto in cases of mass atrocities. At the same time,
we are convinced that the very existence of the veto is a
significant impediment to the Council’s work. I should
like to give just one telling example of that. Two days
ago we marked the second anniversary of the downing
of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17. A joint attempt was
made last year for the Council to establish a tribunal to
prosecute those responsible for that heinous crime. Had
it not been for the veto, the Council would have sent a
strong message that there was no place for impunity
today. While we are fully aware that a veto-free
Council is a distant and uncertain reality, we would
like to draw attention to the existing provision in the
Charter of the United Nations that would prevent abuse
of the right of the veto by the permanent members of the
Council. It is a disgrace that paragraph 3 of Article 27
of the Charter — that a party to a dispute shall abstain
from voting — continues to be blatantly ignored. It
is imperative that clear proceedings be introduced
for operationalizing and properly implementing
this Article.
16-22488

19/07/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

From an unbiased and objective position, it is
clear that the Council should not face unsurmountable
obstacles, especially internally, in organizing a field
mission in response to a situation that warrants the
Council’s engagement on the ground. In that regard, we
welcome the first steps taken, back in 2010, to introduce
certain formal guidelines related to utilizing this
important tool of the Council. We are ready to continue
discussions within the Council to further develop and
improve provisions on Security Council missions.
We believe that the following important elements
have to be clearly defined by the Council: mission
planning and decision-making on its dispatching; the
mission’s composition; the reporting period and form of
reporting; as well as the Council’s decision-making on
the mission’s outcome.
The membership of the United Nations can
definitely count on my delegation’s support during the
Council’s work on the implementation of the outcome
of today’s discussion. For us it is obvious that this
body, entrusted by the entire membership to maintain
international peace and security, needs a substantial
infusion of predictability and transparency to preserve
and strengthen its credibility.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): By way of
thanking you, Mr. President, allow me point out Japan’s
very welcome contribution to the methods of work of
the Security Council, which reflects, Sir, your rigour
and professionalism. As suggested in your thoughtprovoking concept note (S/2016/585), I shall focus on
a few points.
My first point is to recognize above all the profound
evolution in the Council towards more transparency,
which France welcomes, for the major debates of
general interest are the business of all. However, that
evolution has taken place at a time of unprecedented
growth in the Council’s work. I dwell on that point
to emphasize the need to stabilize the procedures so
that they are appropriate and can be evaluated. France
does not deem it necessary to modify presidential note
S/2010/507 to a great degree — or to risk damaging the
quality and continuity of the work of the Council — at a
time replete with challenges and dangers, which should
serve to mobilize all our diplomatic energies. France
favours a constant legal codification of note 507 while
incorporating the 13 new notes adopted since 2010,
in addition to the one adopted last week, as well as
presidential statements including those of October 2015

S/PV.7740

and February 2016, adopted, respectively, under the
Spanish and Venezuelan presidencies.
My second point is to emphasize the need for the
Council to monitor and promote accountability for
its actions before all States Members of the United
Nations, in the spirit of Article 24 of the Charter of
the United Nations. To that end, France considers it
necessary to properly entrench the new pattern for
electing non-permanent members in June and draw all
of the consequences, namely, considering the Council’s
report to the General Assembly and increasing the
time for newly elected members to become acquainted
with the work of the Council and its subsidiary bodies.
We welcome the recent adoption of the presidential
note on that matter, and we congratulate the Japanese
delegation for its efforts since January. In the same
spirit, we welcome the Council’s monthly wrap-up
sessions in an open format in the Council Chamber, or
under an interactive Toledo format as established by
the Spanish presidency in October 2015. Finally, recent
developments with regard to the process for appointing
the Secretary-General and concerning the relationship
between the General Assembly and the Security
Council should be welcomed.
My third point will be dedicated to the issues of
the continuum of peace and conflict prevention. The
Council cannot but profit from the variety of partners
in the informal interactive dialogues and so-called
Arria Formula meetings. That allows it to expand its
sources, to better inform its deliberations and to better
anticipate through the use of informal formats and
early warning so as to act as early as possible. A very
important cultural change has taken place. To give a
recent example, before the adoption of resolution 2295
(2016), on the situation in Mali, in June under the French
presidency of the Council, an informal interactive
dialogue, including the Prime Minister of Mali, was
held instead of consultations, which allowed Council
members to clearly understand the stakes facing
Malians in that important negotiation. This format will
more generally inevitably have a knock-on effect on the
interaction within the Council by encouraging shorter
and more informative interventions, rather than just a
juxtaposition of static statements. In that the Council will
find a considerable source for improving its efficiency.
Reviewing the reporting cycle and publication schedule
could also contribute to such efficiency, as the Council
still faces too many compulsory dates that clutter the
agenda to the detriment of an effective and creative

16-224885/42

S/PV.7740

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

19/07/2016

treatment hot crises. In other words, despite the urgent
situations that remain, the Council must not give in to
the routine of cycles and the illusion of productivism.
We must not fall into the habit of necessarily concluding
every meeting with a long-negotiated text, whose added
value is sometimes limited.

membership of the United Nations and to uphold the
principles of transparency and inclusiveness in its
work. We firmly believe that the note paves the way for
more robust and timely engagement on the work of the
Council by the newly elected members, including its
subsidiary bodies.

Favouring an innovative format, during our
presidency in March 2015 we organized an open debate
(see S/PV.7414) to more closely consider the issue of
children in armed conflict. Solely in our national
capacity, we limited ourselves to a statement of the ideas
exchanged. That statement usefully inspired Malaysia’s
consideration as Chair of the Working Group, prior
to the adoption of resolution 2225 (2015) in June. The
same applies to this debate and the summary of the
open debate in October 2015 provided by the Spanish
delegation. Finally, last month, we organized under
our presidency an interactive and relevant ministerial
debate on the protection of civilians, for which there
was no need to adopt a text. Let us vary the formats of
our meetings with a view primarily towards collective
efficacy, not statistics.

Since joining the Council last year, Malaysia has
been pleased to witness and be part of the positive trends
towards better coordination and cooperation between
the Security Council and the General Assembly. The
good and constructive coordination and cooperation
between the Council and the Assembly on the selection
of the next Secretary-General is a good example. As
stipulated by General Assembly resolution 69/321, the
Assembly successfully undertook early elections for
non-permanent members in June. That was a significant
and important break from previous practice. From our
own fairly recent experience, we can genuinely attest
that time is indeed a precious commodity in the runup to joining the Council. As such, for the incoming
members, the additional time afforded could be taken
advantage of, including by addressing key substantive
issues and administrative concerns, among other issues.

In conclusion — and this is my last point — inclusiveness
is an empty promise if it is not accompanied by a
commitment to multilingualism, which is both an asset
to our thinking and the necessary condition for truly
participatory work. France also believes that e-working
methods and management must not result in, or serve as
a pretext for, diminishing the status accorded to each of
the official languages ​​and working languages.
It was France that, in December 1994, organized
the first Council debate on its working methods (see
S/PV.3483). We have come long way since then, but
we still have a long way to go. We are confident that,
under the leadership of Japan, we will continue to move
forward together to make the Council a body that is
both more efficient and more transparent and in the
service of all.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): Malaysia welcomes the
convening of this open debate. We commend Japan’s
commitment in seeking continuous improvement in
this important area of the work of the Security Council.
Malaysia joins other Council members in welcoming
the just-adopted presidential note S/2016/619, which
focuses on the issue of transitional arrangements for
newly elected members of the Council. The consensus
on this note is an important demonstration of the
Council’s commitment to support the call of the broader
6/42

We are also pleased that the note just adopted
recognizes that the process of appointing new Chairs
for Council subsidiary bodies should commence as soon
as possible, with the full involvement of current and
newly elected non-permanent members. In our view,
such transparency and inclusivity would contribute
immensely to improving the legitimacy of the process,
particularly in the eyes of elected members and the
wider United Nations membership.
A core component of the Council’s responsibility
revolves around the work of its subsidiary bodies, which
are crucial for the implementation of Council decisions.
Such bodies carry out a broad range of tasks, ranging
from implementation monitoring and compliance
assessment, to coordination and cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations, among other
tasks. In that connection, we fully support efforts
to make the work of the subsidiary bodies more
streamlined, coordinated and effective, including
via the initiative by New Zealand regarding the
communications of such bodies. Furthermore, Chairs
of Council subsidiary bodies also have an important
outreach role. Greater understanding of the work of the
subsidiary bodies promotes better and more effective
implementation of the Council’s decisions.
16-22488

19/07/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

At the same time, we believe there is cause for better
coordination among subsidiary bodies, especially those
with related themes and/or geographical scope. During
our current term as a Council member, Malaysia has
sought to promote and support the idea of working better
across related themes and issues. By way of illustration,
earlier this year, a joint consultation involving the
Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict and the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan. Similar
joint consultations were held with the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014) and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the
Central African Republic. We remain committed to
pursuing such an approach to the end of our term.
Looking ahead, we hope that such joint consultations
could become a regular practice by the Council.
On a related issue, Malaysia welcomes the
proposed initiative to update the Council’s presidential
note S/2010/507 on working methods. We stand ready
to support and commit to such an initiative, including
working towards a single comprehensive note.
In line with our collective effort to enhance the
transparency, inclusiveness, coherence, accountability
and, ultimately, the legitimacy of the Council and its
work, we hope that the views of the wider membership
expressed today will be reflected upon and duly taken
into account in any possible Council outcome or future
decisions on working methods.
Finally, I wish to underscore that improvements
to Council working methods should be seen as part
of a larger institutional or structural reform process,
which requires significant political will and flexibility
on the part of all Council members, permanent and
non-permanent. This is crucial to ensure the Council’s
continued adaptability and to ensure that it remains
relevant and appropriately equipped to address the
immediate global peace and security challenges of the
present, as well as in the future.
Mr. Gasso Matoses (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
You, Mr. President, have asked us focus our statements
on three issues at most. We will limit ourselves to
talking about just one theme, that is, working as a team
in the Security Council. It is a matter of promoting
the approach that has come to be known as the Toledo
format, in reference to the Spanish city in which
during there Middle Ages there flourished a spirit of

S/PV.7740

collaboration and exchange among the Jewish, Christian
and Muslim cultures.
While we have now served a year and a half in
the Security Council, this is in fact our fifth term in
this body. Participating in an intermittent way on the
Council has enabled us to gain a different, interesting
perspective that has shown us that teamwork is essential
in order to improve three fundamental things — the
effectiveness, transparency and impact of the Council’s
work, which ought to be our collective aim.
What do I mean by teamwork? The Security Council
should not be the sum of 15 individual Member States,
and much less one of 5+10. The Council is a collegial
organ in which we all have a responsibility to actively
participate. We all have something to contribute. Spain
believes that the initiatives that have been led by various
Member States from different regions, cultures and
political perspectives all bring important added value.
I should like to refer to various concrete examples,
namely, Toledo briefings, joint statements, at both open
and closed meetings, the practice of co-chairmanships of
Council working groups, including with co-penholders,
and the selection of the Secretary-General.
As most Council members and their assistants
are already aware, Toledo briefings have been held
with some regularity at the end of each presidency
since last October. More than a mere recapitulation
of the work of the Council over a given month, the
Toledo format is an informal meeting where a group of
Permanent Representataives respond to questions and
comments from the membership about what has and
has not been achieved during the month. I can think
of no better example of an exercise in transparency,
interaction and accountability to the rest of Members
of the Organization.
Secondly, with regard to joint statements by
members of the Council at open meetings, last October
Spain convened a debate (see S/PV.7539) similar to
today’s in which we encouraged such statements — and
I must say, with some success. The goal was not just to
achieve more flexibility and effectiveness but, above
all, greater clarity and strength in the positions. Six
members of the Council spoke jointly, but Members of
the Organization did so as well. Moreover, one member
of the Council — France — decided to make a joint
statement with a Member of the Organization that was
not then a member of the Council, that is, with Germany.
I think that is a very clear example of success in working

16-224887/42

S/PV.7740

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

19/07/2016

together. The same philosophy could be applied to the
work of the Council in the closed-door meetings.

briefers — focus only on the things that really matter
to us and stick to time, both here and in consultations.

Thirdly, with regard to sharing leadership over work
of the Council, the Egyptian Ambassador has already
mentioned the issue, and I would associate myself with
his position. Currently, 33 of 43 penholderships are in
the hands of three members of the Council. We believe
that work of the penholder undoubtedly has added
value. Nevertheless, we think that teamwork in that
regard could benefit from the varied composition of
the whole Council by generating greater collaboration
among the various members, thereby creating bridges
over divisions.

Secondly, building on one of Ambassador Delattre’s
points, our programme of work is overloaded. It
is driven more by reporting cycles than by what is
happening in the real world. The globalized world is
getting more complex, and we must ask ourselves if we
are keeping up. So far, we have reviewed the periodicity
of mandate and reporting cycles to try to address this,
but I think we need to go further. Instead of receiving
a programme of work filled on the basis of reporting
cycles, incoming presidencies could set out what reports
we expect to receive in a month and ask if there is a
need for a meeting. That should cut out some meetings.
We will always have the option of adding a meeting to
the programme should the need arise, or of raising an
issue under “other matters”.

Finally, allow me to quickly refer to the distribution
of the joint chairmanships of the sanctions committees.
Therein lies a clear example of the success of the
Japanese presidency, and I congratulate you, Sir,
on the note adopted last Friday. Under the note, for
the first time, chairmanships of subsidiary bodies of
the Council would was conducted in a spirit of full
collaboration with the participation of all 15 Council
members, under the leadership and the facilitation of
two Council members.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The working
methods of the Security Council are absolutely key.
Done well, they facilitate our work, provide a framework
for our deliberations and allow us to take decisions that
can help maintain international peace and security.
Done less well, they prevent all that. Japan wrote the
working methods bible, presidential note S/2010/507,
and it is right that Japan is updating it.
How we work has a direct bearing on the impact that
we have in the real world. The United Kingdom, like
most of the rest of the General Assembly membership,
I am sure, wants the Council to be more transparent,
more inclusive, more interactive, more action-oriented
and more efficient. Let me highlight two areas where I
think we can improve our efficiency.
First, with regard to speaking limits, I hope that
everyone can distil their points on any particular issue
into five minutes, or today four minutes, in order to
be efficient in our deliberations. Taking excessive time
over interventions is counterproductive. People switch
off. The shorter an intervention, the more likely it is to
have an impact. We cannot, in any case, hope to cover
everything that there is to say about a topic, so let us
all — Council members, non-Council members and
8/42

Finally, one of the risks to the Security
Council — perhaps the greatest risk — is irrelevance.
If we keep sticking to the status quo in our working
methods, that risk will grow. We will need a more
radical approach if we are to remain relevant. I support
many of the proposals already put forward in the course
of this debate. Let us get on and implement them.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes today’s open debate. As Matthew
Rycroft has just said, Security Council working
methods matter because poor working methods
can lead to poor outcomes. Progress has been
made in recent years in codifying existing
Council practice in documents such as presidential
note S/2010/507, which we are reviewing today. That is
welcome, as is the new presidential note S/2016/619 on
transitional arrangements for incoming members.
But let us be honest — these notes and statements
do not normally result in better Council performance.
Today I will address a few areas where New Zealand has
sought to improve Council culture and practice during
our term, and where we think further work is required.
First, in regard to the quality of Council interactions,
the Council was intended to be a collective security
body. Too often, it is a forum for polarizing initiatives
and last-minute take-it-or-leave-it drafts tabled by socalled penholders. Those practices leave no space for
meaningful input from Council colleagues, let alone
affected parties. New Zealand has made it a priority
to try to create space for more meaningful discussions
focused on identifying collective approaches and
16-22488

19/07/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

solutions. During our presidency in July 2015, we
initiated an ambassador-level breakfast at the start of the
month. The aim was to have Permanent Representatives
talk to each other about the challenges facing the Council
and how they might be resolved. We are pleased that
the breakfast is now becoming an established Council
practice. We Permanent Representatives have had good
conversations about how to manage the programme
of work and topics of the moment, but we believe
that we could do more if we were able and willing to
engage in discussions of a more substantive, problemsolving nature.
Secondly, in regard to living up to our own
undertakings, paragraph 44 of note S/2010/507 is
clear that all draft resolutions should be introduced in
informal consultations. That almost never happens.
Penholders routinely take zero drafts straight to
meetings of so-called experts. This precludes any real
effort at building genuine consensus on the key policy
questions to be considered. Non-penholders have to
choose between accepting a text largely as presented, or
risk being accused of torpedoing important documents
if they wish to make substantive policy proposals.
Those practices are neither effective, sustainable nor
respectful of the perspectives of other Council members.
Thirdly, as regards more meaningful engagement
with key stakeholders, despite the provisions in
paragraph 33 of note S/2010/507, we are yet to see troopand police-contributing countries consistently engaged
in Council discussions. Those countries need regular
meaningful engagement on issues of importance to
their contingents. For a variety of reasons, the formal
consultations held a few days before a draft resolution
is adopted rarely produce useful conversations. Last
year, New Zealand instituted the practice of holding
informal triangular consultations among Council
members, contributing countries and the Secretariat to
discuss key issues and challenges facing a number of
United Nations peacekeeping missions. We think it is
important that that practice now be fully mainstreamed
and become part of standard Council procedure.
Time constraints do not permit consideration
of other areas where we consider Council working
methods can be improved, but I want to make some
more general observations.
First, elected members have to take responsibility
for the way the Council operates. It is easy to blame
permanence and the veto for the Council’s dysfunction,

S/PV.7740

but the acquiescence of the elected 10 members is also a
big factor. Ten votes are needed to adopt any resolution.
Procedural resolutions cannot be vetoed. If the elected
10 are prepared to assert themselves, the five cannot
dictate terms, especially on working methods, which
are quintessentially a procedural matter.
Secondly, Council practice in the operation of
subsidiary bodies is a glaring case where Council habits
well exceed the requirements of the Charter of the
United Nations. Consensus is laudable if it strengthens
the Council’s voice, but to elevate consensus to the
equivalent of a 15-member veto is foolish, particularly if
it allows a single member to assert control over matters
that the Charter never envisaged as subject to veto.
If we really want to make the Council work
more effectively — and New Zealand passionately
believes that we must — the elected 10 must use their
influence and their legitimacy as the representatives
of the wider United Nations membership to push for
real change. Notes on working methods can be useful.
More important, however, is the courage to change
behaviour, to do things differently and to exercise the
powers conferred on us under the Charter. In our own
small way, New Zealand has tried to make a difference.
We hope those that follow will continue our efforts.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to begin by saying that I think Mr. Van Bohemen
has just stated the points that we wanted to make much
more eloquently than I can, and I fully support his
statement. However, in order to enjoy my 15 minutes of
fame, I shall deliver my statement anyway.
My delegation associates itself fully with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of
Switzerland on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group.
I would like to talk about some of my personal
experiences in the somewhat informal way that I
usually prefer to address the Council. In fact, many
of the things that the Council could undertake do not
require new rules. Agreements may be reached but then
are simply not implemented.
I would like to refer to two issues that are actually
only one issue — that of transparency. The two
themes that I want to address today are the drafting
of resolutions and the formats of meetings. Presidential
note S/2014/268, on the drafting of resolutions, refers

16-224889/42

S/PV.7740

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

to three elements: consultations with Council members,
penholdership, and consultations with relevant actors.
With regard to the first element, the note says
that penholders should hold consult and exchange
information with all Council members as early as
possible in the drafting exercise. That generally does
not occur, however. This has its roots in what we would
call a cultural problem in the Council’s functioning.
The permanent members prepare draft resolutions,
discuss them among themselves and share them at the
end of that process, with very little time left before
the document is to be presented for adoption. When
we, the elected members, wish to make comments or
suggestions on the text, we are usually told, “Well,
what a shame! There is a very delicate balance that we
need to strike in the wording of the text, and there is no
time to incorporate any new suggestions”.
This leaves the elected members with the options of
either accepting a fait accompli, giving an explanation
of vote, abstaining in the voting or voting against the
draft resolution, even in cases where they endorse the
content if not the particular wording. It is unfortunate
that this culture of dominance by the five permanent
members permeates all Council activities to the
point that, when an elected member presides over the
Council, the President cannot sign a simple procedural
letter without subjecting that text to the prior scrutiny
of permanent members. This occurs even when the
letter is just a template of the sort that has been used
throughout the Council’s history. Ultimately, this
culture of dominance by the permanent members is
the fundamental reason that the Council’s proceedings
lack transparency.
Turning to the second element, regarding the
active participation of all Council members in drafting
documents, that does not happen either. In general,
penholders are almost exclusively permanent members
of the Council, and in most cases they are the so-called
P-3. Uruguay believes that elected members could have
a greater role in that regard. Suggestions to that end
include the idea of a co-penholdership, which could
be held by both a permanent and an elected member
of the Council. We are not even close to reaching an
agreement on that topic.
With regard to the third element — consultation
with other relevant actors and other States Members
of the United Nations, and in particular Member States
concerned, including groups of friends — I would
10/42

19/07/2016

suggest that this is not the case either. Perhaps the
sole exception is that of the Group of Friends of Haiti,
which Uruguay chairs. Our delegation does indeed
interact with the penholder, the United States, in the
drafting of resolutions pertaining to the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti. For all these reasons,
I must insist on the need to introduce a culture of
greater inclusivity and transparency in the activities of
the Council.
The final point I wish to make concerns something
I have mentioned on several occasions, namely, the
culture of holding open briefings in the Council, at
which we listen to a briefing by a senior official and
then quickly adjourn the meeting to move into the
much-touted informal consultations. I will say it
again — let us demystify the informal consultations.
In general terms, they are merely a routine succession
of delivery of previously prepared statements that put
forward national positions. There is basically little
debate or interaction among the membership. In my
limited experience on the Council, there have been
very few occasions on which I have heard any point
made in those consultations that could not have been
made in the open Chamber. That is why we believe that
we need to have more open briefings at which Council
members deliver their statements before the entire
United Nations membership.
Obviously, the Council will continue to hold
closed informal consultations, which provide a private
atmosphere in which it can discuss some sensitive
issues. However, open meetings should be the norm,
which would be a major step forward in ensuring
greater transparency before and accountability to
Member States. I would like to highlight presidential
note S/2016/619 and the improvements introduced
therein with regard to the participation of new Council
members, which, we trust, will contribute to improving
the functioning of the Council.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The discussion of the working methods of
the Security Council in an open format is an occasion
to hear an outside assessment of the current state of
affairs and be enriched by new ideas and proposals for
improving the procedural aspects of Security Council
activities, of course on the understanding is that the
working methods themselves, as well as decisions on
possible amendments thereto, are within the purview
of the Security Council itself. Today’s meeting has
additional importance because it is presided over by the
16-22488

19/07/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

delegation that heads the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Matters and that
co-sponsored the best-known document on this matter,
presidential note S/2010/507.
We note of Japan’s intention to update note 507,
which is of critical importance as a compendium of the
Security Council’s working practices. For our part, we
stand ready to provide any necessary assistance to the
Japanese delegation with that important work. We also
note the contribution made by other non-permanent
Council members to revitalizing the Council’s
working methods with new initiatives. We welcome
the statement on the Toledo formula, delivered by
the representative of Egypt on behalf of the African
delegations. We also call on our European colleagues
to add this innovation to their toolkits. For instance,
some could associate themselves with the statements of
the United States delegation.
Note 507 is not only actively used by Security
Council members; it is also an important aid for
non-permanent members preparing to work on the
Council. That will be particularly relevant this year.
The new members elected by the General Assembly in
June will be able to attend Council meetings starting
on 1 October. In October, the Security Council will
be presided over by Russia. We stand ready to provide
these members with assistance in the smooth beginning
of their work on the Council, on the clear understanding
that their term begins only on 1 January 2017.
We note that, in recent years, the activities
of
non-permanent
members
have
increased
significantly — a development that we fully welcome.
Many of our non-permanent colleagues are not only
making contributions to resolving pressing issues on
the Council’s agenda; in fact, they are also providing
substantive initiatives and taking the lead in enhancing
important areas of the Council’s work. We are
convinced that the Security Council would benefit from
the further democratization of its work. In line with
that would be a more equitable distribution of duties in
informal leadership on country-specific and thematic
issues — the so-called penholdership. Certain Council
members should not regard countries or even regions as
their tutees and act as mentors on certain issues. This
is a vestige of a bygone era, entirely out of place in the
twenty-first century.
By definition, the reform and improvement of
the work of the Council should be increasing its

S/PV.7740

effectiveness and efficiency in order to facilitate a
fuller implementation of its mandate of maintaining
international peace and security. One area requiring
our attention is the Council’s documentation overload.
Each year, the Security Council distributes hundreds
of documents, and let us acknowledge it that not all
of them have added value. We are convinced that the
Security Council’s decisions and statements to the press
should be terse, easy to understand and action-oriented.
We should avoid situations in which Security Council
resolutions contain up to 50 operative paragraphs and
press statements go on for three pages, while the bulk
of those documents contain repeated provisions from
other documents.
Resolutions are no place for micromanagement.
They should be concise and clear and their content
must be political. We need to take steps to lighten the
workload of the Council, which is already working
at full capacity. I do not think that we will be able
to reduce the number of meetings, particularly given
the growing instability in the world; however, the
Council’s workload should be taken into account
by Council members when they decide to convene
meetings — especially thematic ones — and as they
consider the optimal format for such meetings and the
number of rapporteurs or briefers. At present, we are
hearing five briefers in some meetings. We think that
there should be no more than three.
The most important consideration should be the
added value of the event or meeting and how much it is
likely to improve the situation in practice. We believe
that the Council should not take up topics that it cannot
take decisions on. We also believe that the Council
should remain focused on country-specific issues; it
should neither encroach upon the mandates of other
United Nations bodies nor attempt to act in the stead
of the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council, the Human Rights Council or other organs.
Such initiatives could undermine the organization of
the United Nations system as a whole.
It is absolutely clear that the Security Council is
a favourite of global media, and it is tempting to use
the media for self-promotion, including to promote
domestic political agendas. We know that we cannot
expect Council members to behave like saints but we
would nevertheless ask them to act in the interests
of supporting international peace and security first
and foremost.

16-2248811/42

S/PV.7740

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): In recent
years, while fully discharging its responsibilities, the
Security Council has worked to improve its working
methods, increase efficiency and enhance transparency.
With efforts of the Council members and the support
of the broader membership of the United Nations, the
Council has constantly improved its working methods
in practice and has made positive progress.
There has been a marked increase in the number
of open debates of the Council. The Council has
strengthened coordination with the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and other United
Nations bodies as well as regional organizations. The
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Matters has adopted numerous notes by the
President, made recommendations on improving the
Council’s annual report, maintained regular contact
with the Peacebuilding Commission and strengthened
interactions with countries that contribute troops to
peacekeeping operations. All of these efforts have
yielded good results. China supports the Council in its
continued efforts to improve its working methods. We
believe that attention should be given to the following
three areas.
First, key points should be highlighted to ensure
their effect. The Charter of the United Nations contains
specific provisions on the responsibilities of the Council
and other United Nations bodies. The Council should
concentrate its energy and resources on addressing
pressing issues threatening international peace and
security to improve the real effect of its actions. While
deliberating on some special topics, the Council should
align and coordinate its efforts with those of the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and other
United Nations bodies in order to avoid duplication.
Secondly, it is imperative to emphasize consultation
and collective decision-making. When it comes to
decision-making at the Council and its subsidiary
bodies, Council members should engage in adequate
consultations in a bid to achieve consensus. If there are
still significant differences between parties, no actions
should be forced through. Rather, parties should insist
on seeking maximum consensus so as to safeguard the
authority of the Council.
Thirdly, to strengthen good offices, coordination
and communication, the Council should champion
and advance the culture of peace and give full play to
political means, such as preventive diplomacy, mediation
12/42

19/07/2016

and good offices to push for diplomatic solutions to
crises and avoid the use or the threat of use of sanctions
wantonly. The Council should strengthen coordination
with the Member States and regional organizations,
heed the input of the countries on its agenda and draw
on the experience of regional organizations in dealing
with regional issues and leverage their advantages
in terms of close geographical distance, history and
culture. In this way, the Council can more reasonably
make decisions and form synergies so as to jointly play
a role in seeking the peaceful settlement of disputes.
China has always supported with its actions the
efforts of the Council to improve its working methods
so that it can work more equitably, efficiently and
transparently and better respond to the expectations of
the Member States and the international community.
China stands ready to work together with members of
the Council and the wider membership of the United
Nations to draw upon experience and make innovations
in order to push for active fulfilment of the Council’s
duties so as to play a constructive role in safeguarding
international peace and security.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): At a time
when the Security Council is grappling with crises
from South Sudan to Syria, when the Council’s and
the United Nations response to terrorism is ever
more important, and with threats from pandemics to
proliferation requiring united action, it is appropriate
that we discuss our working methods. I would like to
touch on three aspects: first, how we conduct meetings,
including in consultations; secondly, the importance
of the deliberations of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Matters; and
finally, the selection of the Secretary-General.
My delegation and others have tried to make
Security Council meetings here in the open Chamber
more topical and more oriented towards action. We
have also tried to bring humanity into the Chamber and
by that I mean real people. One of the most memorable
Council events I was ever a part of was the meeting
during our presidency on human trafficking, when we
heard from Nadia Murad Basee Taha, a Yazidi victim of
trafficking by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(see S/PV.7585). Her searing account was unforgettable
and drove home the need for Member States — for all
of us — to act to combat trafficking.
Against this backdrop we do believe that the
connection between human rights abuses and threats
16-22488

19/07/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

to international peace and security is clear and
real and merits Council attention, which is why we
wholeheartedly support briefings in the Council by
officials from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. We should not have
to surmount procedural obstacles to learn more about
dire human rights situations in North Korea or Ukraine
or anywhere else. Behind closed doors in consultations,
the Council needs to be more interactive and more
oriented towards results.
During our most recent presidencies, the United
States injected into our proceedings additional ways
for us to actually talk with each other, which has meant
turning more regularly to the briefer for follow-up. It has
meant urging Council members to jump back into the
discussion, even if they had already made a statement.
And it has meant Council members sometimes asking
each other questions to clarify positions. The dictionary
definition of a consultation is a meeting for deliberation,
discussion or decision, and we want to put an accent on
that “decision” part. As a Council, we must ensure that
our decisions must emerge from real discussions will
we truly get at the facts.
I would like to thank the Japanese delegation for its
extremely capable stewardship of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Matters and the Angolan delegation for its work last
year as well. Just the other day, the Council reached
agreement on a note the Working Group produced on
how to integrate newly elected members into our work
(S/2016/619). In the past few years, the Working Group
has made important contributions to the Council’s daily
work, drafting notes that improved our approach on
preparing products, strengthened the continuity of the
work of the Council’s subsidiary organs and clarified
how we set speaking order at meetings.
We understand that the Japanese Chair would like
the Working Group to consider ways to revamp the note
S/2010/507 of the President of the Security Council. We
look forward to working with Japan and the rest of the
Council on this effort. And consistent with the spirit
of transparency, the process by which we are selecting
the next Secretary-General has also undergone positive
changes this year.
Using General Assembly resolution 69/321 as our
guide, we were pleased to participate in the many
innovations created this year in response to calls
from Member States and from the wider public to

S/PV.7740

increase transparency in the selection process. We have
supported its implementation every step of the way
and have encouraged candidates to take advantage of
the new procedures, especially the General Assembly
informal dialogues. I would like to thank President of
the General Assembly Lykketoft for his commitment to
the dialogues and for his enthusiasm in carrying out the
letter and spirit of resolution 69/321.
The time has come for us in the Security Council to
fulfil our responsibility, as laid out clearly in the United
Nations Charter and to show the world that we are up
to the task of recommending for appointment the best
person to lead the Organization as the next SecretaryGeneral. We look forward to getting under way and to
our first straw poll on Thursday. We think the Council
should be decisive and aim for early agreement that
would give the next Secretary-General time to prepare
to assume the office. The United States looks forward
to working with all Council members in this process.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Mr. President, we
congratulate you on the work you have done in your
capacity as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Matters and for
all your efforts in preparing and facilitating the note
of the President of the Security Council contained in
document S/2016/619.
My country aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
We do not want to repeat some of the points that
have already been raised, but we would like to fully
endorse the statement that was made by the Permanent
Representative of Uruguay. However, we would like to
add a few comments of our own.
The note of the President of the Security Council
that we have adopted under your presidency, Sir, is
helping us to move forward in democratizing the
election of the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council and in making the process fairer and
more transparent. Although we would have liked to
go much further in that regard, we know too well how
difficult it is to move forward along those lines. We
continue to call for a balanced, transparent and inclusive
appointment of the Chairpersons of the subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council. In that connection,
we welcome the progress made by appointing such
Chairpersons as soon as possible after the election

16-2248813/42

S/PV.7740

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

of the Council’s non-permanent members. We must
help the elected members to better prepare for, and
participate in, chairing the subsidiary bodies, as it is
we who will need to deal with the administrative tasks
and the attendant frustrations.
As we make progress in the democratization of the
election process of the Chairpersons for the Council’s
subsidiary bodies, we must also move to make the
work of those groups more transparent. Transparency
in the working methods of the sanctions committees is
particularly important.
With 16 active sanctions regimes, sanctions have
become an essential tool of the Security Council.
Sanctions are temporary tools and should not be seen
as an end in and of themselves. The Council should
therefore not prolong the mandate of those committees
indefinitely. In that connection, it would be necessary
to pinpoint the objectives behind the establishment of
each committee and to conduct regular evaluations to
determine if those goals are being achieved.
We need to consider and address the issue of the
duration of sanctions regimes. A country entering a
sanctions regime has no way of knowing how to exit
it. Often, the reasons for which a sanctions committee
was created disappear, and are then immediately
replaced by new reasons, making it apparent that,
frequently, the sanctions imposed by the Security
Council, under pressure from some of its permanent
members, are simply a means to punish some countries
and not others. In that way, some sanctions regimes
are extended indefinitely, although their reason for
existing is unclear. The issue of sanctions requires
much attention. There is much that we can do to make
sanctions regimes much more fair, clear, transparent
and adapted to international law.
In conclusion, we would like to draw attention to
the obstacles preventing some agenda items that affect
international peace and security from being dealt
with in open meetings, with Western Sahara being a
case in point. The limited consideration given to that
protracted conflict reveals the existence of double
standards, since the same issue is addressed behind
closed doors, without the other members having access
to the views expressed by the members of the Security
Council. Since the Security Council acts on behalf of
the Members of the Organization, in accordance with
Article 25 of the Charter of the United Nations, we would
hope the Council would seek to be more transparent
14/42

19/07/2016

and inclusive by presenting the Secretary-General’s
report on the Western Sahara in an open or public
format, with the participation of the representative of
the African Union, bearing in mind that that regional
organization is a strategic partner of the United Nations
in the peaceful resolution of conflicts afflicting the
African continent, including the Western Sahara.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mr. Ruiz Cabañas (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
This annual debate has been held since 2010, but
I believe, Sir, that today bears particular symbolic
importance as we celebrate the tenth anniversary of
presidential note S/2006/507, on the working methods
of the Security Council, also under the leadership of
your country, Japan.
The 2006 presidential note was the first step in
ensuring that the Organization’s States Members could
make recommendations on the working methods,
practices and formats of the Security Council with a
view to effectively dealing with threats to international
peace and security. We realize that the working
methods of the Council are constantly changing. Proof
of that is that in 2010, also under Japan’s presidency
and with Mexico as an elected member of the Council,
there was an important updating and broadening of the
earlier presidential note. Since that time, 13 additional
notes have been issued, covering various aspects of the
working methods of the Council. That is why Mexico
welcomes the proposal that the Council once again
update that note through the relevant working group,
keeping in mind our successes and, above all, our goals
and how we can reach them.
We have undoubtedly made progress in the past
decade. The participation of many Member States in
this open debate, as well as in other events, is a patent
manifestation of the Council’s improved working
methods. Even if the pace of the improvements is
slower than many would like, there are unambiguous
indicators of the interest on the part of most to continue
working towards great transparency and accountability.
The holding of monthly meetings by some members of
the Council at the end of each presidency has enabled
the Council to increase the transparency it could not
achieve during its work. In the interest of transparency,
it is imperative for more and more countries to adopt
such an approach.
16-22488

19/07/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Similarly, public meetings, interactive informal
consultations and Arria Formula meetings are
mechanisms that have enabled greater interaction
between members of the Council and other Member
States, as well as other actors like civil society, and,
at the same time, have allowed us to contribute to
the transparency, legitimacy and effectiveness of
the Council.
Another recent and critical change was the early
election in June of new members of the Security Council,
consistent with the recommendations in presidential
note 507 and as reinforced by the presidential note
presented a few days ago (S/2016/619). That decision
will allow a significant period of transition between
incoming and outgoing members, as the former can
prepare ahead of time and attend, by invitation, Council
meetings starting in October, months before the start of
their term.
Finally, we believe that the flow of information to
non-member States of the Council regarding the items
under discussion in the Chamber has seen an improvement
in recent years, in line with the recommendations in
presidential note 507. That has been possible thanks to
the commitment of some Council members, especially
elected members, to keep their colleagues informed,
and to the work of non-governmental organizations and
academia in analysing and disseminating information
relating to the Security Council.
At this moment of reflection, I would point out some
elements that can and must continue to be improved.
First, it is essential for all members of the Council,
both permanent and non-permanent, to draft and
promote resolutions and statements concerning all
aspects germane to this organ. Despite some limited
progress in recent years, some draft resolutions are
still drafted exclusively by the permanent members, a
practice that must be avoided, as set forth in presidential
note S/2014/268 two years ago.
We welcome the fact that, for the first time ever,
the process of selecting the next Secretary-General will
be more transparent and inclusive, and in particular
that the General Assembly will play a major role. In a
few days, the straw poll to elect candidates will begin
in the Security Council. In that connection, I commend
efforts to submit more than one name to the General
Assembly in order to lend the selection of the next
Secretary-General a genuine air of democracy. It will
also be important to consider gender balance, as a quick

S/PV.7740

glance at the history of the Organization will reveal
that a woman has never been appointed to the position
of Secretary-General.
Another issue that must be considered is the use
of the veto power. For the past two years, Mexico and
France have promoted an initiative to voluntarily refrain
from its use in cases of mass atrocities. We believe that
that initiative is one of the most realistic short-term
options to reform the Security Council. Consequently,
we are grateful that approximately 100 countries have
decisively signed on to the initiative.
We also recognize the efforts and contributions
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
Group, and in particular its code of conduct on the veto,
which is another related initiative. Similarly, on the
issues of accountability and the fight against impunity,
we reaffirm the importance of the principle that the
Council continue to be guided by clear, objective, and
non-politicized criteria in the submission of cases to
the International Criminal Court, in accordance with
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. We
support the initiative to create a mechanism within
the Security Council to follow up on those referrals,
especially when the Court itself sends notification of a
lack of cooperation on the part of the State concerned.
Finally, a pending, but highly relevant, issue is the
adoption of the rules of procedure of the Council. More
than 70 years after its creation, the Council’s rules
should cease to be provisional so that we can strengthen
the certainty of the Council’s working methods.
After 10 years of discussion on working methods,
the adoption of more than a dozen documents and the
holding of several open debates, the progress achieved
should be celebrated. However, we must also reflect
on the reasons that the implementation of certain
recommendations has been prevented, and direct our
efforts towards ensuring compliance with them. It is
important to make new proposals, but it is also important
to accomplish what we have committed ourselves to.
I therefore welcome once again the efforts of Japan,
as champion of this initiative, as well as its work within
the framework of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Matters.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Carlos
Foradori, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Argentina.
Mr. Foradori (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to thank Japan for convening this open debate on

16-2248815/42

S/PV.7740

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of presidential note S/2006/507, the first note of the
President of the Security Council on the working methods
of the Council. I also wish to express my country’s
appreciation for Japan’s continued commitment to
improving transparency, inclusiveness and efficiency
in the work of the Council during its chairmanship of
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Matters, both during this period and
during its previous term in 2009-2010.
Argentina has historically advocated for a more
transparent and democratic Security Council whenever
it has had the opportunity to do so. It was Argentina
that, in February 2000, during its presidency of the
Council, encouraged the adoption of presidential note
S/2000/155, in accordance with which recently elected
members were invited to participate as observers in
informal consultations during the month before the
beginning of their mandate.
More recently, Argentina was a driver and
supporter of various initiatives to achieve greater
transparency and access to the Council for the United
Nations membership as a whole, including dialogue
between the Council and countries and bodies that
are not members of the Council; consultations among
the Security Council, the Secretariat and troop- and
police-contributing countries; greater involvement by
the elected members of the Council in the drafting
of Council documents; and the efforts to ensure the
continuity of the work of the subsidiary bodies of
the Council.
Argentina considers essential the regular review
of the implementation of presidential note S/2006/507
and other relevant notes aimed at identifying successful
practices and possible shortcomings, and at considering
the implementation of the necessary adjustments.
In that regard, Argentina encourages the Informal
Working Group to continue working towards a single
comprehensive document in order to consolidate and
rationalize all decisions on working methods. The
goal of having a more democratic and transparent
Security Council presupposes and requires that the
path to the Council’s transformation be through the
practices I have referred to, in consultation with the
entire membership, so as to bring it about in the most
legitimate and representative way possible. That will
ensure that the process of methodological development
moves forward in a positive way, while respecting
16/42

19/07/2016

and taking into account the expectations of the entire
international community.
As has recently been stated, what is at stake is the
Council’s decision-making culture and its effectiveness,
which fully affect its performance. The updating of the
Security Council’s working methods in response to the
demands of the international community, with a view to
strengthening its democratization and ensuring greater
inclusiveness, accountability and transparency, remains
an important objective, which Argentina endorses. In
that regard, Argentina reaffirms and pledges its best
efforts to contribute to this process.
Argentina endorses the principle of the non-indifference
in the internal affairs of States. We are not indifferent
in the face of violations of the basic principles of
democracy, regardless of where they occur. We want
to be consistent with that premise and those principles.
In that regard, we want point out that we are concerned
when the democratization process affects certain
bodies, for we believe that when those principles are
promoted, they should be promoted everywhere, in
every situation and throughout all entities. That is why
we believe that the Security Council is not the exception
and that it is very important to uphold the principles of
democracy in all their forms and on all occasions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Lauber (Switzerland): I am pleased to take the
floor in my capacity as Coordinator of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) Group.
As you mentioned, Mr. President, it has been
10 years since the adoption of presidential note
S/2006/507. I take this opportunity to acknowledge the
improvements in the Council’s working methods that we
have seen since then, and in particular Japan’s efforts
and contributions, which have added to that positive
development. At the same time, we must recognize
that the world’s expectations vis-à-vis the Council have
certainly not decreased, but rather increased, over the
past 10 years. We therefore insist that our common
efforts to improve the accountability, coherence,
transparency and, ultimately, the effectiveness of the
Council must continue. Let me make some specific
points in that connection.
The ongoing process to select the next SecretaryGeneral is just one example of the strong interest of
the general membership in a more transparent Security
16-22488

19/07/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Council. For the first time in history, 12 individuals
have taken part in informal dialogues organized by the
President of the General Assembly, after they submitted
their curriculums vitae and vision statements. The ACT
group calls upon any potential future candidates to be
presented as early as possible and to participate in the
same General Assembly process.
We understand that the first straw poll of the
Security Council will take place later this week. The
ACT group believes the wider membership needs to
be informed of the outcome of that and subsequent
polls and strongly encourages close communication
between the President of the Council and the President
of the General Assembly in that regard. The ACT group
also reiterates that it is the prerogative of the General
Assembly to draft the resolution on the appointment of
the next Secretary-General.
The ACT group calls on all States to adhere to the
code of conduct, a pledge to support timely and decisive
Security Council action in situations involving atrocity
crimes. So far, 112 Member States have joined the
code. We encourage them to make sure that the code is
being implemented. That means applying and invoking
it consistently in all relevant country situations before
the Council.
Following the October 2015 open debate on
working methods (see S/PV.7539), the Council adopted
presidential statement S/PRST/2015/19. The ACT group
welcomes the commitment therein to holding an annual
open debate on working methods. That statement also
takes note of the efforts of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Matters to
enhance the transparency of its activities, including by
providing regular briefings to interested Member States.
The ACT group looks forward to participating in such
meetings. We also believe that the report prepared by
Spain containing recommendations gleaned from the
2015 open debate could serve as guidance for the work
of the Informal Working Group, and we encourage the
Group to consider it fully.
The ACT group welcomes presidential note
S/2016/619, adopted last week. We are pleased that the
period of observation for incoming Council members
has been extended to three months. We call on Council
members to implement that provision to the maximum
extent possible, as stated in the note.
The ACT group also welcomes the arrangement
regarding the appointment of the Chairs of subsidiary

S/PV.7740

bodies no later than 1 October each year and the fact that
the process will be facilitated jointly by two members
of the Council, thereby providing an enhanced role for
the elected 10 members of the Council.
Sixty-two per cent of the Council’s meetings in 2015
took place in the format of closed consultations, which
is a significant increase in comparison with previous
years. In addition, the Council also considered 56 issues
under “Any other business”. While we welcome the
fact that the Council acts quickly with regard to urgent
situations, we need also to underline that the enhanced
use of “Any other business” and closed meetings does
not add to the transparency of the Council’s work.
The ACT group also welcomes the practice of
providing public wrap-up meetings and informal
briefing sessions to non-members. More recently,
Council members have also conducted joint informal
briefings by the presidency at the end of the month.
That practice has shown that formal public wrap-ups
and informal briefings do not replace each other and,
on the contrary, may be mutually reinforcing.
Finally, the ACT group welcomes the efforts
of Japan as Chair of the Informal Working Group
to prepare a new note that would consolidate and
streamline all decisions taken regarding working
methods since the publication of presidential note
S/2010/507. We encourage the Council to provide an
updated, strong and comprehensive document that can
lay the groundwork for further positive developments
in this domain. Implementation will of course remain
at the centre of our attention.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): Let me start
by referring to the selection of the next SecretaryGeneral. We appreciate that the current process was
formally started by a joint letter from the President
of the General Assembly and the President of the
Security Council inviting Member States to submit
proposed candidates. The unprecedented hearings are
important steps forward towards the democratization
of the selection process. Brazil believes that the role
of the General Assembly is not simply to rubber-stamp
decisions taken previously by the Security Council.
We agree with Assembly President Lykketoft — and
with the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
(ACT) Group, for that matter — as stated in his letter

16-2248817/42

S/PV.7740

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

dated 7 July, that the result of the informal straw polls
should be made available to the general membership.
The review of the Peacebuilding Architecture
empowered the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in its
advisory capacity to the Security Council. The Council
and the PBC can expand their synergies and draw
upon the expertise of the Commission in assisting with
the longer-term perspective required for sustaining
peace. We believe that there is value added in inviting
the Chairs of the PBC configurations to informally
meet Council members before a situation that they
follow closely is up for review. In the same vein, the
Council should consider inviting the Chairs of PBC
configurations to join official missions.
There is room for improvement in the Council’s
working methods with regard to the implementation
of the Council’s decisions authorizing the use of force
and the follow-up to communications submitted under
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations. As
highlighted by the Secretary-General in the report on
the responsibilty to protect (S/2015/500), it is important
to further strengthen the reporting and reviewing
procedures for the implementation of Security Council
resolutions authorizing the use of force by third parties,
so as to ensure that the mandates given by the United
Nations are being properly implemented. Brazil recalls
its proposal containing two practical steps, both
of which are based on existing mechanisms in the
Security Council.
First, we should import from the peacekeeping
system the practice of sunset clauses, reporting and
briefings to delegations. Secondly, we should create
monitoring mechanisms by establishing panels of
experts modelled after the United Nations sanctions
committees. In addition to proper authorization, it is
essential that the Security Council be kept informed
about the military actions carried out on its behalf as
part of its role in legitimizing the use of force. That role
includes not only deciding to initiate military action,
but also ensuring, for instance, its proportionality and
conformity with international humanitarian law, as
well as determining the appropriate time to conclude
the intervention.
Brazil has also taken note of the increase in
the number of letters to the Security Council under
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations that
seek to justify military actions, most of the time
ex post facto, in the context of countering terrorism.
18/42

19/07/2016

Without prejudice to the necessary debate on the actual
content of such communications, it is also important to
reflect on whether they fulfil the obligation to “report
immediately” as stipulated in the Charter, which applies
to all actions undertaken under that provision. Such
communications do not release the Security Council
from its primary responsibilities. A proper follow-up to
such communications by the Council seems necessary.
It is desirable that the troop- and police- contributing
countries be included in the decision-making process
leading to the deployment of peacekeeping operations.
We need to balance the perspectives of those crafting
mandates and those implementing them. In addition,
penholderships must be more equitably shared. The fact
that elected members have reduced opportunities to take
initiatives is linked, of course, with another unresolved
problem, that is, the comprehensive reform of the
Security Council. No change in the working methods
alone will be able to tackle some of the main challenges
currently faced by the Council. As many have pointed
out during the current session of intergovernmental
negotiations, the longer the reform of the Security
Council takes, the more the United Nations puts its
credibility and long-term legitimacy at risk. Improving
the working methods of the Security Council depends,
to a great extent, on a comprehensive reform capable
of leading to more effective, transparent and legitimate
decision-making processes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Mr. Ruiz Blanco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
As pointed out in the concept note (S/2016/585, annex)
circulated for this open debate, improving transparency,
efficiency, inclusion and accountability in the working
methods of the Security Council is essential if we
want to achieve harmonization between the decisions
taken by the Security Council on peace and security
and the support that those decisions receive from the
entire membership, particularly that of Member States
that are not part of the Council. Those four elements
are essential to creating a culture of decision-making
that is in concert with collective interests. It is
precisely such interactions and constructive dialogue
with non-members of the Council that must serve as
a guide in identifying the practices that have proved
successful, those that require improvement and those
that have not yet been included in the working methods
of the Council.
16-22488

19/07/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

With today marking 10 years since the adoption of
presidential note S/2006/507 — which has become a
compilation of measures that must guide the Council’s
work — and nearly six years since the subsequent
presidential note S/2010/507, which broadened and
replaced that list of practices, I would like to make an
earnest call to ensure its effective implementation and
continued improvement.
In the area of communications, Colombia
recognizes the efforts made since December 2005 by
the various Presidents of the Security Council who,
together with the Presidents of the General Assembly,
have maintained an ongoing dialogue and have
informed Member States in a timely manner about
developments with regard to the process of selecting the
next Secretary-General. That has greatly contributed to
the transparency and inclusiveness of the process. We
therefore wish to explore the possibility of repeating
that practice, so that it can be applied to other matters
of shared interest.
Moreover, in connection with documentation,
Colombia believes that it is essential to ensure that the
annual reports presented by the Council to the General
Assembly have a broad analytical component and
discuss the reasons that have led it to take its decisions,
especially in those situations where action was taken
by the Council. That would ensure that the reports are
truly informative rather than merely descriptive, as is
currently the case. With regard to the programme of
work, it is necessary to continue the good practice
of publishing the monthly forecast by the Council
presidency, keep it updated, make it publicly available,
modify it whenever necessary and distribute it to the
members of the Council with the appropriate changes.
Finally, with regard to transparency, it is
increasingly necessary to move away from the practice
of closed meetings and to hold open or public meetings
more frequently, so that non-member countries may
contribute to deliberations. In that way, Colombia firmly
believes that the continuous improvement and proper
implementation of the working methods of the Security
Council will strengthen and improve the interaction
between it and the other States not on the Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): My delegation wants to
express its gratitude to you, Sir, for organizing today’s
important debate.

S/PV.7740

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).
Pakistan welcomes the gradual improvements in the
Security Council’s working methods, especially since
2006. Those improvements have in particular been the
result of efforts by the non-permanent members of the
Security Council. In that connection, the early election
of non-permanent members this year was a positive
step. We believe that that will help non-permanent
members play a more robust and effective role during
their tenure in the Council.
We are hopeful that, with the cooperation of
all Council members, the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Matters
will continue to endeavour to improve the Council’s
working methods, thereby contributing positively to the
Council’s openness, transparency and accountability.
Pakistan endorses the recommendations to be
made by the representative of Iran on behalf of NAM
to improve the Security Council’s working methods.
Furthermore, and in deference to your request for
succinct suggestions today, Sir, Pakistan would like to
offer the following.
First, dialogue with the wider United Nations
membership is critical. After all, Member States
not serving on the Council have high stakes in the
Council’s decisions.
Second, it is important for the Council to
implement its presidential note S/2014/565, in letter and
in spirit. That note was the culmination of Pakistan’s
initiative, when it was a Council member in 2013, to
improve intra-Council communication and exchange
of information. It is important to hear the views
of the current non-permanent members regarding
implementation of the note.
Third, Pakistan would appreciate an assessment
of the implementation of presidential note S/2014/268.
An objective evaluation of the fulfilment of the
commitments made in the note is important to ensure the
wider participation of Council members in delivering
on the Council’s responsibilities.
Fourth, troop- and police-contributing countries
(TCCs) must be closely consulted before the
formulation and approval of peacekeeping mandates.
Such involvement will address many issues related to
command, control, communication, coordination and

16-2248819/42

S/PV.7740

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

inter-mission movements. Such consultations will also
help to sync peacekeeping missions with the realities
on the ground.
Fifth, the implementation of presidential note
S/2013/630 is particularly important for the Council’s
management and operation of peacekeeping missions.
In this regard, it is imperative to know how the major
TCCs view the implementation of this note. As a leading
troop-contributing country, Pakistan believes that much
needs to be done to ensure deeper and more meaningful
consultations on all aspects of peacekeeping. The Chair
of the Informal Working Group may wish to collate
the views of all TCCs speaking today to assess the
stakeholders’ perception in this regard.
Sixth, regarding the working of the Council’s
subsidiary bodies, Pakistan calls for transparent
processes leading to balanced representation on the
Council’s expert panels.
Seventh, and lastly, ensuring the independence of
the Office of the Ombudsperson is of vital importance
to address concerns on due process in the sanctions
Committees. There is also no justification for
limiting the scope of the Ombudsperson to just one
sanctions Committee.
Before concluding, let me express my appreciation
for the practice adopted today of commencing work
on an important issue only after listening to the views
of the wider membership rather than concluding work
before giving an opportunity to non-Council members
to express themselves.
The Council, according to the Charter, is obliged
to act on behalf of the States Members of the United
Nations. This responsibility can be fulfilled only once
the Council listens to them before acting on their behalf.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM). Let me first express the appreciation
of NAM to you, Sir, and to the Japanese presidency of
the Council for having convened this debate on the
Council’s working methods and for presenting the
concept note (S/2016/585, annex) on the issue.
In view of the time limit and the fact that the NAM
position on the subject at hand is reflected in the May
2014 final document of the seventeenth Ministerial
20/42

19/07/2016

Conference of the Non-Aligned Movement, I will
confine myself to the following nine specific measures
that NAM calls for, with a view to improving the
working methods of the Council and enhancing its
efficiency in fulfilling its primary responsibility.
First, the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council, which have remained provisional for
70 years, should be formalized in order to improve its
transparency and accountability.
Second, the number of public meetings should be
increased, in accordance with Articles 31 and 32 of
the Charter of the United Nations, and the meetings
should provide real opportunities to take into account
the views and contributions of the wider membership
of the United Nations, particularly non-members of
the Council whose affairs are under discussion by
the Council.
Third, closed meetings and informal consultations
should be kept to a minimum and should be the
exception rather than the rule. Meetings should be
open, especially when they include briefings by the
Special Envoys or Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations Secretariat.
Fourth, the establishment of subsidiary organs by
the Council should be in accordance with the letter
and spirit of the Charter of the United Nations, and
those organs should function in a manner that provides
adequate and timely information on their activities to
the broader United Nations membership.
Fifth, the annual reports of the Security Council
to the General Assembly should be more explanatory,
comprehensive and analytical, and they should assess
the work of the Council, including cases in which the
Council has failed to act. They should also include the
views expressed by members during consideration of
agenda items. We also call on the Council to elaborate
on the circumstances under which it adopts the various
outcomes, be they resolutions, presidential statements,
press statements or other elements to the press.
Sixth, the Council should, pursuant to Article
15, paragraph 1, and Article 24, paragraph 3, of the
Charter, submit special reports for consideration by the
General Assembly.
Seventh, the Council should ensure that its monthly
assessments are comprehensive and analytical and
that they are issued in a timely fashion. The General
16-22488

19/07/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Assembly may consider proposing parameters for the
elaboration of such assessments.
Eighth, the Council should fully take into account
the recommendations of the General Assembly on
matters relating to international peace and security,
consistent with Article 11, paragraph 2, of the Charter.
Ninth, the Council should cease its ongoing
attempts to shift issues on the agenda of the General
Assembly or the Economic and Social Council over to
the Security Council and the encroachment by the latter
on the functions and powers of the Assembly.
The Non-Aligned Movement rejects the use of the
Security Council as a tool to pursue national political
interests and agendas, since that practice aggravates
rather than alleviates situations and runs counter to its
mission as enshrined in the Charter.

S/PV.7740

should observe in all its activities, approaches and
procedures. We regret that the Council has neglected
those important elements in numerous instances.
Examples of those failures can be seen in the Council’s
reluctance to convene open debates on certain issues
of great significance, its holding of unscheduled
open debates with selective notifications, its practice
of repeatedly restricting participation in certain
debates and of discriminating between members and
non-members of the Council, particularly with regard
to the sequence in and time limits for statements during
the open debates.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.

We reiterate the need for non-selectivity, impartiality
and accountability in the work of the Council. A
decision by the Security Council to initiate formal or
informal discussions on the situation in any Member
State or on any issue that does not constitute a threat
to international peace and security is contrary to
Article 24 of the Charter. In such cases, there is a need
for the Council to remain strictly within the powers
and functions accorded to it by Member States under
the Charter.

Mr. Akbaruddin (India) I take the floor with
a sense of unease that stems from the old saying,
“Expectation is the mother of all frustration”. Many
of us regularly articulate suggestions for enhancing
transparency, effectiveness and inclusiveness in the
work of the Security Council. In doing so, we begin
to harbour certain expectations from this organ. Yet
these suggestions, supported by many, remain largely
unimplemented. Notwithstanding persistent efforts,
sadly, progress on working methods of the Council is
best measured not by what has been achieved but how
much more remains to be done.

In recent years, the Security Council has been
too quick to threaten or authorize enforcement action
in some cases, while remaining silent and inactive in
others. Furthermore, the Council has increasingly
resorted to Chapter VII of the Charter as an umbrella
for addressing issues that do not necessarily pose an
immediate threat to international peace and security.
Instead of making excessive and quick resort to
Chapter VII, efforts should be made to fully utilize
the provisions of Chapters VI and VIII for the pacific
settlement of disputes.

Today, following your advice, Mr. President, I limit
my focus to just two aspects that are always wished for
but never achieved. The first is the need to change the
processes followed in the subterranean universe of the
Council’s subsidiary bodies. The subterranean universe
I refer to consists of all 26 sanctions regimes acting on
behalf of the Council. On the average, they cumulatively
take a thousand decisions a year. However, rare is the
occasion when the Chair of any of these bodies briefs
Member States or the media about the proceedings after
their meetings.

As we approach the process of appointing a
new Secretary-General of the Organization, NAM
underlines its position as elaborated in the Algiers
ministerial declaration of May 2014, along with the
central role of the General Assembly in the process of
selecting and appointing the Secretary-General, and
expresses its support for efforts aimed at reinforcing and
strengthening the role of the Assembly in that regard.

Mr. President, in your statement you mentioned
that you are conducting a press stake-out after every
session of informal consultations. You also referred
to the fact that informal wrap-up briefing sessions are
now becoming a practice. We compliment you on these
efforts, but I would ask why these efforts at transparency
do not extend to the subterranean universe, where more
decisions are taken than in formal meetings or informal
consultations. Why is it that we are blandly informed
of positive decisions of this subterranean universe and

Finally, for NAM, transparency, openness and
consistency are key elements that the Security Council

16-2248821/42

S/PV.7740

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

never told about negative decisions when proposals are
not adopted?
When a draft resolution of the Council is voted upon,
all of us know who votes for what, and Member States
explain their positions. However, in the subterranean
world of subsidiary bodies, there is no explanation
given. No one says what the rationale for acceptance
is. Furthermore, a rejection does not even surface in
the public space. No one indicates who specifically is
not supporting a request. Indeed, proposals that do not
survive are buried without public acknowledgement
that they were ever considered.
In the subterranean universe, all decisions are
required to be taken by unanimity, a practice that is
not in vogue in the Council itself. The trend now
is to consider means to curtail the use of the veto in
the Council’s own work, and many Council members
today support such efforts. However, in the subsidiary
bodies, all Council Members have extended vetoes to
themselves as members of sanctions committees.
In the subterranean universe of subsidiary bodies,
the adoption of principles of anonymity and unanimity
have absolved individual members of accountability.
Taking their cue from the membership of these bodies,
other Member States too may fail to implement many
of the decisions taken by these bodies. A look at the
implementation reports from Member States, available
on the web site of the sanctions committees, indicates
how outdated they are; in most cases they are of the
2003 vintage. We welcome the Council’s adoption
of a new procedure for the selection of the Chairs of
subsidiary bodies. We hope it is a harbinger of greater
change in the subterranean universe in its totality.
Let me detail the second aspect, which relates to the
lack of institutionalized interaction and consultation
between the Council and troop- and police-contributing
countries. This is a staple issue since the Brahimi
report (S/2000/809) was issued in 2000. More recently,
on 31 December 2015, the Council adopted presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/26, in which it noted that
the lack of effective dialogue among the Council,
Secretariat and troop-contributing countries (TCCs)
had generated frustration on all sides and undermined
mandate implementation.
Yet let us look at the recent example of developments
concerning the United Nations peacekeeping mission
in South Sudan in the same six-month period. There has
been talk and suggestions about increasing the number of
22/42

19/07/2016

troops, of a possible expansion of mandate, deployment
of a rapid action brigade, measures for protection of
civilians and calls for an arms embargo. At no stage have
there been efforts at institutionalized consultations with
TCCs on any of these topics, as my country, the largest
troop-contributor to this peacekeeping operation, can
vouch. Consultations among Council, Secretariat and
troop-contributing countries remains an improvement
that many have asked for in various forums but which
remains to be implemented years after their necessity
was acknowledged. I would ask now: when will its time
will come?
The two areas mentioned by my delegation today
exemplify the chasm that exists between the Council’s
working methods and the general membership’s wishes
for comprehensive structural-functional reform. Despite
this chasm, however, India is committed to pursuing
the quest for far-reaching reform in order to make the
Council fit for purpose for the twenty-first century.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Hungary.
Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): We would all like to see a
more efficient, transparent and relevant Security Council
that provides solutions — and not culs de sac — for all
of us. In order to join forces in trying to find ways and
means to form a more effective Council, let me reiterate
Hungary’s views while fully supporting the statements
delivered previously on behalf of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group.
I thank Japan for providing us with the opportunity
to reflect on this very important topic.
Hungary naturally welcomes resolution 69/321,
adopted by consensus by the General Assembly, on
11 September 2015, on the revitalization of the work
of the General Assembly. The resolution has set up
a structured process for the selection of the next
Secretary-General. So far, the publication of candidates
and the informal dialogues have been conducted
successfully and have yielded interesting results.
I would like to congratulate the Presidents of the
General Assembly and of the Security Council for their
successful cooperation. We hope that this transparent
and inclusive process will be fully implemented and
completed on time. However, we would like to see a
more transparent process during the straw polls as well.
Hungary supports measures that further
strengthen the relationship between the Security
16-22488

19/07/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Council and the General Assembly. We would like
the relationship between the two main bodies of the
United Nations to continue to improve in terms of
greater transparency and consistency. We therefore
suggest making more effective use of already existing
tools and the further development of current practices
and measures. We would like to suggest that the
Security Council submit an analytical, substantive and
comprehensive evaluation of its work in the annual
report to the General Assembly. We would like to see
the Council continue expanding consultations and
cooperation to include non-Council Member States,
in particular troop- and police-contributing countries
and regional organizations.
The Council, we think, should increase the number
of its public meeetings, interactive briefings, informal
interactive dialogues and Arria Formula meetings. The
Council should hold more wrap-up sessions to improve
the flow of substantive information and understanding
of the Council’s positions within the wider membership.
We believe that the Council should use existing tools
to prevent mass atrocities. We advocate voluntary
refraining from the use of the veto in cases of mass
atrocities and encourage all Member States that have
not yet done so to support the so-called code of conduct
elaborated by the ACT group and signed by 112 Member
States so far.
The role of the International Criminal Court is vital
to ending impunity and bringing perpetrators to justice
when national criminal accountability mechanisms
are not available. The Security Council therefore has
a special role to play under the Rome Statute as it can
refer situations of States not party to the Statute to the
Court in order to hold perpetrators to account. The
Security Council should utilize its referral power in a
consistent manner.
Hungary would also like to see the Council engage
in clear-cut communications and able to translate its
work clearly to the outside world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): As it has relevance to working
methods, allow me to briefly outline the agreement we
reached on 28 June with the Netherlands to split the 20172018 term on the Security Council, with Italy serving
the first year and the Kingdom of the Netherlands to
serve in 2018, pending by-elections. I am happy to
mention this issue also on behalf of the Netherlands.

S/PV.7740

We are currently defining our cooperation
around shared goals and values in the firm belief
that this agreement sends a positive political message
of cooperation to tackle common challenges and
contribute to improving the work of the Council. In
this regard, Italy and the Netherlands will be guided by
such principles as safeguarding the effectiveness of the
Council and the action of its elected members, ensuring
as much continuity as possible; avoiding duplication,
and using every opportunity before January to prepare
our term, in the spirit of the joint paragraph. In addition,
allow me to make a few other specific remarks.
My first remark is on the link between the
transparency, openness and inclusiveness of the
Council and its own effectiveness. The former are a
means to achieve more of the latter, of course. Having
served in New York in the 1990s, I can testify that much
has been achieved in terms of the greater transparency
and openness of this organ.
Further specific improvements can be sought,
such as more frequent informal, Toledo-style wrapup sessions, which allow greater interaction with the
membership on the work of the month. The attendance
and interaction achieved in these meetings are a sign
of their popularity and usefulness to non-Council
members. We should make more effective use of open
meetings, such as informal interactive dialogues and
Arria Formula meetings, and continue to increase the
focus and interactivity of open debates, involving,
as appropriate, non-governmental actors, especially
from civil society. We must increase coordination,
cooperation and interaction with the other principal
organs, in particular the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), and expand, as appropriate,
interaction with troop- and police-contributing
countries during the course of the mandate of a mission.
We should also expand consultation and cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations, including
by inviting relevant organizations to participate in the
Council’s private and public meetings, as appropriate.
My second remark concerns the preventive action
of the Council, a specific tool at the disposal of this
organ under section XI of note S/2010/507, concerning
Council missions. We take positive note of their
increased number and underline their value — and that
of the missions of the PBC country configurations — for
understanding and assessing particular situations on
the agenda of the Council.

16-2248823/42

S/PV.7740

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

My third remark refers to section XIII of the
aforementioned note, concerning newly elected
members. Italy welcomes the fact that the Council is
taking full advantage of the elections being moved
forward to June by also adequately moving forward the
invitation to newly elected members to attend meetings
of the Council. In this regard, Italy welcomes the
Council’s commitment to agreeing provisionally on the
appointment of Chairs of the subsidiary organs no later
than 1 October. In light of the arrangement to split the
mandate with the Netherlands, the adoption of the note
by the President S/2016/619 will certainly help new
members to be effective on the Council from day one.
We look forward to an updated and improved note
on the Council’s working methods as a useful guide for
our future action in this organ.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mrs. Duda-Plonka (Poland): I thank you, Sir,
for convening today’s debate. As requested by the
presidency, my contribution to the discussion will be
concise. We have identified three issues with respect
to the Security Council’s working methods that we
consider to be of utmost importance and would like to
highlight today.
First, we note the advantages of the penholdership
system, with special emphasis on the effectiveness of
the work of the Council. We are, however, concerned
that by allowing the de facto monopolization of the
drafting of documents, we voluntarily give up some of
the advantages of diversity and creativity. All members
of the Security Council, including non-permanent
members, should engage in the drafting process at all
stages and contribute to issues of interest to them. In
this context, we refer to note S/2014/268 and call for
change of the arrangement so as to ensure more equal
division of the penholder responsibility.
Secondly, building on the debate held in February
2016 on the working methods of Security Council’s
subsidiary organs (see S/PV.7633), as well as previous
debates on this issue, we would like to urge the members
of the Security Council, including the Chairpersons
of the subsidiary bodies, to continue to work on the
implementation of notes S/2012/937, S/2014/393
and S/2016/170. We believe that a more balanced,
transparent, efficient and inclusive procedure, as well
as the earlier appointment of the Chairpersons of the
subsidiary organs, will benefit us all. We also see the
24/42

19/07/2016

value of continuity in the work of the Security Council’s
subsidiary bodies, ensured by informal briefings and
meetings organized by the outgoing chairmanship.
Thirdly, while most of us agree that the focus of
the work of the Security Council should shift more
in the direction of conflict prevention, we still see a
shortage of effective instruments serving that purpose.
In this context, we would like to call on the Security
Council and the Secretariat to revive the format of
horizon-scanning briefings by the Department of
Political Affairs on issues of concern.
As we approach the start of the process of considering
candidacies for the post of Secretary-General by the
Security Council, I also take this opportunity to appeal
to Security Council members to maintain the level of
transparency, openness and inclusivity and the spirit
of dialogue that have prevailed so far in the process of
selecting the Secretary-General.
There are many more points that we would wish
to make today. We trust, however, that that they will
be brought to the attention of the Council by other
speakers. I would therefore like to conclude by thanking
Japan and other able chairs of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Matters throughout the years for their outstanding work
and contribution to a more effective, transparent and
accountable Security Council.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Germany.
Mr. Braun (Germany): Mindful of your request for
brevity, Sir,I would like to briefly make the following
three points:
First, we welcome the Council’s efforts to increase
its transparency, inclusiveness and efficiency. We
appreciate Japan’s initiative to consolidate and
streamline note 507 on the Council’s working methods.
We welcome the note S/2016/619, on the preparation
of newly elected members of the Council and the
selection of chairs of the Council’s subsidiary bodies.
We support the practice of holding more frequent open
debates, as well as Arria Formula meetings and wrapup sessions. We encourage the Security Council to
further engage in substantive and detailed briefings on
its ongoing activities, as well as in the documentation
and publication of decisions and other relevant matters.
Secondly, Germany reiterates its support for the
French-Mexican initiative on voluntary veto restraint
16-22488

19/07/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

and the code of conduct of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group on Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes.
Thirdly, we consider the International Criminal
Court as a crucial institution in fighting impunity and
pursuing justice. We therefore stress the importance
of increased cooperation and information-sharing
between the Security Council and the International
Criminal Court in order to enable them to work together
effectively and fulfil their mandates.
In conclusion, we consider it to be very important
to improve the Council’s working methods, but we also
urgently need a comprehensive, structural reform of the
Security Council. We were encouraged to see points
of convergence emerge among Member States during
this year’s intergovernmental negotiations on Security
Council reform with regard to all five reform pillars.
However, that convergence has not been consolidated
in an updated framework document comprising the
original positions of Member States. It is crucial to
continue to find common ground on all five key issues
during the next negotiations and to move straight into
text-based negotiations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
reprsentative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): The scale and pace of
challenges facing the Security Council today must
bolster our resolve to ensure that the Council is as agile
and effective as possible. I will focus on three key areas
of working methods reform, namely, transparency,
the use of the veto, and early warning and prevention
of conflict.
First, Australia firmly believes that transparency
is an important element of the Council’s effectiveness.
Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations enshrines
the responsibility of the Security Council to act on behalf
of the United Nations membership as a whole. In line
with that, Council members should engage regularly
with the broader membership through briefings with
regional groups and outreach to affected countries.
We also support greater use of public meetings, open
debates, Arria Formula meetings and monthly wrap-up
sessions. When much of the Council’s work involves
or relies on non-members’ ability to implement its
decisions, it is imperative that the broader membership
be engaged appropriately in Council deliberations.

S/PV.7740

Secondly, we must move urgently, decisively
and in unison to agree on clear limitations on the
veto. Too often, the Council has failed in its mandate
because narrow interests have been allowed to prevail
over those of the most vulnerable. We therefore join
others in calling on all Council members — current
and incoming — to commit unambiguously to the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group’s
code of conduct and the complementary FrenchMexican initiative on limiting the use of the veto in
situations of mass atrocity.
Thirdly, the Council must become better at
predicting and preventing the escalation or relapse into
conflict. We all have a responsibility in that regard.
Frank, timely and independent assessments from the
Secretariat on situations where populations are at risk
are crucial to that. Briefings by the Secretary-General’s
Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and on
the Responsibility to Protect are valuable in ensuring
the Council is well placed to prevent mass atrocities.
We urge Council members to reinstate regular
horizon-scanning briefings on potential emerging
conflicts. As we well know, human rights abuses are
often a precursor to conflict. In that light, we commend
the Secretary-General on driving change through his
Human Rights Up Front initiative, and we encourage
him to make greater use of his prerogative under
Article 99 of the Charter to bring such situations to the
Council’s attention.
In conclusion, as we continue to grapple with
multiple, overlapping challenges of terrorism,
instability, conflict and fragility, working methods
reform is not just a bureaucratic exercise; it is critical
to the ability of the Council to discharge its core
mandate — and to the lives that depend on it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
reprsentative of Romania.
Mr. Jinga (Romania): I would like to express our
appreciation for the work Japan has performed as Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions, particularly the
measures to enhance the Security Council’s efficiency,
transparency and interactivity. The comprehensive
presidential note S/2010/507 has contributed to making
the work of the Security Council more effective
and transparent.
As preceding speakers have done, and as requested
in the concept note (S/2016/585, annex) prepared for

16-2248825/42

S/PV.7740

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

this open debate, I will streamline my intervention to
cover three topics related to the working methods of the
Security Council.
First, with regard to transparency, the Security
Council is responsible for its methods of work, and
it is up to the Council to modify them. At the same
time, the entire United Nations membership has
conferred upon the Council the primary responsibility
for preserving international peace and security. The
Council acts on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations, and its decisions must be implemented
by 193 countries. That is why the Council’s working
methods represent an issue that concerns the entire
United Nations membership.
Significant progress has been achieved in the past
couple of years in adapting the methods of work to
the new global realities, and the Council has proved
to be both creative and flexible when a new tool for
handling a particular situation was necessary. Although
that positive evolution was driven by specific needs,
and not by a thematic reform, I think that using
ad hoc innovations in specific cases seems to be a
realistic approach. In that respect, improvements have
been made on the issue of communication with full
membership — through open debates and briefings,
wrap-up sessions, the announcement of various types
of meetings in The Journal of the United Nations, the
early circulation of draft resolutions and notifications
about the Council’s emergency meetings.
Yet we need more time to hear from people on
the ground, including through informal formats such
as Arria Formula meetings, which provide a tool for
the Council to get views beyond those of Member
States. Greater transparency is also necessary in
the functioning of the Security Council’s subsidiary
organs, which should be encouraged to further interact
with the United Nations membership on topics related
to peacekeeping, conflict prevention and sanctions.
Secondly, with regard to the use of working methods
in conflict prevention, there is broad consensus on
the need to enhance our efforts on prevention, given
the recognition that, in conflicts like in medicine,
preventing is more efficient and less expensive than
healing. As the Security Council’s activity is not only
about ending conflicts, but also about avoiding future
ones, it is important to connect the Council’s work on
peace and security to the development agenda, because,
26/42

19/07/2016

as we know, there is no peace without development and
there is no development without lasting peace.
Consolidating the Security Council’s role
in prevention by strengthening early-warning
mechanisms
—
such
as
horizon-scanning
briefings — briefings on threats and informal
interactive dialogues can play an essential role in
detecting emerging threats to peace and security. More
interaction with regional organizations, troop- and
police-contributing countries, Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General and High Commissioners, the
International Criminal Court and the International Court
of Justice would also contribute to conflict prevention.
Thirdly, discussions about the working methods
must be placed within the broader context of Security
Council reform. We may have different views on
this topic, but the reality is that, without identifying
a common denominator to channel the debate on
Council reform, dissatisfaction and even frustration
among Member States could divert the process into a
less positive direction, with the risk of affecting the
credibility of the United Nations.
We all need a strong Council that continues to
play a decisive role in preserving peace and security
around the globe. In 1946, when the United Nations
was created, there were 50 founding countries, while
today the Organization includes 193 Member States.
In 1946, the world population was 2.5 billion; today
we are 7.3 billion people on Earth. The Council’s
composition should reflect that new geopolitical and
demographic reality.
Therefore, we believe that must continue to search
for a constructive solution on Security Council reform,
while fully respecting the Charter of the United
Nations. At important moments, the Council has shown
inspiration and flexibility. We have to rediscover
those ingredients.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Japan for convening this debate and for its
excellent leadership of the Council’s work and of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Matters.
Chile supports the statement made by the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and of
16-22488

19/07/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Switzerland on behalf of Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group, to which we belong. We
shall therefore address three key areas that our recent
experience in the Council recommends for improving
interactivity, decision-making outcomes, inclusion
and accountability.
Concerning the repertoire of initiatives, the general
rule must be the selection of priority themes or those
relating to necessary preventive actions, avoiding the
misuse of the Council for purposes outside its functions.
Public debates should be oriented by concept notes
focused on promoting exchanges of ideas with clear
objectives to prevent unnecessary rhetoric. The concept
note prepared for this debate (S/2016/585, annex) is a
good example of that.
Procedural economy should not be at the expense
of diversity. Accordingly, we recommend that joint
statements of members of the Council be issued with
caution. Collective formats should not replace the
individual role of the elected members, whose opinions
provide necessary perspectives that are often left out
of group declarations, thereby hindering inclusive
decision-making.
Chile firmly supports the convening of formal
and public wrap-up sessions in the Chamber, with
the participation of all Council members. That format
provides an official record and translation, which
ensure transparency, the dissemination of the Council’s
work and its statistical analysis, which is conducive
to accountability. Such meetings should be oriented
to public evaluation and as a projection of emerging
issues, and constitute an important instrument for the
participation of the elected 10, and should therefore
be safeguarded. With regard to their frequency, these
meetings should take place at least at the beginning
and end of the membership of the elected 10 in order
to provide a space where they can share their priorities
and assess their tenures. The use of these meetings
could be enhanced through concept notes promoting
assessment and foresight. The January wrap-up session
(see S/PV.7616), under the presidency of Uruguay, was
a successful example.
It is only through familiar formats and clear
rules that we will guarantee the transparency and
accountability of this organ. While we support the
informal briefings convened by the presidency, they
should not replace the formal wrap- up sessions but
reinforce and complement them. We note with concern

S/PV.7740

the tendency to confuse these complementary formats,
as informal briefings are primarily an instrument for
the accountability primarily of each presidency, while
the formal wrap-up is a collective and public work of
the Council as a whole.
We call for the process of drafting resolutions and
statements of the presidency include the permanent
and elected members. In the case of items related to
subsidiary bodies, that can be ensured through a
greater role given to the respective Vice-Chairs. We
reiterate that the Council’s work must be inspired
by transparency, fine-tuning and close cooperation
with the General Assembly, including in regard to
the appointment of the Secretary-General, thereby
ensuring an open and inclusive process leading to the
adoption of decisions on this issue and the drafting of
the appointment by the General Assembly.
To close, although the use of the veto does not
constitute a method of work in itself, it has negative
repercussions on the unity of the Council and its work,
perpetuating the imbalance of power between the
permanent and elected members.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Sandoval Cojulún (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): We appreciate the convening of this open
debate on the working methods of the Council and the
concept note prepared for this meeting (S/2016/585,
annex). We trust that our deliberations will not
only allow us to renew our commitment to ongoing
progress in improving the efficiency, transparency and
interactivity of the Security Council, but will also serve
as a solid foundation for the effective updating of the
note by the President S/2010/507.
We recognize the progress made in some practices
and in the strengthening of other measures included
in note S/2010/507 and successive notes of the
presidency, thanks to the commendable work of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Matters. However, taking into account
our own experience as a non-permanent member of
the Security Council for the period 2012-2013, we
believe that there is still room for improvement, and
we highlight three issues of current relevance to the
working methods of the Security Council.
First, the quest for information and understanding
regarding the Council’s activities remains a

16-2248827/42

S/PV.7740

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

fundamental and legitimate one. Although there has
been an increase in the number of public meetings, the
ongoing convening of open debates that promote the
greater participation of non-members of the Council,
and, in recent years, the holding of numerous meetings
under the Arria Formula, we regret the increasingly
rare wrap-up sessions and the lack of regular contact
with the Peacebuilding Commission — an advisory
body of the Council that plays an important role in
preventing the recurrence of conflicts — and the Chairs
of its country-specific configurations, as well as other
United Nations bodies.
Secondly, the Council has in the past taken
decisions on the appointment of the Chairmen of
the subsidiary bodies in a balanced, transparent and
inclusive manner that has promoted change, because
there is the impression that closed consultations are
held on the process, especially with respect to newly
elected Council members. My delegation hopes that this
practice and trend will be strengthened in the future.
It is also necessary to ensure that the selection and
appointment processes for the various panels of expert
are more transparent and balanced in order to promote
the broadest possible geographical representation,
bearing in mind the guidance provided in presidential
note S/2006/997.
We also attach priority to ongoing improvement
ofthe interaction between the subsidiary bodies — the
Committees and informal working groups — with all
Member States. In that regard, we welcome initiatives such
as the open formal consultations on the comprehensive
review of the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), held by the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) in June.
Thirdly, I refer to the selection and appointment
process for the next Secretary-General, particularly
General Assembly resolution 69/321, which we believe
contributes to greater transparency and greater
inclusiveness in this process, with clear guidelines,
such as the joint letter of the President of the General
Assembly and the President of the Security Council,
in which they outline and explain the procedure. The
ongoing flow of information about the candidates and
the holding of informal dialogues and meetings with
candidates are also of enormous importance. All of
this will have promote the deeper involvement of our
membership, which I think is evident as a fundamental
aspect of our goal.
28/42

19/07/2016

Since the issuance of presidential note
S/2010/507, the Council has adopted a dozen notes,
but their implementation often yield unsatisfactory or
contradictory results. To facilitate such follow-up, we
would welcome the proposal contained in the concept
note of working on a comprehensive document under
the format of a presidential note to update note 507 to
consolidate and compile all of the decisions taken on
working methods. We look forward to its publication
and dissemination to all Member States. We trust that
such a document would take into account the criticisms
and proposals made today and in previous debates,
wit the working methods of the Council being closely
linked to accountability to the broader membership of
the Organization. Past practice indicates that the elected
members are accountable to the regional groups and to
all Member States of the United Nations are those who
tend most often to improve working methods of the
Council. The best way to highlight the representative
and democratic nature of the Council is to strengthen
accountability standards and transparency. That, along
with the cooperation of permanent members, will lead
to greater synergy in the Council as it seeks to achieve
its common goal of improving its working methods.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Let me also join other
to express our gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting.
We all agree on the need to streamline the
working methods, but the years that have passed since
2007, despite some progress, have shown the many
difficulties in achieving convergence of Member States’
positions to overcome the structural shortcomings of
the Security Council vis-à-vis the emerging global
threats and challenges. A more expeditious arrival
at a comprehensive package is absolutely necessary,
whereas further delay will continue to put the Council
at further risk of becoming either inadequate or dilatory
in responding to existing or emerging global challenges
and threats to international peace and security. We very
much hope that in the coming months, in accordance with
the statement by the President, the Informal Working
Group intends to work towards a comprehensive
document in the form of an updated presidential note
S/2010/507 that would consolidate all decisions on
working methods, with the fuller participation by the
broader membership in relevant discussions.
16-22488

19/07/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Georgia believes that a more focused and succinct
discussion in the open debate format must be viewed as
an important tool in improving and democratizing the
working methods of the Security Council. A meaningful
streamlining of the working methods should also imply
the reform of the use of the veto, the modalities and
decision-making principles of the Security Council and
more accountability before the General Assembly.
Given our own experience, we already formally
endorsed — and here I also want to reiterate our full
support for — the joint French-Mexican proposal with
regard to the use of the veto in the Security Council,
as well as the initiative introduced by Liechtenstein
on a code of conduct with regard to Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes. When I said our own experience, I
do not mean a theoretical exercise but an actual and
unfortunate fact — when a permanent member of the
Security Council, while being a party to a conflict, with
a single-handed veto, terminated the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia. We faced a paradoxical
scenario that, when a security presence was most
needed right after a full-scale war, the United Nations
withdrew. As aftermath, 20 per cent of my country’s
territory remains under illegal foreign military
occupation following waves of ethnic cleansing.
We should all learn from such examples. Therefore,
Georgia believes that the right to the veto should be
restricted under the following circumstances: first,
when a decision of the Security Council aims at
preventing crimes against humanity, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and genocide; and, secondly, when a
Permanent Member is involved in the conflict under
consideration, and, therefore cannot exercise its
rights impartially.
In conclusion, let me once again express our firm
support for this process. We participated in the previous
discussions, and we are determined to continue to
contribute to this very important process.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Singapore.
Mr. Teo (Singapore): Singapore aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
We express our appreciation to Japan for its long
and consistent leadership on this important topic. It was

S/PV.7740

under Japan’s chairmanship of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Matters in 2006 that presidential note S/2006/507
was first issued. Note 507 was updated in 2010, again
under Japan’s chairmanship. The tenth anniversary of
note 507 is a fitting time to consider the progress we
have made.
However, progress is a relative concept. The
number of steps taken forward must also be measured
against the length of the journey, and how far we have
come from the starting point. On this, my delegation
is pleased to note that there has been good progress in
transparency, aided by developments in technology.
There have been an increasing number of open debates
and informal briefings on the work of the Council to the
wider United Nations membership since note 507 was
first issued, 10 years ago. More meetings are webcast.
More information is disseminated now through the
Council’s website, The Journal of the United Nations
and on social media platforms.
Nevertheless, transparency is not an end in itself. It
is a means to promote accountability and more effective
action by the Council. In that context, more visibility
does not necessarily lead to greater credibility. Formulaic
statements at open debates, where known positions are
regurgitated, do little to effect improvements on the
ground. We therefore appreciate Japan’s commitment to
taking on board views expressed today, and encourage
the Council to engage more meaningfully with the
wider United Nations membership, especially affected
countries and regional organizations, during informal
briefings and Arria Formula meetings. That would
enhance the quality of discussions and strengthen
substantive engagement between the Council and the
General Assembly, which would represent a major step
towards true transparency and accountability. There
are a number of other areas of concern to us that are
not specifically listed in note 507 that we wish to raise.
First, a practical step that the Council could
consider to increase transparency and accountability is
to adopt its rules of procedure. Today marks a little over
70 years that the Council first adopted its provisional
rules of procedure. In other words, they have been
provisionally applied for far longer than most of
diplomats who sit on the Council have been in service.
Surely it is time for the Council to finally adopt its own
rules of procedure. That would be a small, but vital,
step towards demonstrating the Council’s commitment
to transparency and accountability.

16-2248829/42

S/PV.7740

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Secondly, in terms of effectiveness, there have been
examples of how the Council has managed to respond,
or not, to critical developments. The record has been
mixed. Too often in the past, the veto has been used
to prevent action to address crimes of atrocity, at the
cost of many innocent lives. We are therefore happy
to note that there is growing support and movement
in favour of limiting the use of the veto in cases of
mass atrocities. Approximately 100 countries have
supported the French-Mexican initiative calling on the
five permanent members of the Security Council to
voluntarily and collectively pledge not to use the veto
in cases of recognized mass atrocities. An even greater
number of 112 countries, including my own delegation
and eight members of the Security Council, including
two permanent members, have also supported the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency Group’s
initiative on a code of conduct on Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity
or war crimes. Singapore reiterates its call to the
permanent members of the Council to refrain from
using a veto to block Council action aimed at preventing
or ending genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity. If they have to, they should explain to the
wider United Nations membership why they cannot
support initiatives aimed at preventing or ending mass
atrocities. Such a requirement will serve to make the
Council more accountable to the wider membership and
the international community for its action, or inaction.
Finally, it is our hope that further steps will be
taken towards promoting inclusiveness in the Council’s
work. We are encouraged by the conduct to date, under
the leadership of the President of the General Assembly,
of the process of selecting the next Secretary-General.
We hope that the Council will work with the President
of the General Assembly to maintain the strong spirit
of transparency and inclusiveness in the process that
we have seen thus far. In that regard, we note that the
Council will soon conduct its first informal straw poll to
select the next Secretary-General. However, we regret
to hear from the President of the General Assembly that
the outcome of the straw poll will not be communicated
to the wider United Nations membership.
We therefore join the President of the General
Assembly and other Member States in urging the
Council to communicate more openly with the General
Assembly on that very important issue, in line with the
new standard of openness and transparency introduced
into the process by the President of the General
30/42

19/07/2016

Assembly. Singapore welcomes such opportunities
as this open debate to discuss the important issue of
the working methods of the Security Council. Under
Japan’s leadership, we look forward to a meaningful
outcome that will help to strengthen the Council’s
effectiveness and credibility, as well as its engagement
with the broader United Nations membership.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Ms. Lind (Estonia): As a member of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency (ACT)
Group, Estonia fully endorses the statement delivered
by the representative of Switzerland. Together with
Costa Rica, Estonia has been at the forefront of the ACT
group on the issue of appointing the next SecretaryGeneral. I would therefore like to emphasize a few
points on that subject.
Through out the current process — whose transparency
and inclusiveness have been historic — which has
successfully sought to implement General Assembly
resolution 69/321, we have witnessed the importance
of effective and substantive communication between
the Security Council and the wider membership. In
that regard, we consider the monthly meetings between
the President of the Security Council and the President
of the General Assembly and the reports from those
meetings to be very useful. In particular, the General
Assembly hearings, which, for the first time, allow all
Members of the Organization and a global audience
to assess candidates, attest to the Member States’
dedication to the vision set out by the Preparatory
Commission of the United Nations in 1945, that the
Secretary-General, more than anyone else, should stand
for the United Nations as a whole.
As a member of the ACT group, Estonia has
encouraged candidates to participate in all elements
of the selection process. The General Assembly
proceedings have been successful, and the Security
Council is planning to hold its first straw poll for the
candidates in a few days. We have emphasized the need
for the Security Council to keep the General Assembly
informed of any developments, and have encouraged
regular and close communication between the Presidents
of both organs. We expect that the overall change in
the process will bring with it an updated approach by
the Security Council. Furthermore, we are entering the
most decisive phase of the selection process, and would
like to see it conclude successfully.
16-22488

19/07/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

We would also like to recall that it is the General
Assembly’s prerogative to prepare the final draft
resolution on the appointment of the SecretaryGeneral. It is our understanding that a discussion of
the elements to be included in that draft resolution
will be taking place in the General Assembly soon.
For us, in addition to creating a more inclusive process
and broader ownership — in line with present-day
expectations — the aim has been to strengthen the
institution of the Office of the Secretary-General
by making it more representative. We hope that
the culmination of the selection process will be as
encouraging as the whole process has been so far.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): In addition to
the points reflected in the statement delivered earlier
today on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency (ACT) Group, of which we are a member,
we would like to contribute the following brief points
on the working methods of the Security Council.
We value the efforts made by the Council over
the past few years, as reflected in presidential note
S/2010/507 and the update thereof (S/2016/619). Taken
together, those measures have led to real improvements
by creating more transparency and accountability in
the Council’s work; however, their implementation
often remains inconsistent.
Technical and practical improvements are important.
We will continue working with others to propose
meaningful changes to the Council in order to further
improve its performance. In particular, we would like
to encourage an open process in the appointment of
the Chairs of subsidiary bodies — a change that, in
our view, would be a long-awaited improvement. We
also believe that the most meaningful change that
the Council can make would be in the way that it
handles some of its biggest tasks, in which the entire
membership has a direct stake. I would like to highlight
three of those key challenges.
First, the Council’s reputation has been undermined
by its inability to prevent and effectively respond to
mass atrocities. The failures in Srebrenica and Rwanda
are permanent stains on the Council’s record. In spite
of all the calls of “never again”, little has happened in
practice. The case of Syria in particular illustrates on
a daily basis the continued paralysis and dysfunctional
nature of the Council in the face of a situation that is

S/PV.7740

destabilizing an entire region and that is characterized
by the systematic commission of mass atrocities by the
parties to the conflict.
Therefore, the code of conduct on mass atrocities
formulated by the ACT group, and mentioned
frequently in today’s debate, provides a sign of hope.
It has been supported by 112 States. We call on the rest
of the membership to support that important political
commitment, and we look forward to discussing its
implementation with Council members and the relevant
entities in the Secretariat. We also look forward to
tangible progress in the French-Mexican initiative
on restrictions in the use of the veto in dealing with
situations involving mass atrocities.
Secondly, the process of appointing the next
Secretary-General has generated considerable interest
beyond the confines of this building, not least because
of the significantly improved process in the General
Assembly. For the first time, the entire membership
has an opportunity to engage with the candidates
publicly and to assess their qualifications at first hand.
Important as those steps are, they must be matched
by the Security Council’s handling of its part in the
appointment process. As a first step, the results of the
informal voting rounds, in which the Council will start
engaging this week, should be made transparent for the
benefit of the entire membership.
However, the manner in which the Council frames
its recommendation to the General Assembly for
the latter’s final consideration of the draft resolution
appointing the Secretary-General will be of the utmost
importance. For the sake of institutional balance, the
Council should limit its recommendation to one or more
names for consideration by the Assembly. In turn, the
Assembly should forge an agreement on such elements
as the duration of the mandate, whether the mandate
should consist of a single term — as we believe it should
– and on other issues that we hope will be identified in
the course of the next week.
Finally, we would like to emphasize the need for
the Council to perform more effectively its role as
enforcer of accountability for the most serious crimes
under international law. In situations such as that of
Syria, but also in many other post-conflict situations,
the Council should ask for accountability as part of
a reconciliation process that can lead to long-term
stability and peace. Where it is possible and realistic,
the countries in question should be offered assistance

16-2248831/42

S/PV.7740

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

with their efforts to ensure such accountability under
their national systems, with the help of international
entities where necessary.
Referrals to the International Criminal Court are
of course also an option for the Council, provided that
they be accompanied by genuine political will to ensure
accountability, instead of being the result of transient
political expediency. The referrals made thus far have
produced very limited results and have been a mixed
blessing, both for the victims of the crimes in question
and for the Court itself.
The President: I should like to inform all
delegations concerned that, taking into account the
limited number of speakers remaining, thanks to the
efficient use of time so far, I will not suspend this open
debate for lunch as planned earlier. It is my intention to
continue until the last speaker.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Costa Rica.
Mr. Mendoza-García (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica would like to thank you and your
delegation, Sir, for having convened this important open
debate and for your leadership of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural Matters.
Costa Rica aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
Group, which has contributed very responsibly to the
discussion on various aspects of the activities of the
Security Council.
We live in a time when transparency in
decision-making processes and the accountability
of representatives to those whom they represent are
based on increasingly solid principles of organization.
Presidential note S/2010/507, in its updated form,
marks an important landmark in the history of the
Security Council, above all with regard to transparency.
The note addresses many of the concerns of the
Organization’s Members and resolves some of them, at
least conceptually.
We welcome the progress made in the past year
on very important issues such as documentation; the
election — six-months earlier than in earlier years — of
the non-permanent members of the Security Council;
the selection process for the next Secretary-General,
which has promoted the transparency and participation
of Member States and civil society; the call for more
32/42

19/07/2016

monthly open debates on cross-cutting topics that are
important to all Members; wrap-up sessions aimed at
sharing details on the Council’s monthly work with
all Member States; and the monthly publication of the
Council’s programme of work.
Nevertheless, a review of the Council’s practices
also leads us to conclude that the challenges involved in
implementing the agreements and rules that have been
adopted still persist. For example, Costa Rica is of the
view that the Council should pay more attention to the
inputs of those with legitimate interests in, or who are
affected by, the Council’s decisions. Similarly, there
should be more direct and transparent communication
between the Council and its subsidiary bodies and with
the rest of the Organization.
The actions of the Security Council are increasingly
in the public domain, but we are still far from the spirit
of the guideline set forth in the rule that states that,
unless it decides otherwise, the Security Council shall
meet in public. In that connection, we believe that it is
imperative to finally and formally adopt the provisional
rules of procedure of the Security Council, with a view
to increasing transparency and accountability and
regulating and ending the excessively discretionary
nature of the Council’s actions.
We reiterate the need to improve relations,
communication and cooperation among the General
Assembly, other relevant bodies and the Council,
without overstepping the mandates set forth for each
of those bodies in the Charter of the United Nations, in
order to work together to safeguard international peace
and security.
We also need greater transparency in the work
of subsidiary bodies. Additionally, it is important to
continue promoting improvements in the drafting of
the Security Council’s annual report to the General
Assembly by involving Member States in an informal
and interactive debate during both the drafting and the
presentation to the Assembly. Moreover, the Council’s
report should contain more analytical discussion of its
daily work and should not be a mere description of the
work being carried out.
Finally, we emphasize the need to continue our
efforts to delineate the limitations on the use of the veto,
such as its prohibited use in cases of genocide, crimes
against humanity, war crimes and massive violations
of human rights, as proposed by the Accountability,
Coherence, Transparency Group in its code of conduct.
16-22488

19/07/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

My delegation underscores its conviction that
the working methods of the Security Council are a
fundamental aspect of its comprehensive reform. The
implementation of the agreed-upon measures to improve
the Council’s working methods and the inclusion of
new measures will lend greater effectiveness to the
Council’s actions and will contribute to its transparency
and accountability. We are therefore convinced that
a substantive reform of the working methods will
help us remove obstacles that sometimes prevent the
Security Council from entirely fulfilling its mandate
as enshrined in the Charter and strain the Council’s
relationship with other organs.
The President: I now give the floor to the Permanent
Observer of the Holy See to the United Nations.
Archbishop Auza: My delegation wishes to thank
Japan’s presidency for convening this annual open
debate on the working methods of the Security Council.
Without a doubt, the Council deserves our
profound gratitude and appreciation for its efforts
to preserve nations and peoples from the scourge of
war and conflict in the course of its almost 71 years
of existence. Reform and adaptation to the times are,
however, always necessary to make the Council as
fit as possible for its purpose. States Members of the
United Nations and various sectors of civil society
have increasingly been calling for reform to render
the Council more transparent, more efficient, more
effective, more accountable and more representative.
There have been criticisms that national and
geopolitical interests override the Security Council’s
primary function, which is to maintain international
peace and security. To quell criticisms and suspicions
of a self-serving Council, a key feature of a reformed
Council would be a commitment by all Members
States not to vote, while they serve as members of the
Council, against a credible draft resolution before the
Council on timely and decisive action to prevent or end
the commission of genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes. That would necessarily include a
commitment on the part of the Council’s permanent
members to refrain from casting a veto in situations
where such crimes are involved.
In that context, the United Nations in general and the
Council in particular would acquire greater legitimacy
and authority if they could establish clear and effective
criteria for the application of the principle of the
responsibility to protect. In that regard, my delegation

S/PV.7740

believes that, in situations where evident crimes of
genocide, mass atrocities and war crimes are being
committed, the action of the international community
should not be interpreted as an unwarranted imposition
on or limitation of the sovereignty of States, provided
that the action being proposed respected the juridical
means established in the United Nations Charter and
other international legal instruments.
In order to maintain and further consolidate the
Council’s authority, it would be opportune to seriously
consider the calls of Member States for a Council that
is more representative and that better reflects presentday geopolitical realities. While appeals for a more
representative Council are not necessarily motivated
by selfless altruism, and while an enlarged Council
would not offer a guarantee of greater efficiency, a
more representative Security Council is among the
elements of convergence that the majority of the
Member States proposed during the informal meetings
of the intergovernmental negotiations on Security
Council reform held during the seventieth session of
the General Assembly. Dismissing or ignoring those
elements of convergence would not help the Council’s
appeal, credibility or authority.
Another element that has constantly emerged from
consultations and debates on Security Council reform
is the call for greater transparency. That has been
getting stronger during the past months, not only in
the context of the larger question of reinvigorating the
work of the United Nations as it turns 71, but also in the
more immediate context of selecting the Organization’s
next Secretary-General.
The call for greater transparency also includes the
need to continue to improve the means and methods of
dialogue between the Security Council and the General
Assembly and other United Nations bodies and partners.
It likewise suggests a reasonable increase in the number
of the Council’s open debates, while recognizing the
great importance of closed consultations.
The need for greater transparency also extends
to the working methods and procedures of the
Council’s subsidiary bodies, particularly the sanctions
committees, in order to ensure and strengthen the
protection of the fundamental rights of individuals and
the rule of law. In that regard, my delegation would
like to recall paragraph 109 of the 2005 World Summit
Outcome document, on the necessity of ensuring a
fair and clear procedure for placing individuals and

16-2248833/42

S/PV.7740

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

entities on sanctions lists, for removing them and for
considering humanitarian exemptions.
The reform of the Security Council will require
great prudence, wisdom, magnanimity and resolve on
the part of all. At the end of the day, any meaningful
reform of the Security Council must be guided by its
fundamental mission, namely, to effectively ensure
international peace and security. When all is said and
done, and whatever shape and size it may eventually
take, a reformed Council must be better equipped
than ever to spare us and future generations from
the unspeakable horrors of genocide, mass atrocities,
war crimes and other grave violations of fundamental
human rights and of international humanitarian law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mr. Pedersen (Norway): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries — Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Sweden and my own country, Norway.
I would like to touch on three issues, namely,
the selection of the next Secretary-General, how
the Security Council can become more open and
transparent, and the role of the elected members of the
Security Council.
First, with regard to the process of selecting the
new Secretary-General, we are pleased to see that the
selection process this time is much more open and
inclusive, thereby allowing for better scrutiny of the
suitability of candidates by Member States and the
general public. The cooperation between the General
Assembly and the Council on that issue has been
remarkable. Through the informal dialogues with the
candidates, organized by the President of the General
Assembly, candidates have presented their visions for
scrutiny by Member States. For the first time in history,
an equal number of women and men have declared their
candidacy. We urge the Security Council to maintain
that openness and transparency all way through the
process. There is no turning back to the practices
of the past. At a minimum, we expect the Security
Council to announce the results of the various straw
polls through the President of the General Assembly.
We are convinced that the increased transparency and
openness that have been introduced into the selection
process have already raised and improved the profile of
the United Nations.
34/42

19/07/2016

Secondly, the work of the Security Council should
become more accessible. We appreciate that the
Council conducts a significant number of its meetings
in public, and we encourage it to put measures in place
to enable the membership to be effectively informed
about the topics discussed under “Any other business”
during the closed consultations. There are also ways to
improve the information flow. When press statements
and presidential statements are adopted, it takes hours,
if not days, before they are available on the Security
Council’s website. It is a necessity that the work of
the Council become more accessible for the broader
membership and, indeed, the public.
Thirdly, moving the Security Council elections
to earlier in the year is an important step that enables
incoming members to prepare better for their term as
members. We welcome the note adopted by the Council
on Friday (S/2016/619), which aims to extend the period
during which newly elected members can observe
the work of the Council and to make the process for
appointing the Chairs of subsidiary organs more timely
and transparent. Duly implemented, those amendments
to the current procedures will make the transition
phase smoother and provide for enhanced participation
by the elected members for the overall benefit of
the effectiveness, coherence and accountability of
the Council.
Finally, we encourage newly elected members to
take advantage of the annual workshop organized by
Finland, which aims to prepare incoming members for
their membership of the Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Ms. Frankinet (Beligium) (spoke in French):
It is my honour to deliver this statement on behalf of
the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Kingdom of
Belgium.
Following the recommendations set out in your
concept note (S/2016/585, annex), Sir, and mindful
of the end goal of improving the Security Council’s
inclusiveness, transparency and effectiveness and
building further on important work that has been done
over the past years, I would like to focus on three
action-oriented topics.
First, with regard to strengthening procedures in
sanctions regimes, which includes ensuring the fairness
of those procedures, Belgium and the Netherlands are
16-22488

19/07/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

S/PV.7740

part of the Group of Like-minded States on Targeted
Sanctions. We would like to draw the Council’s
attention to the concrete proposals made by the group
and set out in the document on fair and clear procedures
for a more effective United Nations sanctions system
(S/2015/867, annex), which was sent to the Security
Council on 12 November 2015. Belgium and the
Netherlands would like the Council to consider those
proposals in the framework of the review of presidential
note S/2010/507.

minimizing the use of the veto. Like others, we firmly
believe there should be a moratorium on the use of the
veto in cases of genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes. We hope that this could be further explored
by all Security Council members.

Secondly, with regard to strengthening the
Council’s capacity in the area of prevention, we
think that it would be worth exploring the revival of
the practice of the horizon-scanning briefings, or
coming up with an innovative formula that stimulates
reflection and action on the root causes of conflict and
the timely consideration of emerging conflicts. Council
members could also consider interacting more closely
and flexibly with other bodies and individuals working
actively on conflict prevention. We are thinking about,
among others, the Peacebuilding Commission and its
configuration Chairs, the special envoys of regional or
subregional organizations and the Special Adviser on
the Prevention of Genocide and Mass Atrocities. Arria
Formula meetings could also involve more civil society
actors working on conflict prevention. In addition,
Council members could specifically consider measures
to facilitate the use of Article 99 of the Charter of
the United Nations as a key mechanism to help the
Secretary-General call the attention of the Security
Council to any matter that may threaten international
peace and security.

We would like to associate ourselves with the
statement delivered by the representative of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Thirdly, with regard to the operationalization
of thematic debates, the Netherlands and Belgium
believe that the concept notes set forth good practices
to be implemented in all thematic debates — first by
emphasizing the guidelines aimed at making the debates
more succinct and action-oriented and, secondly,
by issuing a clear, specific and operational outcome
of the debate. To the extent possible and if relevant,
operational outcomes of debates could also be pursued
in other relevant United Nations forums. For example,
the Council adopted a resolution on youth and terrorism
at the end of last year (resolution 2250 (2015)). That
initiative was followed up in June by a high-level
thematic conversation in the General Assembly on
children and youth affected by violent extremism.
Finally, I would like to also reiterate the support
of Belgium and the Netherlands for initiatives aimed at

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Isnomo (Indonesia): We thank you, Sir, for
convening this important open debate.

Since at any given time 178 Member countries of
the United Nations are not in the Security Council,
it is crucial that the Council function in a manner
that makes it transparent, effective and accountable
vis-à-vis all United Nations Members. In that regard,
Indonesia welcomes the positive actions taken by the
Council over the years, such as more open debates,
more consultations with the Presidents of the principal
organs and sub-organs and also with troop- and
police-contributing countries, as well as including
voices from multilateral and regional institutions,
civil society, non-governmental organizations and the
private sector to enrich the discourse.
Flowing from General Assembly resolution 69/321,
the joint initiative of the Presidents of the Security
Council and General Assembly to make the process
for the selection of the next Secretary-General open
and consultative is also a milestone step. Furthermore,
the fact that elections for non-permanent Council
members were held six months in advance was another
positive development.
Yet there remains a significant gap between the
expectations of the global citizenry, which has entrusted
the Council to act on its behalf, and the Council’s
functioning. First and foremost in that regard is the
exercise of the veto or the threat to exercise the veto,
which has obstructed necessary action by the Council
in the face of mass atrocities and severe violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law
on too many occasions. The examples of Palestine and
Syria are two such cases. While Indonesia calls for
the abolishment of the right of the veto in the Council,
in view of the present entrenched realities, it would
support steps that would regulate the use of the veto

16-2248835/42

S/PV.7740

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

responsibly. The Council should work out a workable
mechanism in that respect.
Secondly, as world conflicts become more complex,
the Council must ensure that all stakeholders concerned
with United Nations special political missions and
peacekeeping operations are consulted properly and
that their strengths are harnessed. The recent reviews
of United Nations peace operations, peacebuilding and
resolution 1325 (2000) have underscored the primacy of
prevention, politics, dialogue and regional partnerships.
Fundamental to enabling sustainable peace and realizing
the aims of these reviews is the Council’s deeper and
meaningful interaction with relevant stakeholders,
including troop- and police- contributing countries. A
shared understanding, cooperation and collaboration
among them throughout all phases of peace operations
are critical. Following the adoption of resolution
2282 (2016) on the review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture, my delegation also looks
forward to a close and robust partnership of the Council
with the Peacebuilding Commission and other relevant
United Nations and non-United Nations partners.
Thirdly, Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter of
the United Nations should be fully implemented by
taking into consideration the views of the affected
non-member countries. Their perspectives, along with
those of regional organizations, can be invaluable in
building workable approaches to resolving root causes
and advancing reconciliation.
Fourthly, there should be balanced, harmonious
and collaborative relations between the Security
Council and the General Assembly. Consistent with
Article 11 of the Charter, the Council should take into
account the recommendations from the Assembly on
matters pertaining to international peace and security.
In that respect, the Council must not shy away from
discussing non-traditional issues that, in today’s reality,
have proven to have direct and significant linkages to
international peace and security, including the issue of
development. Suffice it to say that peace and security
could not withstand the test of time if development
were neglected.
To keep myself within the time limit and the spirit
of the concept note (S/2016/585, annex), I would like
to conclude by underlining that, as important as the
need to improve the Council’s working methods and
procedures is, better procedures alone are not the
solution. The Council must be effective, fair and just
36/42

19/07/2016

in resolving conflicts in accordance with international
law, and that will occur when the Council is reformed
comprehensively, becoming democratic, accountable
and representative of the plurality and realities of
the world today. For its part, Indonesia stands ready
to contribute to efforts to achieve a comprehensive
Security Council reform.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this open debate on the working methods of
the Security Council. I wish to commend Japan for its
sustained efforts over the past 10 years in working to
improve the working methods of the Security Council,
particularly with regard to its work on strengthening
presidential note S/2010/507. The note remains a useful
guideline in improving the transparency, efficiency
and inclusiveness of the Council. The consistent
implementation of the provisions of note 507 is key to
ensuring its success. South Africa reiterates that the
reforms to working methods, as reflected in note 507,
as well as the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
should become permanent so that this organ can be held
accountable and have predictable and transparent rules.
We wish to align ourselves with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).
In addition to the proposals put forward by NAM, I wish
to also focus on four practical suggestions, as requested
by the concept note for this meeting (S/2016/585, annex),
which South Africa believes can further contribute to
creating a more effective Security Council.
First, the Council has consistently agreed,
including in note 507, to continue to expand
consultation and cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, undertaking to invite
relevant organizations to participate in its public and
private meetings, when appropriate. Additionally, in
note 507 the Council commits itself to continuing to
informally consult with regional organizations when
drafting, inter alia, resolutions, presidential statements
and press statements, as appropriate.
During South Africa’s presidency of the Security
Council in 2012, we championed strengthening
strategic cooperation between the Security Council and
the African Union (AU) Peace and Security Council,
as well as the promotion of the rule of law in conflict
and post-conflict situations. The Security Council also
16-22488

19/07/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

adopted several outcomes, including resolution 2033
(2012), which recognizes that regional organizations are
well placed to understand the nuances and complexities
of conflicts and that their proximity to a given conflict
allows them to directly influence its prevention or
resolution. The resolution provides, among other things,
concrete action for the Council to undertake to foster a
more strategic relationship with the AU.
Currently there are processes under way in Africa
to verify the readiness of the African Standby Force
to enable the AU to intervene in conflicts within a
short time. The AU has the political will and human
resources to deploy troops anywhere in the continent, as
reflected by the fact that the majority of peacekeeping
troops in Africa originate from the continent itself.
What is required is the consistent and regular strategic
consultation and coordination between the Council and
regional bodies, as well as assistance with regard to
capacity-building.
Secondly, while there has been significant
improvement in consultations between the Council
and troop-contributing countries (TCCs), as called
for in note 507, we believe that more can be done.
In that regard, regular and timeous consultations
and coordination between the Council and TCCs are
required, specifically when considering new or the
renewal of mandates.
Thirdly, the Security Council has committed itself
in note 507 to seeking the views of Member States
that are parties to a conflict and/or other interested
and affected parties. That commitment should be
uniformly applied. It would therefore be necessary for
the Council, as a matter of principle, to always consult
with all relevant parties to the conflict to ensure that
the Council has at its disposal all relevant facts before
deliberating on a matter.
Fourthly, briefings by the Council’s presidency to
the general membership at the beginning and end of the
month have become a regular occurrence. The Council
has agreed that the Council presidency should provide
substantive and detailed briefings to Member States
in a timely manner, preferably shortly after informal
consultations of the whole. We encourage members of
the Council to ensure that they maintain this practice
to promote transparency and keep Member States
informed about its work.
This meeting is being held in the context of the
implementation of seminal reforms related to the way

S/PV.7740

in which the United Nations selects and appoints its
Secretary-General. South Africa urges the Security
Council to provide the membership with regular
updates on its consideration of the candidates so as to
ensure the transparency and credibility of the process.
In conclusion, the Council should continue to work
towards increasing and improving its transparency
and accountability, thereby ensuring the greater
effectiveness and legitimacy of its work. Furthermore,
superficial changes to the working methods do not
detract from the fundamental need for a reform of the
Council and the expansion of its membership in both
the permanent and non-permanent categories. We must
therefore speed up the reform of the Council if we
are to avoid the further erosion of the legitimacy and
credibility of this organ.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I thank the Japanese
presidency for convening this open debate, which will
help to strengthen the reform process so as to enable
the Security Council to more effectively address the
unprecedented contemporary threats and challenges
that are making many additional demands on it.
As a member-elect, Kazakhstan is committed to
the reform of the Security Council and agrees to the
steps recommended by the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Matters in order
to promote the greater transparency, inclusiveness,
efficiency, accountability and democratization of the
Council’s work. My delegation would like to underscore
the following proposals for further improving the
working methods of the Council, building upon the
recommendations of presidential note S/2010/507 and
other related documents.
It is clear that greater collaboration with the
General Assembly would provide valuable insights
from Members States neighbouring conflict zones or
impacted by conflicts, with a view to plan meaningful
interventions and prevent further spillovers. These and
many other issues also require an ongoing dialogue
between the Presidents of the Security Council and of
the General Assembly as well as with the Economic and
Social Council and the Secretariat.
My delegation believes that the rule of law should
govern not only internal relations within countries
but also international relations among members of the

16-2248837/42

S/PV.7740

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Council. We are of the view that the work of the Council
would be greatly enhanced if the annual report of the
Council to the General Assembly were more analytical,
reflecting complexities along with an assessment of
Council deliberations and decisions and the mandates of
peacekeeping operations rather than listing summaries
of meetings.
In order to plan rapid and appropriate strategies
for intervention, an astute examination of conflicts and
geopolitical tensions in all of their political, economic
and social dimensions is required, together with an
evaluation of the direct and indirect role of Member
States in facilitating and impeding conflict resolution.
Kazakhstan supports increasing the number of open
meetings, briefings and debates and holding informal
interactive dialogues rather than closed consultations,
which should be structured and focused in such a manner
that they can be productive in laying the foundations
for the next steps to be taken rather than remain only
read-out statements. We fully support the holding of
more ongoing consultations between the Council and
troop- and police-contributing countries throughout all
phases of Council-mandated peacekeeping operations.
Having seen the value of Arria Formula meetings, my
country intends to hold such sessions during its tenure.
We recommend more regular briefings to non-Council
members and more wrap-up sessions.
We welcome the note by the President (S/2016/619)
dated 15 July 2016 concerning newly elected members
during the transitional period between the election and
the beginning of their term. The decision that incoming
non-permanent members should have the opportunity
to observe the work of the Council as of October 2016
will enable them to perform their future role more
effectively. Members-elect, in consultation with all
other members of the Council, should collectively
decide how they will share the chairmanship of
committees and working groups, which are presently
presided over by the non-permanent members who will
be outgoing in 2017.
We concur with other speakers that Council
members should agree on the appointment of the
Chairs of subsidiary organs for the following year no
later than October 2016. Elected members should also
be responsible for drafting resolutions and presidential
statements. Likewise, the Chairs of committees and
working groups should be given the opportunity for
co-penholdership together with existing penholders.
38/42

19/07/2016

Regarding the selection of the next SecretaryGeneral, my delegation recommends that the outcomes
of the straw poll and other subsequent procedures be
shared with the General Assembly so as to enable it to
have a greater say in the selection of a candidate for
this high position. There is also a need for joint ongoing
consultations between the Presidents of the Council
and of the General Assembly.
My delegation also believes that sanctions should
be imposed by the Security Council only following a
proper assessment of their impact, and that they must
not be imposed unilaterally.
Finally, what is most needed is not just reform but
a change in attitudes and a true spirit of solidarity. It
is clear that the national interests of Member States
must be balanced with greater objectivity and global
perspectives.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mrs. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): We endorse the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Cuba supports a genuine and deep reform of the
Security Council that would make it an effective,
transparent, representative and democratic body
reflecting the evolution of international relations and of
the United Nations over the past 70 years.
A key element of Security Council reform is a
change to its working methods. While documents
have been adopted with the aim of improving the
Council’s methods of work, including presidential
note S/2010/507, greater efforts are required in order
to find effective formulas that guarantee a genuine
participation of Member States in the Council’s work
and in its decision-making.
Often measures are adopted that do not take
into account the views of all Council members and
sometimes not even those of its permanent members.
Lack of transparency and exclusionary practices are a
constant thread running through the dynamics of the
Council’s work.
Under Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations, Member States recognize that the Security
Council, in carrying out its functions, acts on their
behalf. Therefore, the work of the Council is the
16-22488

19/07/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

collective responsibility of all Member States, and
they should be guaranteed genuine participation in the
Council’s work and decision-making process.
Cuba reiterates that, at the very least, the following
changes should be made in the Council’s working
methods.
The Council should make every effort to achieve
broad consensus through the required consultations
and negotiations before undertaking any action. No
one should be forced to accept a text when considerable
differences remain with regard to its contents.
The number of public meetings of the Council
must be increased. Closed meetings and informal
consultations should be the exception and not the rule.
Dialogue and interaction between the Council and the
wider United Nations membership must improve. In that
regard, we welcome and encourage the continuation of
the practice of holding monthly wrap-up sessions, as
recent Council presidencies have done.
States that are directly involved or especially
affected should always participate in the Council’s
deliberations on issues that concern them directly, as
required under Article 31 of the Charter. The Council’s
resolutions and presidential statements should reflect
the views that have been expressed by Member States
and in particular by the State directly concerned or
especially affected.
Countries that are non-members of the Council
must have access to subsidiary bodies, including the
right to participate in their deliberations and to receive
sufficient and timely information on their activities.
In order to enhance the transparency and the level
of accountability of the Council, a definitive text should
be adopted that regulates its work. It is inconceivable
that the Council’s rules of procedure remain provisional
after some 70 years.
The annual reports that the Council is obligated
to submit to the General Assembly must truly be
analytical in nature and should adequately assess its
performance. We reiterate the need for the Council
to submit the special reports required of it under the
Charter in its Articles 15 and 24, unfortunately, have
not yet been issued.
The question of the veto is inextricably linked
to the issue of the Council’s working methods, in
particular its decision-making mechanism. The veto

S/PV.7740

is an anachronistic and anti-democratic privilege that
should be eliminated as soon as possible.
We share the concerns expressed with regard to
the growing trend of the Security Council to consider
issues and assume functions that are outside its remit.
This encroaches increasingly on the role entrusted by
the Charter to other United Nations organs, particularly
the General Assembly.
All too frequently and often prematurely, the
Council has been addressing issues that do not
necessarily pose an immediate threat to international
peace and security, invoking Chapter VII. Indeed, in
accordance with the mandate granted by the Charter
of the United Nations, the Security Council must focus
on addressing the most urgent problems that threaten
international peace and security. Chapter VII should be
invoked, as provided for in the Charter, as a last resort.
Another shared concern is the application of double
standards and the manipulation of the Council when it
comes to the consideration of certain issues under by
this organ.
The central focus of this open debate on working
methods should contribute to the essential reform and
democratization of the Security Council. We aspire to
having a representative, democratic, transparent and
efficient Security Council that takes into account the
views of all Member States, pursuant to the mandate set
out in the Charter of the United Nations and the various
realities in our world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): Working methods is an issue
with direct impact on the critical undertakings of our
Organization. We are aware that the Security Council
is the primary body to determine its working methods,
yet the Council does not operate in a vacuum. The way
it functions has a clear impact on the substance of its
work, and therefore on its relations with the other main
organs of the United Nations.
We welcome the latest presidential note (S/2016/619)
on the preparation of newly elected members and on
the Chairs of the subsidiary organs. Nevertheless, I
wish to highlight three points on other aspects of the
working methods.
First, the most obvious and urgent issue in the
working methods is the question of the veto. Needless
to say, the Security Council has, on many occasions,

16-2248839/42

S/PV.7740

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

failed to act in a timely manner to find lasting solutions
to problems. There is no accountability mechanism
for inaction by the Council, which mostly results from
the threat or the use of the veto. That inaction is the
main factor that encourages those who do not refrain
from breaching the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations in a consistent fashion. To preserve
the credibility of the Organization and to enable it to
fulfil the responsibility given by the Charter, we should
deploy more resolute efforts.
In that respect, we welcome the initiative by France
and Mexico, as well as that by Liechtenstein on behalf
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
Group, aimed at eliminating a negative vote in case of
mass atrocities. However, the code of conduct regarding
the non-permanent members will not be meaningful
unless the permanent members embrace it too. In that
context, let me also invite the Council to carefully
reflect upon its recent inaction during the critical hours
when its support and solidarity were important for my
country, its people and democratic institutions.
Secondly, there is the relationship between the
Council and the General Assembly. Bearing in mind
the certain limits in that regard, we think that there
is still room for improvement in terms of increasing
the transparency and inclusiveness of the work of the
Council. To that effect, more informative briefings
and Arria Formula meetings; the timely availability
of draft resolutions, presidential statements and
information on the work of the subsidiary bodies;
decreasing the frequency of closed meetings; and
increased consultation with the members, including
the troop- and police-contributing States, are needed
for meaningful interaction. The process of the selection
of the next Secretary-General is undergoing a positive
change in terms of transparency, and there can be
further improvements in that regard.
Finally, we would be pleased to see a more equitable
division of labour among Council members.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Panama.
Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, allow me to acknowledge the leadership
of Japan in proposing this timely debate, 10 years after
the approval of the first presidential note (S/2006/507)
of the Council on working methods. Japan’s renewed
commitment to the issue allows the General Assembly
to bring to the Council one aspect of the broader
40/42

19/07/2016

discussions we have conducted on Security Council
reform, which should undoubtedly continue.
Panama aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Iran on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries. We have the honour to add
some considerations in our national capacity and from
our experience as a non-permanent member of the
Council on five occasions.
First, in the light of the various exchanges that
have taken place in recent years in order to lend greater
efficiency and effectiveness to the Security Council,
Panama has repeatedly raised the issue that this forum
needs to be revitalized, not just to be representative
but also inclusive, transparent and increasingly open to
accountability. There is an urgent need for improved
and greater access to the Council’s information and
decision-making process; an increase in the frequency
of consultations and open briefings and Arria
Formula meetings, and thereby, greater interaction
and coordination with the General Assembly, with a
view to enabling the Council to reach a higher level
of effectiveness in its working methods. The global
dynamics and our membership have experienced
permanent changes since 1946. Therefore, the internal
structures and internal dynamics of the Organization
need to be updated to respond effectively to the new
realities — an update demanded by 97.4 per cent of the
membership in order to feel represented.
Secondly, the Security Council needs more diverse
and closer participation by non-member States, in
particular developing countries and/or traditionally
underrepresented regions. There is also a need to
strengthen the role of the non-permanent members.
Nevertheless, Panama emphasizes that the presidency
of the Council and the chairmanships of the subsidiary
bodies should be assigned solely to non-permanent
members in order to create a balance in the performance
of the membership.
As a member of the Group of Friends on the
Responsibility to Protect, Panama stresses the
importance of the reports prepared by the Special
Advisers to the Secretary-General on the prevention of
genocide and the responsibility to protect when it comes
to early warning about situations where populations
are at risk of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity, as mentioned in the
Secretary-General’s Human Rights Up Front initiative.
With that vision of a more democratic Security
16-22488

19/07/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Council, Panama has expressed its support for the code
of conduct promoted by the Accountability Coherence
and Transparency Group.
Thirdly, the ongoing process for the selection of
the next Secretary-General must exhibit credibility and
transparency. It should also highlight the attitude of a
Council whose permanent membership is aware of the
new realities and the aspirations of the majority they
represent, and therefore aware that the central role of
that process concerns the General Assembly.
In conclusion, our aspiration is that periodic
changes resulting from the deliberations of the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Matters translate beyond a new consolidated document
and into effective action to strengthen a Council with
open doors, a Council ethical in its decision-making
and with a transparent and accountable attitude.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Mendonça e Moura (Portugal): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on the
implementation of presidential note S/2010/507. The
inclusion of this debate in the programme of work is
a sign of Japan’s commitment to the issue and to the
efforts made by the Japanese delegation towards
improving the Security Council’s working methods.
I wish to also express our recognition for the work
recently undertaken by the members of the Council
to move this agenda forward, in particular Angola as
the previous Chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Matters,
and Spain, which organized the productive debate on
the implementation of note 507 in October 2015 (see
S/PV.7539).
When the time comes to start the discussions to
update note 507, we must acknowledge that positive
developments have occurred since its adoption in
2010, prompted by an active commitment by Council
members and the contribution and support of the wider
membership, including that of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency Group, of which we are
a part.
The Security Council working methods have
proved to be a subject of interest to us all, and we
appreciate the Security Council’s efforts to continue
to push it forward. Very recently, we had an example
of such efforts in the form of the adoption of

S/PV.7740

presidential note S/2016/619, under Japan’s tenure,
with concrete measures to facilitate the preparation
by newly elected members of their mandates and the
appointment of the new Chairs of the subsidiary bodies,
aiming at improving the transparency, efficiency and
inclusiveness in the Council.
In this vein and responding to your invitation,
Mr. President, to make practical suggestions on the
implementation of note 507, I would submit two
concrete ones, both in view of increasing transparency:
The first has to do with making available to
non-members of the Council draft resolutions and
presidential statements as soon as they are introduced
within informal consultations, or earlier. We think that
this is an important element of transparency, already
reflected in paragraph 44 of note 507, but where some
further efforts concerning its implementation should be
exerted as a matter of regular practice.
The second is the suggestion that at briefings
members of the Council express publicly their views
following the briefers’ public statements. That would
allow the members of the Council to put on record
their views on the subject under consideration, which
otherwise might be expressed only in informal
consultations, of course notwithstanding the possibility
of Council members convening subsequently in
informal consultations on the same subject, whenever
appropriate and if still necessary.
These are two concrete suggestions in view of
the future updating of note 507. Let me conclude by
expressing our full support for this initiative and by
thanking you once again, Sir, for your commitment to
improving the Security Council’s working methods.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Lee Moon Hee (Republic of Korea): I would
like to thank you, Sir, for organizing today’s open
debate on the working methods of the Security Council.
Bearing in mind the President’s guidelines for
today’s debate, I would like to focus on, among others,
three topics of particular interest to my delegation.
These are related but not limited to sections IV, VI, VII,
VIII and XI of the annex to S/2010/507.
First, efforts to improve the working methods of the
Security Council should be undertaken with a view to
enhancing the Council’s transparency, accountability,

16-2248841/42

S/PV.7740

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

legitimacy, and efficiency. From the ongoing situations
in Syria, Iraq and South Sudan to nuclear threat of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and emerging
threats of violent extremism, the decisions of the
Security Council must be respected and faithfully
implemented in accordance with the Charter. To that
end, we need the spontaneity of the entire membership.
The paragraphs of note 507, especially those
encouraging active interactions between the Council
and the broader membership, such as paragraphs
42 to 45, could be better utilized in that regard. The
Council could boost the legitimacy of its actions with
more public meetings in lieu of the current practice of
holding informal consultations. Paragraphs 28 and 31
of note 507 are of particular relevance in that context.
Secondly, the working methods of the subsidiary
bodies must be improved. The level of the effectiveness
of sanctions committees is directly related to the
authority of the Security Council’s sanctions regime. No
resolution of the Council can be expected to be adhered
to if the Council shows little interest in effectively
implementing its decision through its own subsidiary
body. Even resolution 2270 (2017) — imposing one of
the most comprehensive and robust sanctions regime
ever to be adopted by the Council — must be faithfully
implemented if it is to accomplish its goals. By refining
paragraphs 46 through 50 of note 507, the Council
could further solidify the working methods of its
subsidiary bodies.
In addition, the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations can be instrumental in strengthening
the credibility of Security Council decisions by
contributing to greater support for the mandates of
various peacekeeping missions. We have to remember
that the Report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and
the subsequent report of the Secretary-General also

42/42

19/07/2016

recommended the revitalization of the Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations.
Thirdly, better coordination with other relevant
bodies of the United Nations system, such as the
Peacebuidling Commission (PBC) and the Economic
and Social Council, should be promoted. My delegation
made the same point at the open debate on working
methods held in October 2015 (see S/PV.7539). As we
are all aware, the adoption of resolution 2282 (2016)
was a landmark achievement not only of the Council,
but of the United Nations membership in general.
The Republic of Korea, as a current member of both
the Economic and Social Council and the PBC, is
committed to working closely with other Member
States in following through with its implementation.
In this regard, my delegation appreciates the
initiative of Egypt, as a designated coordinator on the
stocktaking exercise on the PBC’s advisory function to
the Security Council, to convene a meeting on 14 April.
A number of useful points were raised and discussed,
including the need for closer coordination in terms
of the sequence and the content of messaging and the
potential of dispatching PBC field visits to complement
the Security Council’s fact-finding missions. On this
point, my delegation suggests that we incorporate how
PBC’s field visits can better complement the Security
Council’s field missions by updating relevant paragraphs
of note 507, namely, paragraphs 66 through 69.
Finally, I wish to express my delegation’s
appreciation once again to all members of the Security
Council that have organized previous open debates on
working methods for their tireless efforts to make the
much-needed change in how the Council conducts its
day-to-day operations, one step at a time. My delegation
will continue working with them in the process.
The meeting rose at 1.45 p.m.

16-22488
