A/RES/76/7

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
23 November 2021

Seventy-sixth session
Agenda item 108
Crime prevention and criminal justice

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 22 November 2021
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/76/L.11)]

76/7.

2021 Political Declaration on the Implementation of the
United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons
The General Assembly
Adopts the political declaration entitled “2021 Political Declaration on the
Implementation of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons” annexed to the present resolution.
37th plenary meeting
22 November 2021

Annex
2021 Political Declaration on the Implementation of the
United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons
1.
We, the States Members of the United Nations, reaffirm the United Nations
Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons 1 and our commitments made
therein, and evince our strong political will to take decisive concerted action to end
this heinous crime, wherever it may occur.
2.
We recall and reaffirm our commitments to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, 2 recognizing its integrated and indivisible nature and acknowledging that
the 2030 Agenda includes commitments that relate to combating all forms of trafficking
__________________
1
2

Resolution 64/293.
Resolution 70/1.

21-17189 (E)

261121

*2117189*

2021 Political Declaration on the Implementation of the
United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons

A/RES/76/7

in persons, recognize the importance of partnerships in this regard, and emphasize that
the 2030 Agenda and the Global Plan of Action are mutually reinforcing.
3.
We reaffirm the crucial importance of universal ratification of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime 3 and the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, 4 taking into consideration the central role of those instruments in the fight
against trafficking in persons, and urge Member States that have not yet done so to
consider ratifying or acceding to the Convention and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, as a matter of
priority. We urge States parties to those instruments to implement them fully and
effectively, and welcome the decision of the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime to establish a mechanism
for the review of the implementation of the Convention and the Protocols thereto.
4.
We also reaffirm our recognition that “trafficking in persons” means the
recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of persons, by means of
the threat or use of force or other forms of coercion, of abduction, o f fraud, of
deception, of the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or
receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control
over another person, for the purpose of exploitation, which includes, at a minimum,
the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of sexual exploitation,
forced labour or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude or the
removal of organs, as set forth in the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and P unish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children.
5.
We reiterate that trafficking in persons is a serious crime and a grave offence to
human dignity and physical integrity, a violation and abuse of human rights and a
challenge to sustainable development and we note that respect for human rights is an
important basis of comprehensive anti-trafficking strategies.
6.
We reaffirm the importance of universal ratification and implementation of other
relevant international instruments that address trafficking in persons, including the
Convention on the Rights of the Child 5 and its optional protocols relevant to
trafficking in persons. 6
7.
We recall the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration 7 and the
Global Compact on Refugees, 8 and take note of Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women general recommendation No. 38 (2020) on trafficking
in women and girls in the context of global migration. 9
8.
We reiterate our commitment to prevent trafficking in persons, including
through targeted education and awareness-raising campaigns. We welcome the
designation of 30 July as the World Day against Trafficking in Persons. 10 We commit
to fulfil our obligations and intensify our efforts to prevent and address, with a view
to eliminating, the demand that fosters trafficking in persons, especially of women
and girls, for all forms of exploitation, and in this regard to put in pl ace or enhance
preventive measures, including legislative and punitive measures to deter exploiters,
__________________

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
5
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
6
Ibid., vols. 2171 and 2173, No. 27531.
7
Resolution 73/195, annex.
8
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/73/12
(Part I) and A/73/12 (Part II)), part II.
9
CEDAW/C/GC/38.
10
See resolution 68/192.
3
4

2/8

21-17189

2021 Political Declaration on the Implementation of the
United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons

A/RES/76/7A/RES/76/7

and those who facilitate or profit from the exploitation of trafficking victims, and hold
them accountable.
9.
We reaffirm our commitment to address the social, economic, cultural, political
and other factors that make people vulnerable to trafficking in persons, such as
poverty, underdevelopment, irregular migration, statelessness, unemployment,
inequality, gender inequality, sexual and gender-based violence, discrimination,
including gender and racial discrimination, disability, social and financial exclusion,
marginalization, stigmatization, corruption, persecution as well as humanitarian
emergencies, armed conflicts and natural disasters. We also reaffirm the crucial
importance of addressing negative social norms that sustain gender inequality and
discrimination, including the culture of tolerance towards violence against women,
youth and children, that make them particularly vulnerable to trafficking in p ersons.
We commit to take strong efforts to include more women in leadership positions and
all decision-making processes.
10. We express our serious concern over the significant and enduring trafficking of
women and children, recognize that trafficking in persons disproportionately affects
them, and call upon Member States to enact or update national laws and establish
comprehensive policies, programmes and other measures that provide for the
protection of trafficked women and children from revictimization and appropriate
assistance and protection in the best interests of the child. We stress the importance
of coordinating both national and international cooperation to enhance the positive
effects of all anti-trafficking efforts.
11. We express grave concern that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
has exacerbated existing situations of vulnerability to trafficking in persons, including
in digital contexts, increasing the number of individuals at risk, exposing victims to
bigger challenges due to either abandonment or increased confinement by traffickers,
reduced access to assistance, and the restricted or complete lack of ability to either
work or return home, making their living conditions unbearable. We recognize the
need to place increased priority and urgency on prevention, planning and coordination,
both national and international, to mitigate the impact of emerging and ongoing
challenges on trafficking responses and that more global efforts are needed to combat
discrimination against people vulnerable to trafficking in persons, particularly
migrants, who are more vulnerable to exploitation and trafficking with the outbreak of
the pandemic. We note with concern that sexual and gender-based violence increased
globally during the pandemic, and commit to intensifying efforts to eliminate all forms
of violence against all women and girls in public and private spheres, including
trafficking in persons for sexual exploitation and abuse and forced labour.
12. We express solidarity with and compassion for victims and survivors, call for
full respect of their human rights, and, recognizing their role as agents of change in
the global fight against trafficking in persons, acknowledge the need to incorporate
their perspective and experience in all efforts to prevent and combat trafficking in
persons. We aim to actively involve victims of trafficking in persons in designing,
implementing, monitoring and evaluating such efforts. We will provide victim -centred
and trauma-informed care, assistance and services for their recovery and
rehabilitation, access to health, including sexual and reproductive health -care services
and mental health and psychosocial support services, and, working with civil society
and other relevant partners, monitor and regularly assess suc h assistance, with the
input of victims, and seek to enhance the provision of long -term support and
reintegration, including protection and assistance. We will ensure that victims are
treated with respect and dignity and are not inappropriately penalized o r adversely
affected by laws, policies and other actions taken by government authorities and
communities for acts that they commit as a direct consequence of their trafficking
situation.

21-17189

3/8

A/RES/76/7

2021 Political Declaration on the Implementation of the
United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons

13. We commit to undertake appropriate measures to facilitate access to justice and
protections for victims of trafficking in persons that should not be conditional on their
participation in criminal proceedings, taking into account national legislation. We will
seek to ensure that laws and policies are in place to alleviate reliance on victims’
testimonies, including the use of digital evidence, financial records or other evidence,
as appropriate. Where the victim’s testimony is necessary, we will ensure that
protections are in place for the victims, having regard to their specific vulnerabilities.
We also commit to take steps to ensure that effective remedies, including for damage
suffered, are available. We also commit to intensify our efforts, subject to our national
laws, rules and regulations, to implement the principle of non-punishment of victims
of trafficking, which should apply to unlawful activity that a victim of trafficking in
persons has been compelled to be involved in as a direct consequence of their
trafficking situation and for all types of punishment, inclu ding criminal, civil,
administrative and immigration offences. We commit to provide appropriate responses
to trafficking in persons situations, including through proactive and fair identification
procedures, and access to effective remedies for victims who have been unjustly
penalized for illegal acts committed in connection with their victimization.
14. We affirm our commitment to protect the privacy and identity and ensure the
safety of victims of trafficking in persons before, during and after criminal
proceedings and to protect immediate family members and witnesses, as appropriate,
from retaliation by traffickers by ensuring their safety in accordance with articles 24
and 25 of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime.
15. We reaffirm our commitment to continue our efforts to criminalize trafficking
in persons in all its forms, and to strengthen cooperation and coordination among
Member States in countries of origin, transit and destination in order to disrupt and
dismantle criminal networks involved in such crimes, including through, inter alia,
the enhancement of information-sharing with full respect for domestic law and mutual
legal assistance and extradition in combating crimes that might be connected with
trafficking in persons, such as money-laundering, corruption, illicit financial flows,
the smuggling of migrants, the trafficking in illicit drugs, and all forms of organized
crime. We commit to enhancing the capacity of law enforcement and criminal justice
systems to identify, investigate and prosecute cases of trafficking in persons, and
analyse financial flows to detect those criminal networks in collaboration with
financial institutions. We also commit to developing and strengthening national
referral mechanisms and to use available technology to sustain victim referrals and
services and to identify, seize and forfeit ill-gotten gains of those criminal networks.
We further commit to strengthening the capacity of criminal justice practitioners,
including law enforcement officials, prosecutors, judges and correction and probation
officers, and to enable a victim-centred, age- and gender-sensitive approach to care
and assistance of victims, that takes into consideration disability and trauma and that
addresses the specific needs of women, youth and children.
16. We are seriously concerned that the scale of global resourcing to fight
trafficking in persons does not match the scale of the challenge and in this regard:
(a) We reaffirm our strong support for the United Nations v oluntary trust fund
for victims of trafficking in persons, especially women and children, established in
accordance with the Global Plan of Action, aimed at providing victims of trafficking
in persons with humanitarian, legal and financial aid through esta blished channels of
assistance, such as governmental, intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations, and we invite all stakeholders to contribute to the trust fund, including
through the announcement of pledges at the quadrennial high level appraisa ls of the
Global Plan of Action;

4/8

21-17189

2021 Political Declaration on the Implementation of the
United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons

A/RES/76/7A/RES/76/7

(b) We acknowledge the need to provide sufficient, reliable, sustainable and
predictable resources for national trafficking in persons strategies;
(c) We stress the need to intensify international cooperation, including
capacity-building, exchange of best practices and know-how and technical assistance,
especially for least developed and developing countries, including small island
developing States, aimed at strengthening their ability to prevent all forms of
trafficking and address the special needs of victims, including supporting their
development programmes and to strengthen their criminal justice systems;
(d) We encourage relevant entities and bodies of the United Nations system to
provide assistance to Member States, upon request, including through training and
capacity-building of relevant authorities in the provision of post-trauma counselling,
and gender- and age-sensitive and victim-centred mental health and psychosocial
support services for the recovery and reintegration of victims;
(e) We acknowledge the need for public-private partnerships to prevent and
detect trafficking in persons, recognizing the important role played by financial
institutions, and take note with appreciation of the initiatives of Member States to
contribute to the global fight against trafficking in persons.
17. We reiterate, in the strongest terms possible, the importance of strengthening
collective action by Member States to end trafficking in persons, including through
regional, subregional and cross-regional mechanisms, and through partnerships and
initiatives with the United Nations system and other relevant stakeholders, including,
inter alia, regional and international organizations, the private sector, the media,
academia, parliamentarians and civil society, including non-governmental organizations,
academic institutions and faith-based organizations, as well as national human rights
institutions, where they exist, with regard to the Paris Principles. 11 We will promote
multi-stakeholder partnerships and engage the private sector and civil society, in
developing and implementing relevant sustainable initiatives to prevent and combat
trafficking in persons. We take note of the work of the Special Rapporteur on
trafficking in persons, especially women and children, and the Special Rapporteur on
contemporary forms of slavery, in combating trafficking in persons, and welcome
their continued efforts to support the implementation of the Global Plan of Action and
the present political declaration.
18. We also reiterate the need to continue to enhance the overall organization and
coherence in the global efforts of the United Nations system to respond to trafficking
in persons, especially in ensuring support to Member States. In this regard, while
recalling that the Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons
was established to foster coordination and cooperation among relevant United
Nations system entities and other international organizations involved in combating
trafficking in persons, with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime as its
coordinator, we urge the Secretary-General to continue efforts to strengthen
coordination within the United Nations system and to inform Member States thereof
through existing reporting channels.
19. We recognize the important role played by the Inter-Agency Coordination
Group against Trafficking in Persons in the United Nations system, and recognize
with appreciation the ongoing efforts of its member entities to respond to traffickin g
in persons. We invite the Coordination Group to continue to increase its activities
related to the implementation of the Global Plan of Action and, to that end, to
incorporate aspects of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development relevant to
preventing and combating trafficking in persons and to continue to advance the
coordination of future activities and avoidance of duplication of efforts. We
__________________
11

21-17189

Resolution 48/134, annex.
5/8

A/RES/76/7

2021 Political Declaration on the Implementation of the
United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons

encourage the Coordination Group to continue to expand its membership to include
international intergovernmental entities that have a role in addressing trafficking in
persons in all regions.
20. We reaffirm the central role of the work of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime in the global fight against trafficking in persons, particularly in providing
technical assistance to Member States, upon their request, to implement the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, by making use of existing capacity-building tools, lessons learned from
Member States and expertise available in other international organizations.
21. We will endeavour to provide unearmarked extrabudgetary resources for the
offices of the United Nations system which are mandated to combat trafficking in
persons, consistent with their rules and procedures.
22. We reiterate the need for improved data collection and analysis of trafficking in
persons, disaggregated by sex, age and other relevant factors, including the form of
exploitation, and using systematic and consistent criteria, to effectively counter
trafficking in persons. We thus recognize the importance of improved data collection
by national authorities and will enhance international cooperation to this end,
including through capacity-building, financial support and technical assistance. We
will do so consistent with our national legislation on data protection, if applicable,
and our respective international obligations related to privacy.
23. We acknowledge the importance of the biennial Global Report on Trafficking in
Persons, prepared by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime pursuant to the
Global Plan of Action, and request the Office to continue to collect information on
patterns, forms and flows of trafficking in persons, at the national, regional and
international levels, in a balanced, reliable and comprehensive manner, to be
published in the Global Report, and in ongoing research to estimate the prevalence of
trafficking in persons, in close cooperation and collaboration with Member States.
24. We evince our strong political will and commitment of financial resources to
effectively address trafficking in persons in all circumstances, including in situations
of armed conflict, natural disasters and humanitarian emergencies, while fully
respecting the humanitarian principles for humanitarian action. In this regard:
(a) We recognize that refugees and migrants in large movements face greater
risk of trafficking in persons, including forced labour. We will work to prevent
trafficking among those affected by displacement, and provide support for victims,
including through targeted measures to identify victims or those at risk of trafficking
in places of first arrival as well as throughout their journey. We reiterate our
commitment to take steps to address the particular situations of vulnerability of
women and children during the journey from point of origin to place of arrival,
including their potential exposure to trafficking in persons, including through the
development of age- and gender-responsive policies and programmes;
(b) We commit to intensify our efforts to prevent irregular migration and
create and strengthen pathways for safe, orderly and regular migration to reduce the
exposure of people on the move to trafficking in persons, and in this regard recall our
respective commitments to the Global Compact for Safe Orderly and Regular
Migration, including discretionary measures such as access to residence or work
permits, humanitarian visas, family reunification and private sponsorship, as
applicable;
(c) We encourage the training of humanitarian and peacekeeping personnel to
be deployed in humanitarian emergencies and peacekeeping operations on responding
to trafficking in persons and on gender expertise, child protection and sexual
6/8

21-17189

2021 Political Declaration on the Implementation of the
United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons

A/RES/76/7A/RES/76/7

exploitation and abuse. We encourage relevant entities and bodies of the United
Nations system to train their personnel and to build their technical capacity to assess
situations and respond to instances of trafficking in persons in armed conflict and
humanitarian emergencies, and to work together to identify, prevent and respond
effectively to victims.
25. We express our deep concern about the increasing links between armed groups,
including terrorist groups, and trafficking in persons, involving the coercion of
victims, in particular women and girls, into forced marriages, sexual slavery, forced
pregnancy, forced labour, domestic servitude and sexual exploitation, and subjecting
men and boys to forced labour or act as combatants.
26. We note with concern the increasing misuse of information and communications
technologies, in particular the Internet, to facilitate various aspects of trafficking in
persons, including advertising, grooming, recruitment, control, financial transactions
and various forms of exploitation, including online child sexual exploitation and the
production and distribution of child pornography and other child sexual abuse
material. We also emphasize the importance of countering such misuse while
respecting human rights and fundamental freedoms, in accordance with our
obligations under international law. In this regard:
(a) We call for the strengthening of law enforcement digital expertise and
capacity to conduct proportionate, lawful, accountable and necessary investigations
in cyberspace, including the dark web, and seize associated electronic evidence. We
encourage the appropriate use by law enforcement of technology -based solutions that
address the global scope of trafficking in persons;
(b) We further encourage the appropriate use of technology and innovative
tools by practitioners and central authorities to increase international and cross -border
cooperation in criminal matters. We recognize the need for ethical use of technology
by law enforcement, consistent with human rights obligations;
(c) We call for effective partnerships among the public sector, civil society,
academia and the private sector, including technology companies, to enhance
innovation, cooperation and the use of technology to combat trafficking in persons.
27. We recognize the need for a multidisciplinary approach, based on respect for all
human rights, to combating trafficking in human organs and trafficking in persons for
the purpose of organ removal. We reaffirm our commit ment to prevent and combat
trafficking in persons for the purpose of organ removal. We condemn the involvement
of criminal groups and unethical medical personnel in trafficking in persons for the
purpose of organ removal. We commit to adopting ethical and transparent regulations
governing organ donations, strengthening legislative frameworks, including by
reviewing, developing or amending them, as appropriate, to prevent and combat
trafficking in persons for the purpose of organ removal and trafficking in h uman
organs, including the criminalization of these practices and provisions to ensure the
accountability of the perpetrators, and to resource such efforts, including the ready
provision of effective and needs-based victim protection and health services. We call
for better coordination and collaboration between criminal justice actors and medical
professionals, and strengthened capacity and skills to proactively identify and
investigate these cases.
28. We reaffirm the importance of taking measures to prev ent and combat
trafficking in persons in supply chains, including deterring and penalizing fraudulent
and abusive recruitment practices. We encourage Member States, multilateral
organizations and the private sector to adopt ethical and transparent practice s in their
procurement and supply chains, and strongly urge them to regularly disclose and
provide further access to relevant information on these practices. We are mindful of
21-17189

7/8

2021 Political Declaration on the Implementation of the
United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons

A/RES/76/7

the need to ensure that all actors in global supply chains, including intermedia ries,
who purchase or benefit from the labour of trafficking victims, are to be held
accountable, including through sufficiently stringent sanctions, through adoption and
enforcement of appropriate legislation and practices. In this regard, we recall the
United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights. 12 We also
emphasize the need to establish firewalls between immigration checks and labour
inspections, and/or to ensure that labour inspections are conducted in such a way that
does not put potential victims of trafficking in fear of immigration authorities or
offences. We stress the importance in implementing labour standards improving
government procurement practices in efforts to promote decent work and the need to
develop awareness-raising and educational programmes in partnership with civil
society and the media to counter any acceptance of the use of forced labour and
exploitation in the production of goods. We also urge the Secretary -General to ensure
that all United Nations procurement does not contain goods and services produced by
trafficked persons.
29. We acknowledge that the gaps between the Global Plan of Action and its
implementation by Member States should be closed, and recognize that arrangements
are needed to ensure the systematic follow-up to and review of all of the commitments
we are making at the present high-level meeting, including in the quadrennial highlevel meetings of the General Assembly to appraise progress achieved in the
implementation of the Global Plan of Action. We will also promote the development
of clearer analysis of successful counter-trafficking responses, and assessment and
evaluation frameworks that include consideration of how laws, policies or practical
measures affect victims of trafficking in persons.

__________________
12

8/8

Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights: Implementing the United Nations “Protect,
Respect and Remedy” Framework (A/HRC/17/31, annex).
21-17189
