S/2002/714

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 June 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 25 June 2002 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the Memorandum of Understanding for the
cessation of hostilities and the resolution of the outstanding military issues under the
Lusaka Protocol (S/1994/1441, annex), which was signed on 4 April 2002 by the
Angolan Armed Forces and the União Nacional para a Independência Total de
Angola (UNITA). My Adviser for Special Assignments on Africa, Under-SecretaryGeneral Ibrahim A. Gambari, briefed the Security Council on this subject on 23
April 2002.
As you are aware, the Memorandum of Understanding provides, among other
things, for the quartering, demobilization and reintegration of UNITA soldiers. It is
envisaged that the United Nations would participate as an observer in the
implementing bodies set up by the Memorandum, namely the Joint Military
Commission and the technical groups.
In a letter addressed to me, dated 15 April 2002, the President of Angola, José
Eduardo dos Santos, requested the United Nations to provide assistance in the
organization and management of the quartering areas and in the reintegration of
UNITA soldiers.
To prepare appropriate recommendations to the Council on the tasks of the
United Nations in support of the implementation of the Memorandum of
Understanding, I asked Mr. Gambari to lead an integrated assessment team to
Angola. The team will submit its findings to me shortly. Those findings will form
the basis of my recommendations to the Security Council with regard to the tasks
and mandate of the United Nations presence in Angola, which I intend to present
before the expiry of the current mandate of the United Nations Office in Angola on
15 July 2002.
In the meantime, and in view of the considerable progress already made in the
quartering process, I am seeking the urgent approval of the Security Council for the
deployment of up to 10 military liaison officers to Angola to support the
implementation of the Memorandum of Understanding. For the time being, these
officers would be stationed in Luanda, pending the establishment of the necessary
logistical and other conditions for movement outside the capital. This deployment
would be without prejudice to the mandate that the Council may decide upon,
following the submission of my report.

02-45055 (E)

010702

*0245055*

S/2002/714

To expedite the proposed deployment, I have already approached several
Member States and requested them, on a contingency basis, to make available
qualified military personnel who could travel on short notice upon the Council’s
approval. It is foreseen that the military observers will be required for an initial
period of three months.
There is now a real opportunity to establish the peace and stability to which
the people of Angola have aspired for so long. It is therefore important that the
United Nations provide support and assistance to this process and the above request
is made in that spirit.
I should be grateful if you would bring this request to the attention of the
Security Council with a view to an early decision.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2
