A /73/PV.47

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

47th plenary meeting

Thursday, 6 December 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

The meeting was called to order at 3.55 p.m.
Agenda item 38 (continued)
The situation in the Middle East
Draft resolution (A/73/L.42)
Draft amendment (A/73/L.46)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States of America to
introduce draft resolution A/73/L.42.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): Today
could be a historic day at the United Nations or just
another ordinary day. Today could be a day during
which the General Assembly unconditionally speaks
out with moral clarity against one of the most obvious
and grotesque cases of terrorism in the world or it could
be a day during which it refuses to do so.
Last Friday, the General Assembly adopted
six — and I repeat six — resolutions condemning Israel
in one single day (see A/73/PV.43). In an average year,
the United Nations votes against Israel 20 times. Over
the years, the United Nations has voted to condemn
Israel over 500 times. That is what an ordinary day at
the United Nations looks like.
As much as the United States finds that record
appalling, no one can question whether the United
Nations is on record in its hostility towards the State of
Israel. But for good measure, there will be another vote
this afternoon that gives everyone another chance to put
themselves on record in a way that goes against Israel.

The question before us now is something very different,
namely, whether the United Nations thinks terrorism is
acceptable if — and only if — it is directed at Israel.
That is something that we should all think
deeply about. The draft resolution we have before us
(A/73/L.42) does not comment about the specifics of
any peace agreement. As I have said, the United Nations
has commented hundreds of times on what it would
like to see in a peace agreement, and it will do it again
later today. What this draft resolution does is stand
for a foundational element of peace. That foundation
is the rejection of terrorism, because we all know that
there can be no peace without a mutual agreement that
terrorism is unacceptable.
Let us talk about some of the activities of Hamas,
an entity designated by the United States, the European
Union and others as a terrorist organization. The charter
of Hamas openly calls for the destruction of Israel; its
statements continually repeat that goal. Over the years,
Hamas has used several barbaric ways of conducting
terrorist attacks. Initially, it used suicide bombers. In
the 1990s and early 2000s, Hamas members armed
with bombs boarded Israeli buses and entered Israeli
restaurants and detonated themselves, killing hundreds
of innocent civilians and injuring thousands more.
Since then, it has moved towards indiscriminately firing
rockets into Israel from Gaza, launching thousands of
them in the past five years, including more than 400 in
a two-day period just last month. Neighbourhoods were
targeted and a bus was hit by an anti-tank missile.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-41585 (E)

*1841585*

A/73/PV.47

More recently, Hamas tactics have changed again
as it has adopted still more methods of killing Israeli
civilians and damaging Israeli civilian property. It has
launched flaming kites and balloons by the thousands,
often emblazoned with Nazi symbols, into Israeli
civilian areas. This is the classic case of terrorism.
And yet, throughout all of this, the United Nations has
never — and I repeat never — adopted a resolution
condemning Hamas. It has adopted 700 resolutions
condemning Israel and not one single resolution
condemning Hamas. That, more than anything else, is
a condemnation of the United Nations itself.
Today, at this moment, the United Nations can
change that awful record. The world is coming
to recognize the dangerous and troubling rise of
anti-Semitism around the globe. The Secretary-General
has forcefully spoken out against it, as have many
Heads of State and parliaments around the world. And
yet, what the United Nations chooses to do today will
speak volumes about each country’s seriousness when
it comes to condemning anti-Semitism, because there is
nothing more anti-Semitic than saying that terrorism is
not terrorism when it is used against the Jewish people
and the Jewish State.
There is nothing more anti-Semitic than saying that
we cannot condemn terrorism against Israel, while we
would not hesitate for one minute to condemn the same
acts if they were directed against any other country.
I have watched countries that would never take such
positions on their own come together here at the United
Nations and abandon all sense of honesty, all sense of
accuracy and all sense of truth.
Today we have an opportunity to change that. We
can come together as the unified, moral and powerful
force for peace that this institution’s founders intended
it to be.
However, if that is not enough to motivate Assembly
members, then I ask them to set aside the death and
destruction that Hamas has inflicted on Israel for one
moment. I ask them to consider the suffering that it
has inflicted upon the Palestinian people themselves.
Hamas has been the de facto Government of Gaza
since 2007, and yet, after 11 years of Hamas rule,
Gaza has electricity for only a few hours a day. Only
10 per cent of its population has access to safe drinking
water. Unemployment is approaching 50 per cent and
climbing — one of the highest employment rates in the
entire world. Hamas uses torture and arbitrary arrest
2/15

06/12/2018

to punish its political opponents. It has made Gaza a
police State, all while it spends its resources, including
United Nations resources, on rockets and terror tunnels.
The people who have suffered by far the most because
of Hamas are the Palestinian people. For their sake,
the world should speak out against the destruction of
Hamas and what it continues to cause.
The draft resolution before us would right a historic
wrong. More importantly, it would put the General
Assembly on the side of truth and balance in the effort
to achieve peace in the Middle East. The draft resolution
condemns Hamas rocket attacks on innocent civilians.
It demands that Hamas and other militia groups end
all violent attacks, including the use of flaming kites,
and it also reaffirms the United Nations support for
a just, lasting and comprehensive peace. Before the
General Assembly can credibly advocate compromise
and reconciliation between the Palestinians and Israel,
it must unambiguously and unconditionally condemn
Hamas terrorism on the record. Regardless of what any
country in this Hall thinks a future peace settlement
should look like, support for this draft resolution is
an essential step to achieving it. Peace must be built
on truth.
I want to take a personal moment and ask my Arab
brothers and sisters if the hatred is that strong. Is the
hatred towards Israel so strong that they will defend
a terrorist organization — one that is directly causing
harm to the Palestinian people? Is it not time to let that
go? For true peace and security in the entire region, is
it not time for both sides to let this go? For the sake of
peace and for the sake of this institution, I respectfully
urge my colleagues to support the United States
draft resolution.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): My delegation has introduced draft
amendment A/73/L.46 to draft resolution A/73/L.42,
submitted by the United States of America.
As we have done on other occasions, we state our
firm commitment to all international efforts that are
able to lead to a peaceful resolution of the occupation
suffered by the Palestinian people. In this regard, we
endorse such initiatives as the Quartet road map, the
Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and others,
which constitute a guarantee of just and lasting peace
so that both peoples can live within recognized and
safe borders.
18-41585

06/12/2018

Moreover, we reaffirm our conviction that the only
long-term solution to the occupation of Palestine is the
two-State solution, which would finally establish a free,
sovereign and independent Palestinian State, within the
pre-1967 international borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions. As we have
indicated on other occasions, my delegation condemns
any action that leads to violence or risks civilian lives.
We ask all parties to give priority to the protection of
civilians and infrastructure.
After a number of consultations, my delegation has
decided to withdraw the draft amendment that it had
submitted because we believe that doing so will help to
guarantee that the General Assembly fulfils its role in
this extremely important case. We take this opportunity
to call on all representatives and Member States to join
the initiative of adopting the draft resolution proposed
by the delegation of the United States with a two-thirds
majority of General Assembly members. I reiterate that
my delegation has taken the decision to withdraw the
draft amendment, and we ask the presidency to please
take that decision into consideration.
The President: The Plurinational State of Bolivia
has withdrawn the draft amendment contained in
document A/73/L.46.
The Assembly will now proceed to consider draft
resolution A/73/L.42.
I give the floor to the representative of Kuwait on
a point of order.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): As my
country is the Chair of the Group of Arab States for this
month, I am speaking on behalf of that Group.
The agenda item under consideration, “The
situation in the Middle East”, is directly linked to
international peace and security. This item has been
on the agendas of the Security Council and General
Assembly for years. Accordingly, scores of resolutions
condemning the Israeli occupation and calling for its
end have been adopted, as have resolutions denouncing
the occupying Power’s policies and practices that violate
the Charter of the United Nations, international law
and international humanitarian law. If the occupation
had been brought to an early end then we would not
have needed to adopt such resolutions. For this reason,
the Palestinian question, which is at the core of the
Arab-Israeli conflict, is an issue of such importance

A/73/PV.47

that General Assembly decisions on it require a twothirds majority of the members present and voting, in
accordance with Article 18 of the Charter and rule 83 of
the rules of procedure.
That is what the Arab Group believes. We hope
that the presidency will conduct its work in accordance
with the Charter and the General Assembly’s rules of
procedure and take into account the precedent set in June
2018, by which the previous President of the General
Assembly decided that the situation in the Middle East
is an important issue that affects international peace
and security (see A/ES-10/PV.38).
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the United States of America on a point of order.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): A simple
majority is required for the adoption of the draft
resolution submitted by the United States (A/73/L.42).
Since coming to the United Nations, everyone in this
Hall has heard me talk about double standards and the
fact that we need fairness in the United Nations. We
take on heavy concerns and issues, and the answers
are not always easy. But if we do not exercise fairness,
we have nothing else. This is not about a motion; it is
about doing what is right. The General Assembly has
never said anything — not one thing — about Hamas,
even when we all agree that the behaviour of Hamas
undermines any prospects for peace. The General
Assembly has never uttered the word “Hamas” in
any resolution.
Just last Friday, there was no decision that
resolutions under this same agenda item had to be
adopted by a two-thirds majority (see A/73/PV.43).
The Assembly did not act under such conditions then;
similarly, there should be no decision that a two-thirds
majority applies now.
There should be no double standards in this Hall.
I want to be clear about the consequences of this
procedural vote. This is a decision meant purely to
disrupt the adoption of the draft resolution put forward
by the United States. Those putting forward this motion
want our draft resolution to fail. My Kuwaiti brother
knows that, as does the Group of Arab States. The
President should not let them have their way.
The United States urges all member States to stand
with us on this procedural vote. Accordingly, I urge
all member States to vote against a motion for a twothirds majority to be required. Let us vote for the draft

18-415853/15

A/73/PV.47

resolution in the way that was intended — with a simple
majority, just as all other draft resolutions under this
agenda item were adopted last Friday.
The President: I have listened carefully to the
comments made by the representatives of Kuwait and
the United States.
At this stage, I also wish to inform members
that I have been approached by several delegations
concerning the majority required for the adoption of
draft resolution A/73/L.42. Having taken note of the fact
that the text of the draft resolution deals with matters
that have been dealt with by the Security Council, and
taking into account the decision taken by the General
Assembly during the 38th plenary meeting of the tenth
emergency special session (see A/ES-10/PV.38), I shall
put to the consideration of the Assembly the question of
whether a two-thirds majority of members present and
voting is required for the adoption of draft resolution
A/73/L.42, in accordance with rules 83 and 84 of the
Assembly’s rules of procedure.
We will now proceed to take a decision on the
question of whether a two-thirds majority of the
members present and voting is required for the adoption
of draft resolution A/73/L.42.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan,
Algeria,
Angola,
Argentina,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Chad,
China, Comoros, Congo, Cuba, Djibouti, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Gambia, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libya, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, South Africa,
Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
4/15

06/12/2018

Against:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Australia, Austria, Barbados, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Samoa, San Marino,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu
Abstaining:
Armenia, Bhutan, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde,
Chile, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Fiji, Gabon,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Iceland, Jamaica, Kenya,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Liechtenstein,
Mongolia, Nepal, New Zealand, Norway, Palau,
Philippines, Saint Lucia, Sri Lanka, Switzerland,
Timor-Leste
By 75 votes to 72, with 26 abstentions, the General
Assembly decided that a two-thirds majority of the
members present and voting was required for the
adoption of draft resolution A/73/L.42.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Guatemala
informed the Secretariat that it had intended
to vote against.]
The President: The Assembly has decided that
a two-thirds majority of the members present and
voting is required for the adoption of draft resolution
A/73/L.42.
I now give the floor to delegations wishing to
deliver explanations of vote before the voting. I would
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): I have the honour to speak on behalf of four
States: the Kingdom of Bahrain, the United Arab
18-41585

06/12/2018

Emirates, the Republic of Yemen and my own country,
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
I would like to state that we are in complete
agreement with my colleague the representative of
Kuwait, who spoke on behalf of the Group of Arab
States. The four States, in their national capacities,
would like to add the following comments.
Our States attach great importance to a lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East as a strategic
choice in favour of ending the Arab-Israeli conflict,
based on the two-State solution, in accordance with
international terms of reference and the Arab Peace
Initiative of 2002, which calls for establishing the
Palestinian State along the 4 June 1967 borders with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, the return of refugees,
and an end to the Israeli occupation of all Arab
territories, including the Syrian Arab Golan and the
Lebanese territories.
Our States stress that the lasting settlement of
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict can be achieved only
by peaceful means, in accordance with international
law and relevant United Nations resolutions. Israel
must cease any aggression or use of force against the
Palestinian people. It must also bring to an immediate
end all of the illegal Israeli settlement practices and
policies in the occupied State of Palestine.
Our States denounce without reservation all
terrorist acts, regardless of the identity of perpetrators
or victims. We also condemn all States, groups or
individuals that practice or incite terrorism. We believe
that there is no justification for terrorist acts. We
further denounce all acts of violence that could put
civilian lives at risk. We call for respect of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law,
in particular the protection of civilians. All measures
necessary for protecting civilians and their welfare
must be taken, and the perpetrators of such crimes must
be held accountable.
In that regard, we take note of the some 500 United
Nations resolutions denouncing Israel, the more recent
of which was resolution ES-10/20, on the protection of
Palestinian civilians. We call on Israel, the occupying
Power, to abstain from all acts of aggression and to
fulfil its legal commitments and responsibilities. We
condemn any act that leads to further violence or
threatens civilian lives. We call on all stakeholders to
make all forms of protest peaceful in nature. We also
condemn the launching of rockets from the Gaza Strip

A/73/PV.47

into Israeli civilian areas, and call for the adoption
of urgent measures to bring about an immediate and
lasting ceasefire and, once a ceasefire is in place, for
strict adherence to it.
From 1947 to the present, Israel has acted without
respect for United Nations resolutions or any ethical
and humanitarian law, and has contravened numerous
international resolutions, particularly those of the
General Assembly and the Security Council. Israel has
no respect for the United Nations, of which it is a Member.
Israel has no respect for the will of the international
community, which has condemned its violations of
the rights of the Palestinians. For this reason, our four
States will vote against draft resolution A/73/L.42.
Indeed, the draft resolution attempts to cover up
Israeli violations against the Palestinians and seeks to
undermine the two-State solution to which we aspire.
The draft resolution diverts attention away from the
major issues of the conflict, namely, occupation,
settlement activity and the blockade. These are the
three fundamental challenges that Palestine is facing,
be it in the Gaza Strip, the West Bank or Al-Quds
Al-Sharif. We must not turn our attention away from
these obstacles to peace. Accordingly, we call on all
Member States to vote against the draft resolution
before us today.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I am
taking the floor to explain our position regarding draft
resolution A/73/L.42, entitled “Activities of Hamas and
other militant groups in Gaza”.
The draft resolution is based on deception, as it
totally ignores the main root cause of the conflict — the
decades-long illegal occupation of Palestine by Israel.
That occupation remains at the epicentre of all conflicts
in the Middle East. It is the main source of more than
seven decades of Israel’s brutal practices towards
the Palestinian people. It is the root cause of the
continued violation of the fundamental human rights
of the Palestinians and other Arabs living under Israel’s
occupation. It is the main reason for the suffering and
injustice imposed on the Palestinians, resulting in the
displacement of approximately 6 million refugees. It
is why the Palestinians, Muslim and Christian alike,
suffer from a situation tantamount to ethnic cleansing.
Worse still, in the Gaza Strip nearly 2 million
Palestinians continue to live under the suffocating
Israeli-imposed closure. The unlawful, inhumane
blockade has made Gaza an uninhabitable open-

18-415855/15

A/73/PV.47

air prison that is designed to be unsustainable for
human life. The situation represents an actual,
massive and collective punishment against the entire
Gaza population, including women and children. It
constitutes a war crime.
One of the latest cruelties committed by Israel is
the killing of more than 160 Palestinians and the injury
of thousands more during the peaceful Great March of
Return, in Gaza. Another reality on the ground that the
draft resolution intentionally and entirely ignores is the
continued illegal settlement activities in the Palestinian
territories, which constitute not only a flagrant
violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention, but also a
war crime. Furthermore, Israel’s so-called participation
in the peace process has merely been a shroud covering
its policy of aggression and expansion. Emboldened by
the changes in the United States political landscape,
which led to America’s recognition of Jerusalem as
the so-called capital of Israel and the relocation of its
Embassy to Jerusalem, the Israeli occupying regime
has conveniently wrapped all of this disrespect in
that shroud.
Israel also continues to totally negate any right of
the Palestinians to self-determination. This was seen in
the recent enactment of the racist Jewish nation-State
law. In addition, the regime has taken unprecedented
measures to accelerate the Judaization of Jerusalem,
alter its demographic composition and religious
and cultural identity, and eliminate the Palestinian,
Christian and Muslim presence in the holy city.
All of the foregoing measures have been taken
while the Security Council was failing to live up to its
responsibilities to put an end to the illegal occupation
and decades-long tragedy. This failure is the direct
result of the sustained and unequivocal support of the
United States for all of the Israeli regime’s policies and
practices. Such policies greatly embolden the regime
to continue its illegal policies and inhumane practices
against the Palestinian people, in clear violation of
international law, international humanitarian and
human rights laws, United Nations resolutions and,
more importantly, the principle of humanity.
The submission of the draft resolution represents
yet another instance of United States support for Israel’s
narrative of the conflict, justifying its aggression
towards the Palestinians. The draft is a deceptive attempt
to deflect the attention of the international community
from the root causes of the Middle East conflict — the
6/15

06/12/2018

occupation of Palestinian territory. The United States
initiative intends to undermine the sustained and strong
international support for the realization of the cause of
Palestine. It tries to disregard relevant United Nations
resolutions, adopted over decades in support of the full
realization of the Palestinian’s rights. Therefore, it not
only targets Hamas, but also multilateralism and the
long-standing support given to the Palestinian people
by the Organization and its Member States.
The Islamic Republic of Iran categorically rejects
the draft resolution. We will vote against it and urge
all Member States to do likewise and clearly reject
its adoption. We recognize Hamas as a legitimate
resistance movement fighting for the liberation of
Palestinian territory from foreign occupation. Hamas
is part and parcel of the Palestinian people and defends
Palestinian civilians against Israeli military aggression.
By any measure, this is an inherent and legitimate right
under international law.
Moreover, in recent years, Hamas has consistently
played a significant and responsible role in the
maintenance of security in the Gaza Strip and has
remained committed to the elements of the 2014
ceasefire agreement. Therefore, adopting any decision
against Hamas will only serve the occupying regime’s
interests. The adoption of such a distorted draft
resolution will also further embolden the Israeli regime
to continue its years-long brutal blockade of Gaza,
thereby worsening the already dire humanitarian crisis
there. It will also send a very erroneous and frustrating
message to the Palestinians, in particular in Gaza.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that peace in
the Middle East cannot be achieved through coercion,
intimidation or discriminatory or selective policies.
Condemning the legitimate struggle of the Palestinians
against occupation is illegal, illegitimate and void of
political wisdom, and is therefore unacceptable. Any
solution to the crisis requires the termination of the
occupation and the restoration of all the inalienable
rights of the Palestinians, including their right to
return, to self-determination and to establish their
own independent and viable State of Palestine, with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital. Despite all of the
brutalities and recklessness committed by Israel, along
with the unwavering support, plots and plans of the
United States in this regard, we are confident that all
such rights will be realized and that the force of logic
will prevail over the logic of force.
18-41585

06/12/2018

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf
of the Group of Arab States, I call on all Member States
to vote against draft resolution A/73/L.42. Indeed, we
believe that the draft resolution draws attention away
from the deep-rooted causes of the Palestinian question
and contributes to undermining international consensus
on it.
Lasting, comprehensive and just peace in the Middle
East is based on relevant United Nations resolutions,
including Security Council resolution 2334 (2016),
the land-for-peace principle, the Quartet road map
and the Arab Peace Initiative, which was adopted by
all Arab countries during the Beirut summit, in 2002.
The Initiative states that peace and normalization with
Israel must be preceded by its ending the occupation of
Palestinian and Arab territories that have been occupied
since 1967. We reaffirm our support for the two-State
solution whereby Israeli and Palestine would live side
by side in peace and security, within the recognized
pre-1967 borders.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.42, entitled
“Activities of Hamas and other militant groups in
Gaza”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium,
Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Eritrea, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kiribati,
Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, San Marino, Serbia,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and

A/73/PV.47

Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay
Against:
Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, China, Comoros,
Congo, Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt, Gambia, Guinea,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa,
Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia,
Turkey, United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Angola, Armenia, Barbados, Bhutan,
Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon,
Ghana, Grenada, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, India,
Kenya, Mongolia, Nepal, Philippines, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sri
Lanka, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania,
Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/73/L.42 was rejected by 87 votes
to 57, with 33 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegations of Afghanistan and
South Sudan informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote against.]
The President: Before giving the floor to those
delegations wishing to deliver explanations of vote after
the voting, may I remind delegations that explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Danon (Israel): Today’s draft resolution,
contained in document A/73/L.42, presented an
opportunity for redemption. Proposed by the United
States and supported by a global coalition, the draft
resolution offered the United Nations another chance
to finally condemn Hamas. We thank the United States
and Ambassador Haley for standing up for what is
right, and we are proud that a plurality of Member

18-415857/15

A/73/PV.47

States stood by the truth and took a moral stand by
condemning Hamas for its relentless acts of terror.
Today we achieved plurality. That plurality would
have equated to a majority if the vote had not been
hijacked by a political procedural move. In one strong
courageous voice, we could have brought Hamas to
justice. Those Member States that voted against the
draft resolution should be ashamed of themselves. I
ask those countries to wait until they have to deal with
terrorism on their own territories. Their silence in the
face of evil reveals their true colours and tells us what
side they are really on — the side that does not care
for the lives of innocent Israelis and Palestinians who
have fallen victim to the terrorists of Hamas. Those
who endorse terrorism today will be forced to face its
deadly consequences tomorrow.
We salute the children in Israel — in Sderot, Netivot
and Ashkelon — who so bravely endure the unthinkable
dangers of falling rockets. We also think of the people
of Gaza; they deserve a brighter future, not one that is
controlled by a regime of terrorists. The world will not
be silent until Hamas stops its violent and illegal ways.
Its time is up. Whether or not they choose to admit it, all
Member States in this Hall know full well that Hamas
is a radical Islamic terror organization that is dedicated
to the destruction of Israel.
For the past 13 years, since Israel completely
withdrew from the Gaza Strip and Hamas violently
took it over, Hamas terrorists have launched over
13,000 rockets into Israeli communities, deliberately
targeting civilians. In November, Hamas fired nearly
500 rockets into Israel over a two-day period. Hamas
is committing a double war crime by launching rockets
from Palestinian neighbourhoods in Gaza directly
into Israeli civilian population centres. Hamas has
constructed nearly 40 terror tunnels that infiltrate
Israeli border towns to kidnap and kill Israelis. We have
exposed and neutralized 15 tunnels this year alone, most
recently in October. Hamas has carried out hundreds
of suicide bombings, shootings and stabbings that have
killed and wounded thousands of innocent people. It
has organized endless, violent riots on the security
fence between Israel and Gaza, seeking to invade and
overrun Israel and encourage young Palestinians to
send flaming materials into Israel.
Hamas exploits the people of Gaza — its own
Palestinian brothers and sisters — as human shields,
an activity that is both illegal and deplorable. Hamas
8/15

06/12/2018

deprives its people of their basic human rights and steals
billions of dollars of humanitarian aid, paid for by the
taxes of citizens of United Nations Member States, to
fund its terror ambitions. Day in and day out, Hamas
denies Israel’s very right to exist.
Hamas is also in flagrant violation of international
law by continuing to hold hostage four young Israelis
whom it has captured. In 2014, Hamas killed and
kidnapped Oron Shaul and Hadar Goldin. Hamas is
also holding Avraham Mengistu and Hisham Al-Sayed,
two young Israeli civilians who suffer from mental
illnesses. Hamas has refused to provide any sign of
life to the families of those men and is not permitting
visits by the International Committee of the Red Cross.
The United Nations has a legal and moral obligation to
ensure the return of our boys.
While Hamas flagrantly violates international law,
its leadership has the audacity to complain about Israel
to the United Nations. Just last week, Hamas leader
Ismail Haniyeh sent a letter to the United Nations that all
Member States received, condemning Israel and calling
for more violence. Ismail Haniyeh approached you,
Madam President. He is a man who has praised Osama
bin Laden and referred to him as a holy warrior. The
blood of countless innocent lives drips from his hands.
There is no difference between the evil of Hamas and
the barbarity of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
Al-Qaida or Boko Haram. All of those organizations
are committed to terrorizing innocent people.
Today, as the Jewish people celebrate the miracle
of Hanukkah, a plurality of Member States took a
moral stand. They supported the draft resolution and
unequivocally condemned Hamas. Other nations chose
to vote against the draft resolution. Some sat passively
on the sidelines in an attempt to appear neutral or
objective. Let me be clear — there is no such thing here
as neutrality. There is no such thing as “both sides”.
There is no moral equivalency. There is a terrorist
organization that endangers civilians, fragrantly
violating the law, and there is a State that protects it.
Today, the majority of the international community
has exposed Hamas; others have turned a blind eye.
It will not be long until all nations of the world stop
turning their backs on the thousands of Palestinian and
Israeli victims of terror and finally make a clear and
unequivocal statement condemning Hamas.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom aligns itself with the explanation of vote
18-41585

06/12/2018

that will shortly be delivered by the representative of
Austria on behalf of the European Union. The following
statement will be made in our national capacity.
The United Kingdom voted in favour of draft
resolution A/73/L.42 and we thank the United States
for introducing it, because it is right that Hamas be
condemned for its indiscriminate use of rocket fire
and other weaponry against Israeli communities and
civilians. The United Kingdom supports and calls
for a comprehensive peace between the parties, in
accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions.
The draft resolution makes it very clear that all
acts of violence against civilians are unacceptable. The
United Kingdom calls on all actors to show restraint
and refrain from any further violence. Palestinians have
the right to engage in peaceful protest and Israel has the
right to defend itself, but it should use restraint in the
use of live fire. We are deeply concerned by casualties
on both sides, including the number of Palestinian
fatalities this year.
Hamas faces a decision about whether it is prepared
to accept the Quartet principles and join efforts for
peace or whether it will continue to use terror, with all
the consequences for the people of Gaza and Israel. We
therefore fully support the draft resolution’s call for
tangible steps towards intra-Palestinian reconciliation
and concrete steps to reunite the Gaza Strip and the
West Bank under the Palestinian Authority and ensure
its effective functioning in the Gaza Strip. We welcome
the efforts of Egypt, the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and the
wider international community towards that goal.
We remain gravely concerned about the dire
humanitarian situation in Gaza. The immediate priority
must be to reduce tensions and avoid another conflict.
We expect Hamas, the Palestinian Authority and Israel
to do their utmost to prevent further escalation. We have
frequent discussions with the Government of Israel
and the Palestinian Authority about the need to ease
restrictions on Gaza. The United Kingdom welcomes
recent efforts to improve the humanitarian situation,
but much more needs to be done. The people of Israel
and Gaza have the right to live without constant fear for
their security. Both peoples have the right to live safely
in peace. Urgent steps need to be taken to address the
underlying causes of the conflict.
Now more than ever we need a political process
that delivers the two-State solution, based on the

A/73/PV.47

well-established parameters that the United Kingdom
continues to see as the only viable framework for a just
and lasting peace. For that reason, the United Kingdom
would also have voted in favour of the other draft
resolution on the matter, had it been submitted. The
United Kingdom remains committed to working with
both parties and regional and international partners in
support of that goal.
Mr. Kickert (Austria): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the European Union (EU)
and its member States, to which the United Kingdom
has just aligned itself. The candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; and the European Free Trade Association
country Liechtenstein, member of the European
Economic Area; as well as Ukraine, align themselves
with this statement.
While reconfirming that the EU supported draft
resolution A/73/L.42, on the activities of Hamas and
other militant groups in Gaza, I would like to once again
reiterate and emphasize the EU’s strong, continued
commitment to the internationally agreed parameters
for a just and lasting peace in the Middle East, based
on international law, the relevant United Nations
resolutions and previous agreements. Any peace plan
that fails to recognize those internationally agreed
parameters would risk being condemned to failure.
The EU is truly convinced that the achievement of
a two-State solution based on the 1967 borders, with
Jerusalem as the capital of both States, that meets
Israeli and Palestinian security needs and Palestinian
aspirations for statehood and sovereignty, ends the
occupation and resolves all final-status issues, in
accordance with Security Council resolutions 1860
(2009) and 2334 (2016) and previous agreements, is the
only viable and realistic way to end the conflict and
achieve just and lasting peace. The EU will continue to
work towards that end with both parties and its regional
and international partners.
The EU is deeply concerned by the situation in
Gaza. Gaza is home to 2 million people who struggle
to access basic services, sufficient water and electricity
supply. The humanitarian situation is dire. We
commend the efforts of the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, Nickolay Mladenov, to

18-415859/15

A/73/PV.47

mitigate the risk of further deterioration and improve
the humanitarian situation.
More generally, the EU would like to express its
support for all humanitarian actors, in particular the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). UNRWA’s
assistance to Palestinian refugees is a factor for stability
in Gaza and the region. The immediate priority must
be to reduce the tensions and avoid another conflict in
Gaza. We expect the de facto authorities in Gaza to do
their utmost to prevent further escalation. The EU urges
all actors concerned to act with the utmost restraint to
avoid further loss of life, prevent any escalation and not
resort to violence or exploit peaceful demonstrations
for other means.
While recalling Israel’s right to self-defence,
we expect the Israeli authorities to fully abide by the
principles of necessity and proportionality in its use of
force. A return of the Palestinian Authority to the Gaza
Strip is indispensable to durably improve the conditions
and humanitarian situation. However, to ensure lasting
results, a fundamental change to the situation in Gaza
is crucial. That needs to include an end to the Israeli
policy of closure and the full opening of crossing points,
while addressing Israel’s legitimate security concerns.
The EU will continue to support the United Nations
and Egyptian efforts towards the reunification of Gaza
and the West Bank under one single and legitimate
Palestinian Authority. The EU will continue to work
with its partners, the Israelis and the Palestinians,
regional actors and the Middle East Quartet to that end.
There is a pressing need for a political horizon to be
restored. That is why, in recent months, the EU and its
member States have been so vocal in reconfirming their
united, consolidated position in support of the twoState solution, with Jerusalem as the future capital of
both States.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): The
Kingdom of Bahrain reaffirms its steadfast position
in support of the brotherly Palestinian people and all
efforts to achieve a just and comprehensive peace
between Palestinians and Israelis, leading to the
establishment of the independent Palestinian State
with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with
the Arab Peace Initiative, the principles of the twoState solution and relevant resolutions of international
legitimacy and the United Nations.
10/15

06/12/2018

The Kingdom of Bahrain strongly condemns and
rejects all forms of violence, extremism, aggression and
terrorism against civilians, regardless of the causes and
motivations. We stress the importance of respecting
relevant laws and conventions.
Mr. Hattrem (Norway): Norway voted in favour of
draft resolution A/73/L.42 and would like to deliver an
explanation of vote.
The text of the draft resolution is, in our view,
not strong enough with respect to the principle of a
negotiated two-State solution as our strategic goal. The
references in the text to the requirements of international
law and relevant United Nations resolutions are, in our
view, too weak in that respect. Norway supports Egypt’s
work for Palestinian reconciliation and rapprochement.
The draft resolution, as we see it, is unclear regarding
the fundamental requirements for a Palestinian national
unity Government, as expressed in the Quartet criteria.
Norway will continue its work as Chair of the Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the
International Assistance to Palestinians to stabilize the
situation in Gaza, reinforce international support for
the Palestinian Authority and increase humanitarian
efforts in Gaza.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): The Government of Mexico voted in favour
of draft resolution A/73/L.42, because it emphatically
condemns all forms of violence committed against
civilian populations and humanitarian assistance
workers by any actor and in any circumstances, as well
as all forms and manifestations of terrorist acts.
Mexico supports a resumption of dialogue in order to
reach a fair and lasting solution that is based on the twoState solution, namely, with Israel and Palestine both
able to live in peace within secure and internationally
recognized borders, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
Mr. Nguyen (Viet Nam): Viet Nam highly
appreciates and supports all efforts of the international
and regional communities to move the Middle East
peace process forward for the sake of peace, stability,
cooperation and development in the region. We are of
the view that the conflict can be settled only through
peaceful negotiations aimed at a comprehensive and just
solution, on the basis of the relevant Security Council
resolutions and respect for the fundamental rights of
18-41585

06/12/2018

the Palestinian people and the legitimate right of all
countries to live side by side in peace and security.
We regret that we were not in a position to vote in
favour of draft resolution A/73/L.42, on the activities of
Hamas and other militant groups in Gaza. At the same
time, we reiterate our firm position of condemning all
acts of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
Mr. Skoknic Tapia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
The Government of Chile voted in favour of draft
resolution A/73/L.42, and wishes to clarify our position
on the issue.
Chile reiterates its full and unconditional support
for resolution 181 (II), whereby the international
community decided to establish two States — one
Arab and one Jewish. Accordingly, Chile recognizes
and maintains diplomatic ties with both the States of
Israel and Palestine. We also confirm that both have the
right to live as independent and democratic States, in
peaceful coexistence and within safe and internationally
recognized borders that must be determined through
bilateral negotiations between the parties.
For our country, there is no reason or context that
can excuse or justify acts of terrorism. We also reaffirm
that the measures adopted by States to fight terrorism
must fulfil commitments arising from international
humanitarian law and the Charter of the United Nations.
Chile calls for an intensification of efforts to reach a
lasting peace and for the Palestinian Authority to return
to Gaza without delay. We urge Israel to lift the severe
restrictions imposed on Palestinian citizens in Gaza
and to improve the critical difficult living conditions
affecting 2 million people in those territories. We
condemn all acts of provocation and violence, which
above all affect the civilian populations of both sides,
and we regret the disproportionate use of force by Israeli
forces, especially the use of munitions and weapons of
war as a tool to repress unarmed protesters.
To conclude, Chile rejects any attempt to link
or associate terrorism with the Palestinian people
as a whole. Our country hosts the largest number of
Palestinian people outside the Middle East. In that
regard, Chile is deeply grateful for the contribution
of the Palestinian community to the development and
progress of our country.
Ms. Yánez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation abstained in the voting and would like to
make the following explanation of vote.

A/73/PV.47

As a Member State, we have a duty and responsibility
to support diplomatic, regional and international
efforts between the parties to ensure progress towards
a political, definitive and fair solution for all parties
with regard to the situation in the Middle East and the
Palestinian question. Such a solution must be based on
the existence of two States — Palestine and Israel — as
the only path to achieving peace and stability in the
Middle East.
Ecuador has reiterated its full support for the
spirit and nature of the relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution
2334 (2016), and all initiatives that have accompanied
the process of dialogue and negotiation between Israel
and Palestine. Ecuador believes that the situation in the
Middle East and the Palestinian question should not
be limited to condemning Hamas alone and urgently
require a peaceful and negotiated solution.
In conclusion, Ecuador condemns all forms of
terrorist acts and reiterates its call for a cessation to
violence, regardless of where it originates.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada): The fact that today a
plurality of countries condemned the role of Hamas
in perpetuating Gaza’s misery, as well as the threat it
poses to Israel, is a positive step. Today, we still see
an opportunity for a more comprehensive approach to
this issue in the General Assembly, but we all know
that votes and resolutions will not be the solution to
the conflict. Let us use this opportunity to encourage
and help both sides to resume direct negotiations
and work towards achieving a lasting peace for their
people. Canada remains committed to the goal of a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, including the creation of a Palestinian State living
side by side in peace and security with Israel.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 38.
Agenda item 38 (continued)
The situation in the Middle East
Draft resolution (A/73/L.49)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.49.

18-4158511/15

A/73/PV.47

Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): Ireland is pleased
to introduce draft resolution A/73/L.49, entitled
“Comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East.”
Such a peace, unfortunately, is not currently in
sight. Resolving the Middle East conflict, 25 years after
the signing of the Oslo Accords, will require a reversal
of the current negative developments on the ground.
Settlement activity, violence and terror all lead us away
from progress towards a negotiated two-State solution,
with Jerusalem as the future capital of both States.
As the draft resolution before the General Assembly
indicates, a two-State solution must be based on longstanding and agreed parameters, including an end to
the occupation that began in 1967. A settlement of the
conflict must meet Israeli and Palestinian security
needs and Palestinian aspirations to statehood and
sovereignty, and resolve all final status issues. Ireland,
along with its partners in the European Union, will
continue to work towards that end with both parties and
its regional and international partners.
As a country that has endured and overcome
conflict and has nurtured a successful peace process
with important international support, Ireland
remains hopeful that divisions can be overcome and
long-standing enmities set aside. That will require
leadership and vision, along with the active support
of the international community. A comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in the Middle East is possible. It
must be based on agreed and long-standing parameters
that recognize the legitimate aspirations and security
needs of both the Palestinian and the Israeli peoples.
We believe that it is important to reaffirm those shared
understandings, and we urge all our fellow Members of
the United Nations to support the draft resolution today.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.49, entitled
“Comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East.”
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.49?
Mr. Wagner (United States of America): The
United States requests a recorded vote on draft
resolution A/73/L.49.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
12/15

06/12/2018

In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Israel, Liberia, Marshall Islands, Nauru,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Canada, Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial
Guinea, Guatemala, Honduras, Myanmar, Papua
New Guinea, Samoa, South Sudan, Timor-Leste,
Vanuatu
18-41585

06/12/2018

A/73/PV.47

Draft resolution A/73/L.49 was adopted by 156
votes to 6, with 12 abstentions (resolution 73/89).

to the United Nations, Abba Eban. He spent many years
in this building, and once said:

The President: I will now give the floor to those
delegations wishing to deliver explanations of vote after
the voting. May I remind delegations that explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.

“If Algeria introduced a resolution claiming
that the earth was flat and that Israel had flattened
it, it would pass by a vote in the General Assembly
of 164 to 13.”

Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): Singapore voted in favour
of draft resolution A/73/L.42, which was not adopted,
and resolution 73/89, which was just adopted. We
believe that both the resolution and the draft resolution
are interlinked, which is why they were considered at
the same plenary meeting.
Singapore’s position can be understood by taking
into account the content of the resolution and draft
resolution. I wish to underline that our position today
has also been guided by two key principles.
First, Singapore does not condone acts of violence
against civilian targets, including the launching of
rockets into civilian areas. We acknowledge Israel’s
right to self-defence and to take proportionate measures
in the protection of its civilian population. Secondly,
we reaffirm our long-standing position in support of
a peaceful solution to the Israeli-Palestinian issue
through a negotiated two-State solution, with Israel and
Palestine living side by side in peace and security.
Singapore encourages renewed dialogue among all
concerned parties and calls on all of them to exercise
restraint and to do their utmost to protect civilians on
both sides of the border, while taking urgent measures
to de-escalate the situation. All parties must bear the
responsibility of ending the violence, restoring calm
and achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive peace
in the Middle East.
Mr. Danon (Israel): The United Nations has
adopted yet another anti-Israel resolution (resolution
73/89), adding to an ever-increasing pile of resolutions
that de-legitimize my country.
This body has missed another opportunity to
condemn terrorism and make a clear statement against
Hamas, a terrorist organization that harms and kills
innocent Palestinians and Israelis, denies Israel’s
very right to exist and derails all hope for peace. On
the same day, the General Assembly has adopted the
resolution put forward by Ireland. That reminds me of
the infamous comments of Israel’s former Ambassador

Since he said that over 50 years ago, nothing has
changed in this Hall. If the United Nations seeks to
bring about real change in the Middle East, it must start
with the basics and condemn terrorism unequivocally,
recognize Israel’s right to exist as a Jewish and
democratic State and clearly reject all actors that
do not recognize Israel, while rejecting the kind of
double standards and hypocrisy that we have witnessed
here today.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I thank you, Madam
President, for your most skilled conduct of the General
Assembly on this important issue.
We must begin by reaffirming our sincere, deepest
gratitude to all the member States that today stood
on the side of justice, in support of the just cause of
Palestine, the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people and the global consensus on the terms of
reference for a just and lasting peaceful solution to
the Palestinian question, the core of the Arab-Israeli
conflict. Unwavering in principle, they have helped
to push back attempts to undermine the decades-long
efforts to resolve this injustice, on the basis of law and
relevant United Nations resolutions, which form the
backbone of the international consensus and are the key
to peace.
That international consensus has been reinforced
today by the strong support for resolution 73/89 on a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, reaffirming the General Assembly’s commitment
to the basis and parameters for a peaceful solution, as
enshrined in the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and
the Quartet road map. That unequivocal affirmation,
in line with numerous General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016),
is significant in view of the actions aimed at eroding
the global consensus for achieving a just solution
that realizes the rights of the Palestinian people and
the two-State solution of Palestine and Israel living

18-4158513/15

A/73/PV.47

side by side in peace and harmony, on the basis of the
pre-1967 borders.
We thank Ireland for presenting the resolution and
Bolivia for amendment A/73/L.46, on which the draft
was based. We express deep appreciation to delegations
that voted in favour, confirming their principled
positions and solidarity. It is clear that the international
community will not accept that international law,
United Nations resolutions and the long-standing terms
of reference for a solution be cast aside. That is the
fundamental and minimal basis for any engagement on
the issue in a fair and constructive manner. We will not
relent on that, whether with regard to actions taken here
at the United Nations or in the political process. Peace
negotiations can never be credible — nor will they ever
succeed — if detached from this space, as evidenced by
the historic failures of the peace process and the current
political deadlock.
Member States that have long supported United
Nations resolutions on the Palestine question should not
accept offensive allegations that demean their national
positions, shared values and multilateral efforts on this
issue of global importance. We reject any slander or
insult directed at them for standing on principle. We
reiterate that those resolutions are not one-sided or
anti-Israeli; rather, they are serious pieces of legislation
that are pro-law, pro-rights and pro-peace. Claims to
the contrary are false, and those resolutions address all
aspects of the issue, based on the law and in a reasonable
and non-provocative manner.
As to the calls for balance, we say that there is
absolutely no balance or symmetry in the conflict.
There is an occupier and an occupied people, and the
rules of international law, including humanitarian and
human rights law, are patently clear in that regard. We
therefore reject the premise of the need to bring balance
to United Nations resolutions as a pretext to undertake
what is clearly an anti-Palestinian action — another in
the list of punitive actions taken by the current United
States Administration, which began with the provocative
decision on Jerusalem, in violation of Security Council
resolutions and global consensus, which was taken one
year ago on this very same day and that has obviously
only emboldened Israel to commit crimes and act with
impunity, to the detriment of the Palestinian people, the
two-State solution and the goal of peace.
What happened today in the Assembly was brought
about by instigating an unnecessary confrontation,
14/15

06/12/2018

with questionable motives and objectives. Exploiting
the issues of violence and terror, the overt purpose of
that confrontation was to name and shame in a biased
and flagrant manner. That is not the business of the
General Assembly; its role is to promote cooperative
and sustainable solutions to the complex problems and
conflicts in our world. That United States action does
the opposite, exacerbating tensions and undermining
the collective and serious efforts of concerned parties
to de-escalate, build trust and confidence and truly
pursue reconciliation and peace.
Violence and terror are a serious aspect of this
conflict, as in other conflicts around the world, but we
reject cynical attempts to reduce the Palestine question
to a matter of violence and terror. This is a political,
territorial and human rights issue. It is an issue about
ending occupation. It is about a people denied their
right to live in freedom, dignity and peace in their
own homeland. False narratives that further malign the
Palestinian side and absolve Israel of its responsibilities
are unacceptable and flatly ignore the root cause of
the conflict and recurrent crises, the illegal Israeli
occupation, colonization and blockade of our land and
oppression of our people.
We therefore sincerely thank all those delegations
that voted against the United States draft resolution
A/73/L.42, rejecting that false narrative and disruptive
approach, and we stress that this is not just about
Palestine; it must be rejected in all instances. The
international community cannot allow the rules-based
order to be so easily dismantled. Multilateralism and
international institutions must be preserved, as they are
vital for human progress and for overcoming the many
challenges that we collectively face.
The pretext for such an initiative was directly
contradicted by the fact that General Assembly
resolutions on our issue are replete with clear
condemnations of violence and terror against civilians
in all circumstances. Those are properly drafted, within
the framework of international law and with due regard
to the overreaching context of Israel’s occupation of the
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem since
1967 — an illegal occupation that is not the preordained
eternal fate of the Palestinian people and must end.
We cannot accept a one-sided narrative that
attributes violence to the Palestinian side, while ignoring
the daily Israeli violence and terror against Palestinian
children, women and men that is manifested in
18-41585

06/12/2018

countless ways, necessitating international protection,
which those people continue to be unfairly denied.
This initiative offers no solutions. The humanitarian
catastrophe and human misery in the Gaza Strip will
not be resolved by such hostile actions. Political and
humanitarian solutions are urgently needed. The illegal
Israeli blockade must be lifted.
We also once again pay tribute to fraternal Egypt’s
efforts towards Palestinian reconciliation. It remains a
national priority to end this harmful division, reunite
our people and land and restore Palestinian national
consensus, Government control and functions in the
Gaza Strip, as in the West Bank, with one law, one
Government and one security force, based on the
principles of the Palestine Liberation Organization. We
call for an end to the hypocrisy that calls on Palestinians
to reconcile, on the one hand, but threatens to punish
them for doing, so on the other.
To the delegations that voted in favour of the
United States draft resolution, I say that we are deeply
disappointed but understand that each State has a
sovereign right to determine its vote. However, we
view today as an anomaly and remain reassured by the
principled support and solidarity extended to Palestine

A/73/PV.47

from across the globe. We firmly reject might over
right and reiterate that punitive measures meant to
undermine our rights, humiliate our people and wear
us down will not bring us to submission. Our rights are
inalienable, our cause is just and we stand firmly in
their defence.
I must ask what honour or glory there can possibly
be in attacking an occupied, defenceless people that
has been denied liberty for so long and has suffered
so greatly. What honour can there be in using power
to harm, rather than to rectify injustice and truly help
those in need? There is absolutely none. The Palestinian
people are a proud and steadfast people. They will not
surrender to this injustice; rather, they will persist
in seeking a peaceful end to it in a way that ensures
the realization of their inalienable rights, including to
self-determination and return and to a life of freedom,
dignity, peace and security in their independent,
sovereign State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 38.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

18-4158515/15
