VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committ-

------------~

Desiring to achieve the rapid and complete elimination of the obstacles to the economic and social progress of peoples, particularly colonialism, neo-colonialism, racism, racial discrimination, apartheid, aggression, occupation and foreign domination and all
other forms of inequality and exploitation of peoples,
Mindful of the social aspects of the elaboration
of the new international development strategy,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 23
prepared on the basis of information provided by
Governments, on national experience in achieving farreaching social and economic changes for the purpose
of social progress,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of all nations
to pursue freely their economic and social development and to exercise full and complete sovereignty
over ali their natural resources;
2. W elcomes the active and growing participation
of all members of society in economic and social development programmes;
3. Reaffirms also that the elimination of all forms
of dependence and oppression such as aggression,
foreign occupation, colonialism, apartheid and racial
discrimination constitutes a prerequisite for world social and economic progress;
4. Urges the developed countries to make the
structural changes included in the resolutions on the
new international economic arder aimed at eliminating
the inequities and imbalances characterizing international economic relations which are necessary for the
progress of the developing countries;
5. Requests the Economic and Social Council, the
Commission for Social Development, the Committee
for Development Planning and the regional commissions to pay particular attention to studies and analyses
concerning national experience in achieving far-reaching social and economic changes for the purpose of
social progress;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to bear in mind,
in preparing the reports on the world social situation,
the clase relationship between economic development
and social development, and the over-all situation of
the developing countries in international economic
relations;
7. Considers that the new international development strategy should duly stress the need for each
country to define within the context of its development
plans and priorities an appropriate social development
policy taking account of its socio-economic structure
and its degree of development;
8. Requests the Commission for Social Development to consider at its twenty-sixth session the report
on the world social situation in the context of the
work on the new international development strategy
and to transmit its recommendations to the body entrusted with the preparation of that strategy;
9. Requests the Committee for Development Planning and the regional commissions, in their contribution to the work of the body entrusted with the preparation of the new international development strategy,
to ensure that social development objectives are integrated in the strategy in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions;
2a E/1978/19

and Add.l.

-------~----

141

II
Recalling resolution 3273 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974, in which the General Assembly reaffirmed
the right of every State to carry out social and economic changes for the purpose of social progress and
the need to continue the study of national experience
in that field, and Economic and Social Council resolution 2074 (LXII) of 13 May 1977, in which the
Council requested the Secretary-General to submit a
report on the findings of various specialized agencies
and organs of the United Nations system relating to
the distribution of national income,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General24 on the equitable distribution of national income,
l. Affirms that the social progress of all countries
implies, among other things, a just and equitable distribution of income at the national and international
levels;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session, through
the Economic and Social Council, a report on the
conclusions of the study requested in Council resolution 1086 (XXXIX) of 30 July 1965.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
33/49.

Preservation and further development of
cultural values

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3026 A (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, 3148 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973
and 31 /39 of 30 November 1976,
Noting the resolutions adopted by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization at its nineteenth session,
held at Nairobi from 26 October to 30 November
1976, in particular its resolutions 4.12 on preservation
and presentation of the cultural heritage of mankind
and 4.13 on cultural development,25
T aking into account the results of the meeting of
the Committee of Experts on the Preservation and
Further Development of Cultural Values, convened
by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization at Warsaw from 24 to 28 October 1977,26
Noting with appreciation the report of the DirectorGeneral of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization on the preservation and
further development of cultural values,27
Noting with satisfaction that, since the adoption of
General Assembly resolution 3148 (XXVIII), the attention of Governments and international organizations, in particular the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, has been focused
on the importance of the preservation, renewal and
continuous creation of cultural values and that cooperation between States has been developing to
this end,
2 4 F/1978/29 .
2

~ United Nations Educational, Scientific and Ctbltural Organ1zat1on, Records of the General Conference, Nineteenth Session, vol. l, Reso/utions, pp. 46-53.
2 6 See the final report of the Committee of Experts (CC'-77/
CONF.614/COL.9).
21 See A/33/157.
•

142

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

Conscious of the importance of cultural development which, along with progress in the economic and
social fields, should contribute to the improvement of
living conditions and the well-being of nations and
peoples in the process of establishing a new international economic arder, as envisaged in the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New lnternational Economic Order,28
adopted during the sixth special session of the General Assembly, in the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States29 and in the Declaration on Social
Progress and Development,80
1. W elcomes with appreciation the work of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization in promoting the cause of the preservation and further development of cultural values and
in assisting co-operation among States in this respect;
2. Calls upan the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization to continue its
activities in the field of the preservation and further
development of cultural values and, in particular:
(a) To collect infarmation relevant thereto and
carry out interdisciplinary research on the role and
place of cultural values in contemporary society;
(b) To encourage the international exchange of
infarmation on modern methods used in the preservation and development of cultural values;
(e) To promote and assist international co-operation among States and relevant international organizations aiming at the preservation and further development of cultural values;
(d) To include on a continuing basis the problem
of the preservation and further development of cultural values in its medium-term and long-term plans.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
33/50.

Protection, restitution and return of cultural and artistic property as part of the
preservation and further development of
cultural values

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3026 A (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, 3148 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973,
3187 (XXVIII) of 18 December 1973, 3391 (XXX)
of 19 November 1975, 31/40 of 30 November 1976
and 32/18 of 11 November 1977,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the
Director-General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, 31
Noting with satisfaction the resolution adopted by
the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at its
twentieth session, held in París from 24 October to
28 November 1978, by which it approved the statutes
of the Intergovemmental Committee far Promoting
the Return of Cultural Property to its Countries of
Origin or its Restitution in Case of Illicit Appropriation,
2s Resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI).
29 Resolution 3281 (XXIX).
80 Resolution 2542 (XXIV).
81 See A/33/157.

T aking into account the results of the meeting of
the Committee of Experts held at Dakar in 1978 to
study the mandate, means of action and working
methods of the above-mentioned Intergovernmental
Committee,
Reaffirming that the restitution to a country of its
objets d'art, monuments, museum pieces, manuscripts,
documents and any other cultural or artistic treasures
constitutes a step farward in the strengthening of international co-operation and the preservation and
further development of cultural values,
l. Commends the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization far the work done
in connexion with the restitution and return of cultural and artistic property;
2. W elcomes the establishment of the Intergovernmental Committee far Promoting the Return of Cultural Property to its Countries of Origin or its Restitution in Case of Illicit Appropriation;
3. Requests the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to continue its valuable efforts to find suitable solutions far the problems
relating to the restitution and return of cultural and
artistic property and urges Member States to cooperate with that organization in this field;
4. Invites Member States to take all possible
steps far the restitution and return of cultural and
artistic property, including manuscripts and documents, through, inter alia, the establishment of bilateral arrangements;
5. Invites all Governments to accede to the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing
the Illicit lmport, Export and Transfer of Ownership
of Cultural Property,82 adopted by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization on 14 November 1970;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-fifth session an itero entitled "Preservation and further development of cultural values, including the protection, restitution and return of cultural
and artistic property".
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
33/51.

lnternational Covenants on Human Rights

The General Assembly,
Mindful that the International Covenants on Human
Rights 33 constitute the first all-embracing and legally
binding international treaties in the field of human
rights and, together with the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, 34 farm the heart of the International
Bill of Human Rights, 35
Recalling its resolutions 31/86 of 13 December
1976 and 32/66 of 8 December 1977,
Having noted the report of the Secretary-General
on the status of the lntemational Covenant on Eco8 2 United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference, Sixteenth Session, vol. 1, Resolutions, pp. 135-141.
83 Resolution 2200 (XXI), annex.
84 Resolution 217 A (111).
35 Human Rights: A Compilation of International Instruments (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.78.XIV.2),
sect. A.
