United Nations

S/PV.6216

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6216th meeting
Wednesday, 11 November 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Spindelegger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Austria)

Members:

Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Kafando
Mr. Zhang Yesui
Mr. Ugalde
Mr. Jandroković
Mr. Araud
Mr. Miyajima
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Lukwiya
Baroness Taylor
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Letter dated 2 November 2009 from the Permanent Representative of Austria
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2009/567)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

09-60204 (E)

*0960204*

S/PV.6216

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Letter dated 2 November 2009 from
the Permanent Representative of Austria
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2009/567)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Croatia and the other ministers participating in today’s
Security Council meeting. Their presence is an
affirmation of the importance of the subject matter to
be discussed.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule
39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Kyung-wha
Kang, Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights.
It is so decided.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 10 November 2009 from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations,
which will be issued as document S/2009/577 and
which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the Security
Council invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine
to the United Nations to participate in the meeting
of the Security Council which will be held on
Wednesday, 11 November 2009, regarding the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.”

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the representatives of those countries inscribed on
the list of speakers to participate in the consideration of
the item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in this meeting, in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the representatives
of the following countries took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber:
Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Azerbaijan,
Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Egypt, Estonia, Finland,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Kenya, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Republic of
Moldova, Morocco, Netherlands, Norway, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Zambia.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. John Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
It is so decided.

2

I invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
take the seat reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 10 November 2009 from the
Permanent Representative of Austria to the United
Nations, in which he requests that His Excellency
Mr. Albrecht Freiherr von Boeselager, Minister for
International Cooperation and Humanitarian Affairs of
the Sovereign Military Order of Malta, be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item, in
accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Albrecht Freiherr von Boeselager.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Von Boeselager to take the seat
reserved for him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is

09-60204

S/PV.6216

meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/582, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Austria, Azerbaijan,
Belgium, Benin, Burkina Faso, Canada, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico, the Netherlands,
Norway, the Republic of Moldova, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, the United Republic of
Tanzania and the United States of America.
I should also like to draw the attention of
members to document S/2009/567, which contains the
text of a letter dated 2 November 2009 from the
Permanent Representative of Austria to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting
a concept paper on the item under consideration.
I should now like to make some introductory
remarks.
Ten years ago, the Security Council took the
unanimous decision to begin to address the protection
of civilians in armed conflict in a systematic manner.
Today, we are still facing tremendous challenges, and
civilians, more than ever, have to pay the price of war.
They have to flee their homes. They become victims of
violence, armed attacks and rape. In armed conflicts all
over the world, United Nations peacekeeping missions
and humanitarian organizations do their utmost to
alleviate the suffering of civilians, including women
and children. But more needs to be done to improve the
protection of civilians on the ground.
That is why, for Austria, the protection of
civilians is a key priority. It is why we took the
initiative to submit a draft resolution on the protection
of civilians on the occasion of the tenth anniversary.
This draft resolution aims to address existing gaps in
the protection work of the United Nations and sets out
concrete measures to improve the protection of
civilians on the ground.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank all
members of the Council for their constructive work in
recent weeks. We also highly commend the SecretaryGeneral for his latest report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (S/2009/277).

09-60204

We, the international community, have to do
better. We need to live up to our shared responsibility
to effectively respond to situations in which the safety
and security of civilians are in danger.
No conflict justifies breaches of international
humanitarian law. No conflict justifies the refusal of
access for humanitarian workers to civilians in need.
No conflict justifies impunity for those who have
committed serious crimes against civilians.
The Security Council has a key role to play. The
Council has a broad range of tools at its disposal to
ensure compliance by all parties with their obligations
under international law to protect civilians, to facilitate
access for humanitarian aid and to ensure
accountability for serious crimes against civilians.
Today, the protection of civilians is at the core of
United Nations peacekeeping. Since 1999, the Council
has mandated United Nations peacekeeping missions to
protect civilians from attacks. The presence of United
Nations peacekeepers generates global expectations, as
well as local aspirations to protect vulnerable
communities.
However, we still do not have a common
understanding of what peacekeepers can and should do
in the implementation of such protection mandates. We
believe that an operational concept, mission-wide
protection strategies and improved predeployment
training on the protection of civilians will help to close
this gap between Security Council mandates and their
implementation. It will also contribute to ensuring the
credibility of United Nations peacekeeping missions.
There is a need for clear and achievable mandates based
on accurate and reliable information and an assessment of
threats to civilians and peacekeepers on the ground. It
also requires an ongoing dialogue with troop- and policecontributing countries throughout the process.
Today’s debate and the draft resolution before us
provide an important opportunity to take stock of the
progress made so far and to send a clear signal of our
commitment to the protection of civilians. I hope that
discussions will provide further guidance as we fulfil
our obligation to better protect those in need.
In accordance with the understanding reached
earlier among members, the Security Council will take
action on the draft resolution (S/2009/582) prior to
hearing statements from the participants in today’s

3

S/PV.6216

meeting. Accordingly, I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Viet Nam.
The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1894 (2009).
I now invite the Secretary-General,
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to take the floor.

His

The Secretary-General: I thank the Government
of Austria for convening this ministerial debate to mark
the tenth anniversary of the Security Council’s
engagement on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. I commend Foreign Minister Michael
Spindelegger for his leadership.
Over the past decade, this issue has come to
occupy a prominent place on the Council’s agenda. We
see this in the biannual open debates; we see it in the
thematic resolutions on the subject; and we see it in the
Council’s adoption of an aide-memoire and convening
of an informal expert group. Most importantly, the
protection of civilians increasingly permeates the
country-specific deliberations and decisions of the
Council. This has raised global awareness and
advanced what is, after all, a key part of this
Organization’s cardinal mission — saving and
protecting people from the horrors of armed conflict.
Not so long ago, many Member States questioned
whether internal armed conflict posed a threat to
international peace and security. Today, the regional
dimensions and destabilizing effects of internal
conflicts have been firmly recognized. Not so long ago,
Member States questioned whether the United Nations
Charter contemplated the protection of civilians as a
legitimate subject of a peacekeeping mandate. Today,
the Council readily demonstrates its willingness to
address the protection needs of civilians in situations
on its agenda.
This is a welcome evolution. However, even
conflicts that are not perceived by all Council members

4

to have implications for international peace and
security could have a dramatic impact on civilians and
therefore warrant Council attention. We must find ways
to better address these situations as well.
The past 10 years have seen some major conflicts
come to an end, but others have persisted and new ones
have broken out. In old and new alike, we see
appalling levels of human suffering and a fundamental
failure of the parties involved to respect their
obligations to protect civilians. This failure demands a
reinvigorated commitment by the Security Council,
Member States and the United Nation to the principles
of international humanitarian law, human rights law
and refugee law. It requires the Council to guard
against the perception that only some situations are of
concern. And in practical terms, it requires us to meet
five core challenges.
First, we need to strengthen compliance by all
parties to conflict with international law, particularly in
the conduct of hostilities. This means ensuring access
to conflict zones and reporting on the way conflicts are
conducted. That in turn means making better use of
existing instruments and machinery. But the Council
may also wish to consider ways of improving what we
do and how widely we do it. At the moment, under
mandates from this Council, we are able to examine
and report on the impact of armed conflict on children
and, soon, on sexual violence perpetrated against
women wherever there is conflict and without
additional procedural hurdle. This has been a welcome
step. I now welcome members’ thoughts on what we
have learned from these mechanisms that could be
applied to the broader task of protecting civilians.
Secondly, we need more consistent engagement
with non-State armed groups in order to ensure their
compliance and our safe access to populations in need.
Member States must accept the fundamental necessity
of such engagement.
Thirdly, peacekeeping missions must be enabled to
discharge their protection mandates more effectively.
Protection mandates place very distinct and enhanced
responsibilities on peacekeepers and reshape the
requirements of our missions. Most obviously, protection
mandates can involve not only the static protection of a
line separating forces, but the active policing of
territory. This requires improved operational guidance,
training, equipment and appropriate resources,
especially those that allow our forces mobility.

09-60204

S/PV.6216

In this connection, I welcome the recently
completed independent study on the implementation of
protection mandates by United Nations peacekeeping
missions commissioned by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. I call on the
Council and Member States, including troop- and
police-contributing countries, in cooperation with the
Secretariat, to consider the recommendations for
implementation.
Fourthly, humanitarian actors must have better
and safer access to civilians in need of assistance. The
Council must be prepared to respond when such access
is not forthcoming.
Last but not least, we must enhance
accountability for individuals who commit war crimes,
crimes against humanity, genocide and other serious
violations of international human rights law. There is a
need for consistency and perseverance in this regard.
Through criminal prosecutions and other resolute
action, we must hold to account those who violate the
law — law, I should stress, that we have worked so
hard to put in place.
As we mark the tenth anniversary of the Security
Council’s consideration of the protection of civilians,
let us not dwell too long on what has been achieved,
significant though that is. We must focus on the future
and on how to ensure more effective protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. John Holmes, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
Mr. Holmes: Allow me to express sincere
appreciation to you, Sir, and to the Government of
Austria for convening this high-level open debate, as
well as for your efforts leading to the adoption today of
resolution 1894 (2009), which marks a further
important advance in the Council’s commitment to
protecting civilians.
When the Council first took up the protection of
civilians as a thematic issue in February 1999, against
the backdrop of widespread atrocities and displacement
in Angola, Kosovo, Sierra Leone and elsewhere, it
rightly viewed the situation in very bleak terms. The
presidential statement of 12 February 1999

09-60204

(S/PRST/1999/6), the first on this topic, spoke of the
Council’s distress that civilians accounted for the vast
majority of casualties in conflicts. It condemned the
targeting of civilians, demanded an end to such
violations and affirmed the need to bring to justice
those who violate international humanitarian and
human rights law. It expressed concern also over the
widening gap between the rules of international
humanitarian law and their application.
Significant progress has since been made in
seeking enhanced protection for civilians and in
developing further the normative framework. But can
we say with conviction, as we meet today, that those
affected by conflict enjoy a significantly greater and
more tangible degree of protection than 10 years ago?
Have we narrowed the gap between the rules of
international humanitarian and human rights law and
their application? Have we narrowed the gap between
rhetoric and reality?
Even an optimistic assessment suggests that we
still have far to go, first, in closing the gap between the
rhetoric of internationally agreed laws for the
protection of civilians and the reality of widespread
non-compliance with those laws. From Afghanistan to
Chad to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
occupied Palestinian territories, Somalia, the Sudan,
Yemen and beyond, the lack of compliance with the
law by parties to conflict, both State and non-State,
results in thousands of civilians killed or injured every
month and thousands more forced from their homes
into situations of dependency, destitution and yet
further violations, including rape and other forms of
sexual violence.
As the Secretary-General has made clear, access
for humanitarians is vital to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. One issue critical to enhancing
compliance and access is humanitarian engagement
with non-State armed groups. Some Member States
remain concerned that engagement affords those
groups an unwelcome degree of recognition. Yet the
reality is that armed groups account for one or more of
the parties in virtually every conflict in which we
operate today, however much we may condemn their
aims or their often bloody acts, which take many
civilian lives. For the effectiveness and safety of
humanitarian operations — and we have seen some
horrific attacks on humanitarians in recent weeks and
months — and for the sake of access to those in need,
we must have flexibility to engage these groups, to

5

S/PV.6216

promote
their
compliance
with
international
humanitarian law and to seek their understanding of
our neutrality, independence and impartiality.
We have far to go too in closing the gap between
the mandates of peacekeeping missions which include
the protection of civilians and the reality of the
shortcomings identified in the independent study,
jointly commissioned by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs OCHA) and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO),
which was released last Friday. I should make clear
that this part of my statement includes input from the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. UnderSecretary-General Le Roy and I agreed on this in order
to limit the number of speakers. The OCHA-DPKO
study sheds valuable light on where we must focus our
efforts in improving the implementation of protection
mandates by United Nations peacekeeping missions.
First, we must address the uncertainty as to what
missions, and individual actors within missions, should
actually do to protect civilians and, critically, how they
should do it. We should be clear that, even when they
have protection of civilians mandates under Chapter VII
of the Charter, United Nations peacekeeping operations
continue to be guided by the basic principles of
peacekeeping. They are not peace-enforcement
operations. DPKO, in consultation with troop and
police contributors and other stakeholders, is
developing an operational concept to clarify what
protection means in the peacekeeping context, which
will provide the basis for further guidance. It will
ensure that Member States, including troop and police
contributors, the Secretariat and peacekeeping missions
themselves have the same understanding of the
expectations and limitations of protection mandates.
Support from Member States in the Council and the
General Assembly in developing the concept and this
guidance will be critical.
Secondly, all missions should develop protectionof-civilians
strategies,
in
consultation
with
humanitarian and human rights actors, and based on a
realistic assessment of the threats and risks to the
population. Guidance from Headquarters on developing
such strategies will be important, and development of
the operational concept is an important step in that
direction. Such protection strategies must be based on
the understanding that protection mandates are not
limited to the protection of civilians under imminent
threat of physical violence, but involve a much broader

6

range of activities including, for example, facilitating
humanitarian access, the return of refugees and
displaced persons, human rights monitoring, child
protection and addressing sexual violence. Their
implementation is not a task exclusively for the
military or police personnel of a mission, or just for the
civilian components of missions and humanitarian
actors. Rather, it is an overarching responsibility for
the mission, whose leadership needs to finds ways to
bring together the relevant mandates, capacities and
expertise of those different actors.
Thirdly, leadership is crucial, and Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General and the senior
mission leadership must ensure protection is
considered a priority across the whole mission. They
must be accountable for developing and implementing
protection strategies and reporting on their results. But
if they are to do this effectively, they too must receive
the requisite guidance, training and resources before
they assume their responsibilities.
Fourthly, we must ensure, through better analysis
and reporting, that the Council itself is candidly
informed of the challenges missions face and the
opportunities that exist to protect civilians. Only then
can the Council take informed and supportive action.
Fifthly, we must ensure the requisite political
commitment to the mission by the Council and by the
parties on the ground, and also by troop and police
contributors, who must have a firm understanding of
the critical role they play in protecting civilians.
DPKO and the Department of Field Support will
work closely with contributing countries and other
stakeholders to ensure that protection of civilians
becomes integral to predeployment training, as part of
a broader effort to gather lessons learned on the
implementation of protection mandates, as requested
by the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
earlier this year.
We must also keep in mind the necessity of
strengthening the host State’s capacity to protect its
population. Peacekeeping can assist countries in
rebuilding in the aftermath of a conflict and in
protecting civilians while doing so. But it cannot
substitute for the State, which bears the primary
responsibility for the safety and well-being of its own
citizens.

09-60204

S/PV.6216

While we must guard against exaggerated
expectations of protection of all civilians wherever
missions are deployed, as the study itself makes clear,
we can nevertheless reasonably expect greater
consistency and success in this core function of
peacekeeping than has been the case to date. We are
committed to working jointly to take forward the
study’s recommendations, in consultation with all
relevant actors. I trust that we can count on the full
cooperation and support of the Council and Member
States in doing so. I am delighted that important
provisions of resolution 1894 (2009) already give us a
head start in this respect.
Finally, I believe that there is a gap between
rhetoric and reality as it relates to the consistency with
which the Council itself pursues its stated commitment
to the protection of civilians. For example, targeted
sanctions are a critical tool for seeking compliance
with the law. They have been imposed against those
responsible for humanitarian and human rights law
violations in Côte d’Ivoire and in the Sudan. But in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, only those
committing violations involving the targeting of
children or women or obstructing the access to or the
distribution of humanitarian assistance are subject to
such measures. In Somalia, only those obstructing
humanitarian assistance are targeted.
The
Council
needs
a
consistent
and
comprehensive approach to these accountability issues.
The stakes for the civilians concerned are simply too
high, and the allegations of selectivity or double
standards too easily made otherwise. The systematic
application of the aide-memoire (see S/PRST/2009/1,
annex), as a checklist against which to identify
protection concerns and appropriate responses in any
given context, can help here, as can the informal
Expert Group.
Others have characterized the gap between the
rhetoric and the reality of the protection of civilians as
that between idealism and realism. But the effective
application of international humanitarian and human
rights law is not some ideal notion. On the contrary, it
is an achievable reality. What it requires, above all
else, is that States and other parties to conflict give top
priority to the protection of civilians, that they
promote, implement and enforce the practical steps
required to apply the law, and that the Security Council
not only encourage them to do so but also call them to
account when they do not, on the basis of the facts, not

09-60204

political convenience. This tenth anniversary of the
protection of civilians is as good a time as any to make
a fresh start.
The President: I thank Mr. Holmes for his
interesting briefing. I now give the floor to Ms. Kyungwha Kang, Deputy High Commissioner for Human
Rights.
Ms. Kyung-wha Kang: I have the honour to
deliver the following statement on behalf of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Navanethem Pillay.
The particular vulnerability of human rights in
situations of armed conflict means that the daily work
of the Office of the High Commissioner includes a
significant focus on the full range of situations under
the Council’s review. For this reason, and for more
than a decade, successive High Commissioners have
been called to brief the Council, and we are pleased to
continue this tradition of collaboration in our common
cause of protecting civilians exposed to the horrors of
armed conflict.
The constitutional responsibility of the Council
under the Charter for the maintenance of international
peace and security is one of the greatest trusts of
humankind. By keeping the protection of civilians in
armed conflict on its agenda during the past ten years,
the Council has significantly advanced our
understanding of the crucial importance of the
protection of civilians and human rights to the cause of
international peace and security at the normative and
policy level. Translating that policy into more effective
action on the ground is the challenge that we must now
confront.
As the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/277) points out, this will mean enhancing
compliance with international law, bolstering
protection through more effective and better resourced
United Nations missions, securing humanitarian access
and pursuing accountability for violations. It will also
mean seeking creative solutions to the political
obstacles that have at times kept critical situations off
the Council’s formal agenda and to those obstacles that
have stalled action or blocked the Council’s protective
response all together. And it will mean moving beyond
narrow notions of what constitutes an imminent threat.
If the cause of protection is to advance in the next
ten years, a higher level of political will must be
mobilized to take timely and effective action to prevent

7

S/PV.6216

atrocities, protect the vulnerable, hold perpetrators to
account and ensure redress for victims.
It is now axiomatic that the resolution of conflict
and the maintenance of peace and security will be
neither achieved nor sustained without due attention
being paid to redressing grievances, ending impunity
and protecting the human rights of civilians. But this
requires greater clarity in our concepts and
expeditiousness in our action. To be clear, when we say
protection, we are talking about protection of the
human rights of individuals as contained in
international law, including international human rights
law, international humanitarian law, international
refugee law and international criminal law.
The authority of international law and the
obligations of duty bearers — among all the parties to
conflict — cannot be replaced by more amorphous
notions of protection, or by less obligatory notions of
charitable action. To be sure, the politics of conflict
cannot be ignored. But where conflict entails the abuse
of human rights, the international community must act
to identify the facts and then to apply the law.
But law without enforcement is of little moment
to would-be perpetrators. To be effective in the
protection of civilians, the Council must consistently
work to ensure accountability for perpetrators of war
crimes, crimes against humanity and other gross
violations of human rights. The establishment of
tribunals for the former Yugoslavia, Rwanda and
elsewhere, as well as the referral of specific cases to
the International Criminal Court (ICC), has helped to
send an important signal that, even in the fog of war,
impunity is not assured. The dispatch of credible,
independent, law-based commissions of inquiry that
are focused on accountability and which report their
findings publicly has proven to be an important
catalyst in the Council’s efforts to combat impunity,
and more use could be made of such mechanisms.
The corrosive effect of impunity on both human
rights and peace is evident in the case of the occupied
Palestinian territory, as documented in the report of the
United Nations Fact-Finding Mission (A/64/640)
headed by the distinguished international jurist Richard
Goldstone, which has been transmitted to this Council.
The report lays out in detail the nature and scope of
violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law perpetrated against the civilian
population of the occupied Palestinian territory, where,

8

in Gaza earlier this year, Israeli forces killed well over
one thousand civilians and attacked homes, schools,
mosques, food and water installations and United
Nations facilities. The report also documents the
indiscriminate launching of rockets and mortars into
southern Israel by armed Palestinian groups in Gaza,
killing Israeli civilians and causing terror and trauma
among communities in disregard of international
humanitarian and human rights norms.
Collective punishment, as evidenced by the
crippling Israeli blockade and the devastating military
offensive, is a violation of international human rights
and humanitarian law, as are the forcible evictions of
Arabs, the demolition of homes and the expropriation
of occupied East Jerusalem lands for Israeli
settlements.
Until meaningful steps are taken to end impunity
for these violations and to assert the applicability of
international law, peace and security will remain
elusive for all the people of the region. The Council is
urged to embrace the recommendations in the report, so
as to secure accountability for all perpetrators and to
fully integrate human rights guarantees into
peacemaking efforts.
The situation in the eastern Democratic Republic
of Congo is a horrifying reminder of the depths to
which inhumanity can spiral if left unchecked. Military
operations against residual armed groups, such as the
Lord’s Resistance Army and the Forces Démocratiques
de Libération du Rwanda, have led to massive
displacement, and several hundreds of civilians have
been killed this year alone. Sexual violence, including
rape, has increased drastically. Support provided by the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to the Congolese
Army in the context of these operations needs to be
reviewed whenever there is a risk of violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
This situation is further compounded by concerns that
well-known human rights violators, including an
individual indicted by the ICC, continue to occupy
high-level command positions within the Congolese
army. Recent public statements by senior Government
officials demonstrate a lack of political will to
investigate high ranking officials and raise doubts
regarding the zero-tolerance policy against sexual
violence proclaimed by the President. Under these
circumstances, the sustained and unequivocal support

09-60204

S/PV.6216

of the Council to the fight against impunity is urgently
needed.
Efforts to bring effective protection to the longsuffering people of Darfur have occupied countless
hours of this Council’s work over many years now, but
without satisfactory progress towards a sustainable
solution to the conflict. The Council has again
emphasized the protection of civilians as a priority in
renewing the mandate of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. In 2005, the
Office of the High Commissioner supported the
International Commission of Inquiry on Darfur, which
concluded that Government forces and militias were
responsible for serious violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law, and which led to
the referral of the situation by this Council to the
International Criminal Court. But justice remains
elusive and violations continue. Darfur illustrates that,
even with robust mandates, there are political,
structural, operational and resource issues that limit the
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping
missions. The situation also necessitates the
employment of a broader human rights approach with a
focus on the entire spectrum of rights beyond physical
protection.
The conflict in Afghanistan has repeatedly caught
civilians in the crossfire. The recent attack on a United
Nations guesthouse in Kabul, killing five United
Nations staff members and injuring numerous others, is
a stark reminder that United Nations personnel
continue to put their lives at risk, while protecting waraffected civilians and working to build an environment
that is conducive to respect for human rights. Civilian
casualties continue to mount, with hundreds killed
every year by armed anti-Government elements,
Government forces and international forces carrying
out both air strikes and ground assaults.
During the first 10 months of 2009, the United
Nations Mission of Assistance in Afghanistan recorded
2,021 civilian deaths, compared with 1,838 for the
same period in 2008 and 1,275 in 2007. The
intensifying conflict has had a disastrous impact on the
enjoyment by many Afghans of basic rights to health,
food, shelter, a livelihood and education.
In addition, there continues to be an urgent need
to improve overall accountability procedures, including
through criminal prosecution when warranted, as well
as redress for victims, while bringing the legal

09-60204

framework governing conflict-related detention by all
who take and hold detainees into line with human
rights law. The failure to pursue a credible transitional
justice strategy, including holding to account those
responsible for the gravest crimes over more than three
decades of war and the resulting climate of impunity, is
a significant factor in the challenging political context
and growing insecurity that now envelop Afghanistan.
For 10 years now, the Council has worked under
this thematic track to build up a framework for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. That work has
better equipped the Council, and all of us, to address
that vital issue. Institutionally, the Council should
mandate arrangements on the ground to ensure an
enhanced coherence, rather than fragmentation, and to
make full use of civilian capacities, with robust human
rights components in United Nations peace missions
tasked to provide effective protection to the full range
of vulnerable persons and groups in conflict and postconflict countries.
The early deployment of human rights officers,
the rapid fielding of human rights investigations and
the organization of human rights assessments have
proved to be valuable interventions, allowing us to
identify trends, threats and risks, to document abuse
and to hear the concerns of victims and the vulnerable.
At the same time, the disparity between mandated
responsibilities, on the one hand, and inadequate
resources, on the other, must be addressed if the
expectations of the international community and the
demands of victims and the vulnerable for effective
protection are to be met.
However, as this brief review of four countries on
the Council’s agenda reveals, the most important gap
remains between policy and practice. Closing that gap
will require a greater commitment by all to the explicit
application of international law and to its enforcement.
It will require more political will and less political
exceptionalism. All must be held to a single standard.
It will require enhanced resources and their more rapid
deployment and an unwavering focus on the three
mutually reinforcing imperatives of accountability for
perpetrators, redress for victims and protection for the
vulnerable. In this challenging endeavour, we — the
High Commissioner and her Office — stand ready to
assist.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached among Council members, I wish

9

S/PV.6216

to remind all speakers to limit their statements to no
more than five minutes in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate the
texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber.

perpetrated before the arrival of international
peacekeeping forces. For that reason, we hope that the
resolution just adopted will strengthen the resolve of
the international community to react quickly and
decisively in order to minimize actual threats to
civilians.

I shall now give the floor to members of the
Council.

As a response to the atrocities committed during
the 1990s, The Security Council took an important
decision in 1999 to add to the mandate of the
peacekeeping operation in Sierra Leone a direct
reference to the protection of civilians — including
through the use of force — as a mandated task of that
peacekeeping operation. The introduction of the
protection of civilian provisions became increasingly
important in later peacekeeping mandates, where the
concept became the central part of the mandate of the
peacekeeping operation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and has since been introduced into a
plethora
of
other
United
Nations-mandated
peacekeeping missions.

I invite the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
European Integration of Croatia, His Excellency
Mr. Gordan Jandroković, to take the floor.
Mr. Jandroković (Croatia): At the outset, allow
me to thank you, Mr. President, and the Austrian
presidency, for taking the initiative to re-engage this
body on the vitally important issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, which, in our view, often
strikes at the core of the Council’s primary mandate
regarding threats to international peace and stability.
I would also like to commend the Austrian
presidency on his hard work in preparing the draft
resolution on this issue, which we have just adopted.
My thanks also go to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
for his frank and poignant remarks. His presence here
today shows the clear commitment of the United
Nation to placing this issue at the highest possible
level.
It is evident that the nature of contemporary
conflict has changed in the modern era. Nowadays, in
the conduct of armed conflict, civilians more often than
not become the targets of armed attacks and atrocities,
including murder, deportation and ethnic cleansing, as
well as rape and sexual violence. This is not only as a
consequence of war but as a method and means of
conducting war. Such atrocities were once considered
as exceptions in the conduct of armed conflict, while
today they have frequently become the rule.
The defining moment that forced the international
community to conclude that a more decisive and
comprehensive approach and action were required
came in the mid-1990s with the genocides committed
in Rwanda and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Our own
experience of the early 1990s showed us that there still
existed an immense gap between the theoretical
implementation of international humanitarian law and
practice on the ground.
It is especially important to note that the majority
of atrocities committed during the war in Croatia were

10

I would like to add that while a peacekeeping
mission may be able to help stop violations of
international humanitarian law on the ground, for any
long term and sustainable improvement of a conflict
situation there needs to be solid cooperation between
peacekeeping and other international personnel and the
authorities and populace of the host country. Such
personnel work closely with civilians on the ground,
and a deterioration of relations between them may have
an indeterminate yet detrimental effect on overall
political efforts to establish and sustain peace and
prosperity.
This has led the United Nations to develop a
more integrated or multidimensional approach to
peacekeeping, which is well reflected in the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations’ New Horizon
non-paper on the protection of civilians. Here the
emphasis is placed not only on issues of immediate
security or military concern but also on long-term
issues, such as the protection of civilians, the
strengthening of civil society and security sector
reform, as well as on economic revitalization and
development.
Development is especially important in this
context since, without assisting a host country’s return
to self-sustainability, recourse to violence can and quite
often does occur, as has been demonstrated by

09-60204

S/PV.6216

returning peacekeeping operations to countries in West
Africa, Timor Leste and Haiti.
The war of independence in Croatia during the
early 1990s produced untold consequences on a great
many civilians in my country. Apart from the resulting
death and destruction, I would like to stress that
Croatia, a nation of 4.5 million people, was nearly
overwhelmed with over 850,000 displaced persons and
refugees, more than half of whom came from
neighbouring Bosnia and Herzegovina. Although this
was an immense challenge, we managed to ensure the
provision of all necessary facilities for this population,
as well as the maintenance of the normal functioning of
all institutions.
The terrible losses suffered in Croatia as a
consequence of the conflict spurred our leaders to
explore new avenues for seeking internationally-agreed
and legally binding redress for the crimes committed,
without prejudice, through the establishment of an ad
hoc tribunal. This resulted in the establishment of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. In advocating for a tribunal, Croatia did
not lose sight of the fact that the duty to protect
civilians by implementing international humanitarian
law lies primarily with the parties to the conflict and,
as such, it emphasized the vital principle that judicial
processes individualize criminal responsibility.
For its part, by establishing the ad hoc Criminal
Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, the
Security Council opened a new chapter in international
law, leading to the establishment of the International
Criminal Court and a number of other hybrid tribunals.
All these have proved to be valuable tools in
combating impunity as a corrosive force that can
undermine chances for reconciliation and the building
of lasting peace.
Over the years, the Security Council has acted in
numerous other ways to enhance the protection of
civilians agenda. The Council has promoted the use of
mediation in order to help prevent the outbreak of
armed conflict in crisis situations. It has used its
influence on parties to armed conflict to observe
standards of protection, including by imposing targeted
measures against recalcitrant parties in cases of
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law. And it has now even referred specific
situations to the International Criminal Court.

09-60204

The sixtieth anniversary of the core treaties of
international humanitarian law — the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and their subsequent protocols —
likewise provide us with an opportunity to look back
and examine our own roles in implementing the central
tenets of these treaties. They also allow us to analyse
the degree and level of success to which the various
international actors have managed these inherent
responsibilities.
In spite of numerous positive developments in the
Council, Croatia remains extremely concerned about
the severity and prevalence of constraints on
humanitarian access in the field, as well as the
frequency and gravity of attacks on humanitarian
personnel, bearing in mind the impact they also has on
civilians, especially women and children. The Council
has a responsibility to respond to situations of armed
conflict where humanitarian assistance is being
deliberately obstructed, not merely by calling on the
parties involved to allow unimpeded passage to relief,
but also by imposing targeted measures in grave
instances of the wilful impediment of such supplies.
Moreover, the concept of the responsibility to protect,
as reflected in the 2005 World Summit Outcome
Document (General Assembly resolution 60/1),
represents an integral part of the protection of civilians
agenda.
As world leaders have acknowledged, individual
States are responsible for protecting their populations
from the aforementioned atrocities. At the same time,
the international community also has a responsibility to
help protect populations and to take collective action
through the Security Council if and when national
authorities manifestly fail to protect their people from
such atrocities.
We would also like to stress the need for greater
emphasis on the issue of mines and explosive remnants
of war. Croatia has much experience in the technical
side of mine clearance, as well as in the rehabilitation
of mine victims. We need to remember that these silent
killers kill and maim long after the end of a conflict,
and at that point the victims tend to be civilians rather
than military personnel.
The new resolution 1894 (2009) joins a number
of resolutions that the Council has adopted in the past
two years on civilian-related issues, for which I would
like once again to thank my friend and colleague
Michael Spindelegger and the Austrian delegation.

11

S/PV.6216

While we agree that the Council’s involvement in the
protection of civilians as a thematic issue has helped
create a much-needed normative framework for the
issue, this progress has not been as evident in
improvements of the actual situation on the ground for
civilians in armed conflict.
Croatia firmly believes that the Council’s new
resolution offers a valuable opportunity for that
improvement to take place, to the benefit of all
civilians caught in armed conflict.
The President: I now invite the Right
Honourable Baroness Taylor, Minister for International
Defence and Security of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to take the floor.
Baroness Taylor (United Kingdom): Let me
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting. We are extremely grateful to you and the
Austrian delegation for all your hard work in
promoting an agenda item to which we attach great
importance. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his words and the Under-Secretary-General
for his informative and thought-provoking briefing. We
are also very pleased to see and hear from the Deputy
High Commissioner.
I would like to associate the United Kingdom
with the statement that will be delivered by the
Permanent Representative of Sweden on behalf of the
European Union.
We share many of the concerns that have been
raised in today’s briefing. Given the perilous situations
in which many civilian populations still find
themselves despite the efforts of the Security Council
over a period of 10 years, it is imperative that the
protection of civilians remain at the core of the
Council’s work. We welcome the prominence given in
resolution 1894 (2009), just adopted, to the issue of
humanitarian access.
We also agree with the Secretary-General that we
can do more to minimize violations of international
humanitarian law. The Council should be ready to
address flagrant and widespread violations committed
against civilians, even when they take place in
situations of internal armed conflict. Protecting
civilians requires a holistic approach that will
sometimes stray into areas that are sensitive for some
Governments. We must be ready to face up to those
challenges.

12

We would also like to see the Council show
genuine readiness to engage in conflict prevention as
well as resolution. As a Council, we often talk about
the importance of prevention but only rarely are we
able to achieve consensus on action. If we are to
change that, we will need to increase our ability to
receive and digest information, and, most importantly,
our willingness to address threatening situations at a
sufficiently early stage. As we have said before, the
United Kingdom stands ready to do so.
Parties to an armed conflict bear the primary
obligation under international law to protect civilians.
However, where that obligation is not met or where
national capacities are not adequate to provide
protection, there is a clear role that United Nations
peacekeeping missions can play, both in providing
physical protection to civilian populations and in
assisting the host Government to shoulder its own
responsibilities.
My Government believes that protecting civilians
is an important measure of the credibility of
peacekeeping operations. It goes to the very heart of
what people around the world admire and respect about
the United Nations in action. We all owe a debt of
gratitude to the peacekeepers who take on the vital role
of protecting civilians, invariably in testing
circumstances and often at considerable risk to their
own safety.
We must ensure that we make realistic demands
of peacekeeping missions, matched with sufficient
resources, training and structures to successfully
protect civilians. This is why the United Kingdom fully
supports renewed efforts to improve the dialogue
between the Secretariat, the Security Council and
troop- and police-contributing countries. The Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations has a key role
to play in this process.
There is much good field practice on which we
can build. Peacekeepers in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo are actively protecting civilians in very
difficult circumstances, and combining civilian and
military expertise in efforts to deliver a holistic
approach. The United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) has
identified protection hotspots and, with the help of
early warning and rapid-response mechanisms, has
deployed mobile operating bases and joint protection
teams.

09-60204

S/PV.6216

These are innovative measures that are achieving
results. MONUC, for example, proves the importance
of a systematic and integrated approach to protection.
It also underlines the need for comprehensive United
Nations guidance to be made available to all who need
it. Both measures would help leaders on the ground by
framing and informing the challenging decisions they
regularly face.
In this context, we look forward to digesting the
findings and recommendations of a timely independent
study on mandate implementation commissioned by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA). It will be important that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs continue to work
closely with one another in taking forward the
recommendations contained in that study. In turn, we
hope that the study will inform the considerations of
the Committee of 34 and the Council’s informal expert
group on the protection of civilians.
This meeting today and the resolution that we
have just adopted (resolution 1894 (2009)) are further
steps towards developing a shared understanding on
some of the more complex issues facing United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The United
Kingdom looks forward to progressive discussions on
these issues over the coming months and in the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations next year.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Costa Rica.
Mr. Ugalde (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, Costa Rica would like to thank you and
your delegation for convening this debate on the
protection of civilians and for your initiative that has
led to the adoption of this new resolution (resolution
1894 (2009)) . We would also like to acknowledge the
presence of the Secretary-General, the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and the
Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights and
thank them for their presentations. I would also like to
greet the distinguished ministers present here.
During its membership in the Security Council,
Costa Rica has participated in the renewal of the
comprehensive protection framework. In the past two
years, we have contributed to the adoption of
resolutions on children in armed conflict (resolution
1882 (2009)), sexual violence (resolution 1820

09-60204

(2008)), women and peace and security (resolutions
1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009)), and also to the update
of the aide-memoire. Today, we close the cycle by
bringing this framework up to date through the
adoption of the new resolution on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (resolution 1894 (2009)). In
addition, Costa Rica has promoted the strengthening of
protection mandates in several peacekeeping missions
and has participated in the group of experts on the
protection of civilians since its inception.
During the past 10 years, the protection of
civilians has been recognized as a fundamental
component of the United Nations mandate and as a
central element for the legitimacy and credibility of
peacekeeping operations. Despite the progress
achieved so far, considerable problems remain,
particularly in the areas of accountability and
compliance with international law.
Costa Rica believes that the Security Council
must ensure the protection of civilian populations and
strongly and decisively respond to grave violations by
using all available resources. The obligations to protect
civilians apply to all situations and must be held to the
same standards in all parts of the world, regardless of
any political consideration.
Another important aspect of this mandate is
accountability. The Council has the responsibility of
closely monitoring situations where international
standards are repeatedly violated. We believe that the
Council has the obligation to obtain timely and detailed
information, promote investigations when necessary,
and ensure timely assistance to victims. We must work
resolutely towards achieving agreements that guarantee
victims’ access to justice, including by referring
situations to the International Criminal Court, bearing
in mind its subsidiary role, when national authorities
lack the capacity or political will to fulfil their
obligations. The Council must implement actions to
strengthen the security sector in all its missions,
particularly those authorities charged with providing
transitional justice, which is an indispensable tool for
consolidating peace, recovering stability, combating
impunity and ensuring respect for human rights.
The protection of civilians is a comprehensive
and multidimensional concept and is the primary
responsibility of States. Nevertheless, given the nature
of today’s conflicts, in order to achieve its objectives,
this concept requires strategic partnerships among

13

S/PV.6216

States, the United Nations, regional organizations, nongovernmental
organizations
and
the
affected
populations themselves.

our satisfaction with a conclusion of the process that
has led to the adoption of the new resolution
(resolution 1894 (2009)).

Efforts to integrate the establishment and renewal
of mandates, mission planning, deployment and
evaluation have not been sufficient so far to
mainstream the protection of civilians as a crosscutting pillar in the work of peacekeeping operations
and the achievement of their objectives. In order to
achieve effectiveness in the protection of civilians, it is
necessary to work towards greater integration of efforts
in peacekeeping operations and improve coordination
between political, military and humanitarian actors.

We would like congratulate Austria for achieving
this outcome. We are delighted with the progress of the
Security Council has made in the thematic discussions
and the positive developments in this area. We would
like to reiterate our conviction that it is still necessary
to work on five challenges listed in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/277) . We believe that it is
important to include the human security perspective in
order to guarantee not only the physical protection but
also the human dignity of civilians affected by armed
conflict.

The Security Council, mission personnel,
humanitarian actors and the civilian population should
clearly know what is expected of a mission, as well as
their roles and responsibilities. The Council must be
specifically aware of the resources that are needed for
the effective implementation of its mandates. There
must be a strategy for each mission that includes all of
the mission’s components. In order to fulfil their tasks,
peacekeepers must have clear guidelines and proper
training that derives from a general operational
concept. In addition, to improve security, it is
necessary to enhance interaction and promote a better
flow of information among missions, humanitarian
actors and local populations.
For its part, the Secretariat must systematically
include in its country-specific reports relevant data and
recommendations to protect the civilian population,
reduce risks and threats and information on
humanitarian access constraints.
In
summary,
stronger
leadership
and
responsibility is necessary to ensure greater coherence,
unity of purpose and a common vision, as well as to
link the protection of civilians to the success of the
political solution to any conflict.
I would like to make a brief statement on behalf
of the Human Security Network, comprised of Austria,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan,
Mali, Norway, Slovenia, Switzerland and Thailand, and
South Africa as an observer member:
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the first
Security Council resolution containing specific
provisions for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (resolution 1265 (1999)) and is also the tenth
anniversary of our Network. We would like to express

14

The President: I now call on the representative
of France.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Austria for the opportunity it has given us
to address once more in this open debate format the
matter of the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
France supports the statement to be made by the
representative of Sweden, who will speak on behalf of
the European Union.
As we are celebrating the sixtieth anniversary of
the Geneva Conventions and the tenth anniversary of
the first resolution on the protection of civilians
(resolution 1265 (1999)) , I wish to reaffirm France’s
commitment in this field. The respect for international
humanitarian law is non-negotiable. All parties to an
armed conflict — States and non-State groups alike —
must respect this law. Human rights must be ensured,
whether we are talking about the Sudan, Gaza, Sri
Lanka or even, more recently, in Guinea. The growing
likelihood of conflicts occurring in densely populated
areas and against adversaries who are not wearing
uniforms raises additional issues with regard to the
implementation of the Geneva Conventions. That is a
matter that merits the attention of the international
community.
I should like to confine my statement to two
issues, namely, first, peacekeeping operations and,
secondly, combating impunity.
Ensuring the protection of civilians, which is part
of peacekeeping operations, is not limited to carrying
out military tasks to protect against immediate threats
of physical violence. It also encompasses greater and
more complex responsibilities and tasks. It entails the

09-60204

S/PV.6216

development of integrated operational directives as
part of comprehensive strategic planning.
We must also define peacekeeping operations in
concrete terms. France has contributed financially to a
Secretariat study on that issue. The recommendations
to emerge from that study should make it possible for
the chain of actors involved in the protection of
civilians — from the Security Council, at the time
when mandates are set out, to stakeholders on the
ground, at the time that instructions are conveyed to
contingents — to have a common and unambiguous
understanding of their obligations. In addition, the
Security Council must ask for what is possible; but it
must subsequently be certain of what has been done.
With regard to that last point, allow me to dwell a
little on the Democratic Republic of the Congo — a
major tragedy of our time that has cost the lives of
hundreds of thousands, and perhaps even millions, of
civilians. The United Nations operation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is an illustration of
all the challenges that we must face. Of course, we
have made an attempt to respond by further defining
the mission’s mandate through resolution 1856 (2008).
It is also true that we have enacted innovative
initiatives on the ground, including joint protection
teams and the establishment of an early warning
system. However, as non-governmental organizations
are repeatedly telling us today, we should ask ourselves
about the reality on the ground.
Massacres and attacks against civilians are
continuing at an alarming rate. Therefore, when it falls
on us to renew the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo at the end of this year, the Security Council
should demonstrate its determination to implement the
resolution that we have just adopted on the protection
of civilians (resolution 1894 (2009)). France will be
especially vigilant in that regard.
That is what I wanted to say about peacekeeping
operations. Let me now turn to combating impunity. In
that connection, States must prosecute and punish those
responsible for violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law. That requires carrying
out impartial and independent investigations. Should
there be a failure to do so, international criminal justice
systems must try the most serious crimes. France calls
upon all States to accede to the Rome Statute and to
cooperate with the International Criminal Court.

09-60204

Without real punishment there can be no prevention or
discouragement of such crimes. It is for that reason that
the Security Council must study the possibility of
including sanctions for violations of international
humanitarian law when it establishes or renews the
mandates of sanctions committees, including the
prevention of access to humanitarian assistance.
Lastly, I should like to take the opportunity
provided by this meeting of the Security Council to
commend the General Assembly’s recent reaffirmation
of the concept of the responsibility to protect. The
Security Council has a special responsibility under that
concept. It is not just a matter of intervening in serious
crises to put an end to the most heinous crimes; it is
also a matter of acting beforehand to prevent such
crimes and of strengthening warning systems for
situations where there is the potential for such crimes.
In its action in the Council, France is always mindful
of that responsibility. We will spare no effort to
operationalize that concept.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are very pleased to welcome you, Sir, as
you preside over the Security Council at this important
meeting. We would like to thank our Austrian partners
for their initiative to once again address the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We would
also like to express our gratitude for Austria’s
contribution to the drafting of the resolution that the
Council has just adopted (resolution 1894 (2009)). We
are also grateful for the statements made by SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, Under-Secretary-General
Holmes and Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Deputy High
Commissioner for Human Rights.
We support the resolution that the Council has
adopted today, which is a comprehensive document
that was the outcome of a thorough discussion and
which
encompasses
legal,
humanitarian
and
peacekeeping issues as they pertain to the issue under
discussion.
The Russian Federation supports the peaceful
settlement of disputes. There should be no room for
violence and armed conflict in the twenty-first century.
However, we live in the real world. In spite of efforts
by the international community, conflicts continue to
occur and to take the lives of many people, most of
them civilians. It is therefore civilians who require our

15

S/PV.6216

special protection, first and foremost women, children,
older persons and the humanitarian staff who assist
them.
We are convinced that, in order to remedy the
situation, we must reject selective and one-sided
approaches to violations of international humanitarian
law. There must be strict adherence to human rights
standards, as well as compliance with the relevant
decisions of the Security Council.
We unequivocally condemn both deliberate
attacks on civilians and the loss of civilian life as the
result of the indiscriminate or disproportionate use of
force, which is a gross violation of international
humanitarian law. We welcome the fact that this issue
has been duly reflected in the resolution that the
Council has adopted today. There is no justification for
armed groups that attack civilians, carry out terrorist
acts and take hostages.
We would like to underscore the shared
responsibility of all parties to ensure the protection of
civilians and to adhere strictly to international
humanitarian law. We also support the thorough
investigation of incidents involving violence, including
punishing those responsible. That also applies to the
activities of private security companies, whose actions
often victimize innocent people.
The protection of civilians is primarily the
responsibility of the Governments of the States
involved in a conflict. All parties to an armed conflict
have the responsibility to protect civilians. The actions
of the international community should be focused on
assisting national efforts in that regard. The
international community can only take appropriate
steps, especially when it comes to the use of force,
under the auspices and with the consent of the Security
Council, as well as in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations. Of course, we should always bear
in mind the economic, social, historical, religious,
cultural and other specific features of each country and
region, including the specific nature of each conflict
and the possible ways to resolve it.
The issue of the protection of civilians during
peacekeeping operations still requires more detailed
work. That should be done in harmony with further
steps to enhance the effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. In that regard, we are in
favour of further fine-tuning the practice of operational
consultations between members of the Security

16

Council, troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat on all aspects of peacekeeping operations,
including during the planning stages, on the basis of
existing procedures and arrangements and previous
decisions of the Security Council.
There is no doubt that the Security Council
should develop clear and realistic mandates to protect
civilians, bearing in mind the material and financial
resources available to United Nations peacekeeping
operations and the operational guidelines in that
regard, as well as on the basis of consultations with
Member States.
At the same time, we must not forget that the
protection of civilians is only one aspect of the
mandate of a peacekeeping operation. The main task of
United Nations peacekeepers is to assist the peace
process. In the protection of civilians, the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants
can play a very important role. Such efforts require an
appropriate level of support from United Nations
peacekeepers. An important factor is the work of
humanitarian agencies, which should be carried out in
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and
humanitarian principles. The success of such action
depends largely on how it accords with the efforts of
the international community in achieving a peaceful
settlement.
The President: I call on the representative of
Japan.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important debate. I would also like
to congratulate Austria on its leadership in promoting
the cause of the protection of civilians. In addition, we
are grateful to the Secretary-General; Mr. John
Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; and
Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Deputy High Commissioner for
Human Rights, for their valuable presentations.
The Security Council has developed a number of
normative standards and frameworks on the protection
of civilians since it adopted resolution 1265 (1999).
They include, inter alia, the aide-memoire for
reviewing mission mandates, revised earlier this year,
and resolution 1894 (2009), just adopted. At the same
time, we should acknowledge that enormous and wideranging challenges to the protection of civilians —
such as sexual violence, child soldiers, deliberate
attacks on humanitarian personnel and other violations

09-60204

S/PV.6216

of international humanitarian and human rights law —
remain in many parts of the world. The most pressing
task for us now is to determine how we can put those
normative frameworks and standards into practice.
First and foremost, international humanitarian
and human rights laws must be acceded to by all
States. Regrettably, many of the States involved in
armed conflict have not yet acceded to such key
instruments as the Additional Protocols to the 1949
Geneva Convention and the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. We urge all States to
become parties to those instruments.
Once ratified, those instruments must be
complied with and implemented. States have primary
responsibility for protecting their citizens. However,
States in armed conflict often lack the capacity and the
institutions necessary for such implementation. It is
essential that those States strengthen their lawenforcement institutions, promote security sector
reform and establish the rule of law. The international
community should support the efforts of those
countries in their capacity-building. Japan will extend
assistance as much as possible in that regard.
We must also address equally serious violations
by non-State actors, which often operate outside the
effective rule of government and deliberately make use
of civilians to attain their goals. The Security Council
must address serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law whenever they
occur, make its position known and urge parties to take
steps to ameliorate the situation. If necessary, the
Council should take measures to verify the facts and
establish accountability, and sometimes also impose
targeted sanctions to ensure the compliance of State
and non-State groups with international law.
The United Nations assumes direct responsibility
for protecting civilians where United Nations
peacekeeping operations are deployed, and it is tasked
with doing so. Of course, that is easier said than done.
Out of the 15 peacekeeping operations currently
deployed, eight are tasked with a protection mandate.
Many of those missions face difficulties in
implementing their complicated and demanding
mandates with limited human and material resources.
The areas in which they are deployed are generally
large, and in many cases mission personnel do not
necessarily have a clear understanding of how a

09-60204

Security Council mandate should be translated into
operational activities on the ground.
If a mandate is to be successfully implemented, it
must be realistic and feasible. In other words, in
determining the mandate of a peacekeeping operation,
the Security Council must fully take into account local
security and other situations, as well as available
resources and field support. That is important for the
credibility of the Council and of the United Nations as
a whole. From the perspective of guaranteeing
credibility, we request the Secretary-General to ensure
this by communicating clearly to the Government and
the people of the host country the specific role that the
mission is expected to perform.
Some missions have begun to take innovative
approaches to translating the will of the Council into
an operational plan. Unfortunately, many have not. In
order to overcome that situation, we request the
Secretariat to formulate and develop an operational
concept and guidelines on the protection of civilians
that are most appropriately tailored to meeting missionspecific requirements and situations on the ground.
At the same time, I wish to emphasize that
protection does not mean merely protection from
imminent military threat. A protection mandate needs
to be implemented not only by a military component,
but also by a civilian component, to deal with issues
such as human rights violations and civil-military
coordination. Therefore, each mission with a protection
mandate needs to develop a comprehensive strategy.
In that regard, I wish to underline that
empowering vulnerable people — children, refugees,
internally displaced persons and others — also
contributes to protecting civilians and preventing the
recurrence of conflict. Empowerment is a core notion
of human security. We believe that it provides added
value to an operational plan and strategy for the
protection of civilians.
In addition to improved guidelines and a strategy,
it is essential to ensure an appropriate level of human
and financial resources, training, information about the
local situation, assets and equipment, including land
and air transportation, and communications for
effective mandate implementation. It is therefore
indispensable to consult very closely with troopcontributing countries, police-contributing countries,
major finance-contributing countries and host countries
in the early stages of mandate formulation. In

17

S/PV.6216

particular, we need to strengthen predeployment
training, because the skills necessary for a protection
mandate differ significantly from those required for
other operations.
We are very pleased at the high priority now
being placed on this issue by the Secretary-General, the
Secretariat and the Security Council itself. I hope that
the outcomes of exercises such as the New Horizon
study, the joint study between the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, and the
Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations will be fully reflected in order to strengthen
partnerships with all stakeholders, including, inter alia,
troop-contributing
countries,
police-contributing
countries and major finance-contributing countries.
In conclusion, if the Council is to take
appropriate action, it must receive timely and accurate
information on the ground. United Nations missions
with protection mandates should provide the Council
with more detailed information about the protection of
civilians on the ground. We value the meetings of the
Security Council Expert Group on the Protection of
Civilians in order to receive briefings from the
Secretariat on the latest information prior to
consultations on the mandates of specific missions.
The Security Council should continue to improve
its work both in the formulation stage and in the
implementation stage. Resolution 1894 (2009), adopted
today, is an important contribution to setting the course
that the Council should follow. In other words, we
should closely monitor progress against the yardsticks
provided for in the resolution.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming Japan’s
strong commitment to enhancing the security of
vulnerable people caught in conflict.
The President: I call on the representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): I should like at the outset to thank the
delegation of Austria for having organized this
important meeting and to thank you personally, Sir, for
presiding over it. I wish also to thank His Excellency
the Secretary-General for his presence among us and
for his important contribution to the debate. Nor can I
fail to thank the Under-Secretary-General for

18

Humanitarian Affairs and the Deputy High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their statements.
Participants at the 2005 World Summit endorsed
the principle of the responsibility to protect
populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. The Security
Council’s deliberations and its relevant resolutions,
including resolution 1674 (2006), helped to establish a
framework incorporating measures on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Those measures were
intended to enhance the implementation on the ground
of the principles of international humanitarian law and
human rights law.
But in spite of the substantial progress achieved
in the sphere of the codification of international
humanitarian law and in spite of the endorsement of
the general principles of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, the tangible results in terms of
implementation have not yet reached the target. This
frequently creates frustration because of the great
divergence between principle and action.
The number of victims of armed conflict,
including victims of foreign occupation, has not
decreased. The suffering of victims has increased. This
suffering includes torture and other forms of inhumane
treatment such as gender-based and sexual violence,
violence against children, the recruitment of child
soldiers, trafficking in persons, displacement and the
deliberate denial of access to international assistance.
We continue to live in a world in which States
and groups wilfully and wantonly target civilians or
adopt strategies that they know have the potential to
result in the killing of civilians. Here, we note that
wars have been and continue to be waged on the
pretext of fighting terrorism or self-defence. In most
such wars, principles and norms of international
humanitarian law have not been heeded. The majority
of casualties in these wars have been civilians. That is
true in particular of Israel’s repeated acts of aggression
against Lebanon, the war in Iraq and the invasion of
Afghanistan.
Nor must we forget the victims of local conflicts.
The Somali people have been subject to killings,
displacement, exile as refugees, hunger and threats and
have been deprived of their fundamental rights. In the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
civilians continue to suffer as a result of the conflict
and daily violations of their rights. In Darfur and in

09-60204

S/PV.6216

eastern Chad, civilians continue to fall victim to tribal
conflicts and regional disputes. That list is far from
exhaustive, and everybody knows it.
The Palestinian people continue to suffer the
harshest and most inhumane treatment under Israeli
occupation. In the Gaza Strip, the most basic needs of
more than 1.5 million Palestinians continue to be
neglected. They are being denied access to
humanitarian assistance — even assistance provided
under the supervision of the United Nations, which
cannot reach them in a timely manner. The Gaza Strip
has become a huge prison, with entry and exit still
being obstructed. That is unprecedented in human
history.
But the Israeli occupation authorities were not
satisfied with the situation and launched a flagrant 22day act of aggression against the Gaza Strip,
employing every means of mass destruction, including
internationally prohibited weapons such as white
phosphorus. The attacks spared no one and did not
distinguish between civilians and members of the
military. They wantonly targeted civilians, civilian
infrastructure such as hospitals and schools and United
Nations property and facilities. The result is known to
all and has been set out in trustworthy international
reports that are beyond question.
In fact, we cannot understand how the Security
Council can remain silent, and how it can fail to move
immediately to prosecute Israeli perpetrators of war
crimes, in particular the crimes in Gaza. These are very
well documented and have been set out in the report of
the fact-finding body established by the SecretaryGeneral to investigate damage to United Nations
property in Gaza, as well in the report of the United
Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Israeli aggression
in Gaza, chaired by Justice Richard Goldstone (see
A/HRC/12/48). The General Assembly has considered
the latter report and endorsed its recommendations; it
has called on the Security Council to adopt measures
on war crimes and crimes against humanity perpetrated
by the Israeli occupation forces against civilians in
Gaza. We hope that, ultimately, the support of some
Council members for Israel will not block the
Council’s attempts to shoulder its responsibilities. We
hope that Israel will cease to be an untouchable entity
that is above the law.
or

Thousands of Palestinians were mercilessly killed
wounded in full view of the international

09-60204

community. Internationally prohibited weapons were
used against Palestinians, and the infrastructure of
Gaza was almost completely destroyed. For justice to
prevail, the perpetrators of these crimes must be
prosecuted. The Security Council must complement the
role of the General Assembly so that its deliberations
on the protection of civilians can be meaningful and so
that the Council can regain its credibility.
When it adopted resolution 1674 (2006), the
Security Council was very clear about the need to
provide unobstructed humanitarian assistance to those
in need. The Council must adopt an unwavering
position on the provision of international humanitarian
assistance and on meeting the basic needs of those
requiring assistance. For that reason the Council must
pressure the Israeli occupation authorities to lift their
siege on Gaza, enabling people, goods and money to
move freely, so that the basic needs of those under
siege are met.
Some countries take the high moral ground when
they preach at us in the Security Council about the
protection of civilians. But those countries do nothing
to protect Palestinians from Israeli terror or from
Israel’s systematic crimes against the Palestinian
people, even though it is within their power to put an
end to them. These countries compete to provide the
weapons that the Israeli entity uses to kill and mutilate
Palestinians. Moreover, they claim to be committed to
Israel’s so-called security, which certainly includes the
security of the Israeli occupation in occupied Arab
territories. This undoubtedly complicates the lives of
Palestinian and Arab citizens who can find no
explanation for this blind support for Israel’s
behaviour.
The issue of protecting civilians in armed conflict
should be addressed comprehensively and in a context
that includes prevention, motivation, rationales and
outcomes. We would stress, first, that the Council must
place greater priority on preventing the outbreak or
exacerbation of conflicts. To that end, international
efforts must be coordinated to combat hunger and
poverty and to redress the injustices inflicted on many
peoples. The activation of preventive diplomacy and
early warning mechanisms would do much to prevent
the outbreak and exacerbation of conflicts. Secondly,
pursuant to resolution 1674 (2006), the protection of
civilians should be a core priority of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, which should be endowed
with the means necessary to that end. Thirdly, when the

19

S/PV.6216

Security Council acts to guarantee the protection of
civilians, its actions should be balanced and
transparent, avoid double standards and be supported
by a system of accountability and sanctions that serves
as a deterrent to all without distinction.
We hope that our debate will result in coordinated
action commensurate with the importance of the issue
under discussion, which touches first and foremost on
the dignity of humankind.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States of America.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I, too,
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comments this morning, and Under-Secretary-General
Holmes and Deputy High Commissioner Kang for their
briefings.
The United States thanks you, Sir, and the
Government of Austria for organizing this important
debate and for your leadership on the resolution the
Security Council has just adopted. Resolution 1894
(2009) consolidates a decade of study and effort to
better protect civilians in armed conflict. We also offer
our deepest thanks today to the hundreds of brave
United Nations personnel dispatched to war zones who
have died trying to put our aspirations into practice.
As a result of this decade of United Nations
action, millions of civilians have been saved and
helped through political, peacekeeping, human rights,
humanitarian and development efforts. This is certainly
the case in such places as Burundi, Côte d’Ivoire, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Haiti, Liberia,
Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, Timor-Leste and other
countries shaken by armed conflict.
But in all too many places, the innocent have still
borne the brunt of conflicts. In this same decade, the
response has sometimes come too late or fallen short.
Millions of Congolese died in the past decade as the
direct or indirect result of armed conflict. In Darfur,
hundreds of thousands of people were slaughtered and
millions driven from their homes. The plight of
civilians in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Darfur and elsewhere in northern and southern
Sudan remains precarious and extremely worrying.
Somalia and its civilian population have been
devastated by decades of violence. Insurgent attacks
still terrorize innocents in Iraq and Afghanistan, and

20

the Palestinian and Israeli peoples continue to suffer
from the ongoing Arab-Israeli conflict.
Far too many civilians are still threatened and
victimized by violence. The perpetrators — often
rebels, terrorists, extremist groups and other non-State
actors — are unmoved by the law and operate outside
it. War-torn States often lack the capacity to bring
perpetrators to justice and provide security for their
citizens. State security forces that lack the necessary
training and oversight, as well as State forces
integrated
with
former
rebels
during
the
implementation of peace agreements, can themselves
threaten civilians, as evidenced by the case of the
Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
International
peacekeepers
can
and
do
supplement local capacity in countries shaken by
conflict. Eight United Nations peacekeeping missions
are now mandated to protect civilians from physical
violence, but some peacekeepers lack the means to
match their challenging mandates. We must do better.
On occasion, the severity of the threat cannot be
managed by United Nations peacekeepers. What is
needed is much more sophisticated combat capability
and enforcement action. It is especially important that
military forces undertaking such actions abide by the
Geneva Conventions, the sixtieth anniversary of which
we celebrate this year. United States forces are
committed to compliance with the laws of war,
including the Geneva Conventions, even as we face an
enemy that is loyal to no State, that hides among
civilians and that routinely violates laws.
The lives of innocent civilians in all the world’s
conflict zones demand our concern, but the situations
in which civilians are imperilled differ radically. As
such, the resolution adopted today addresses a wide
range of actions to strengthen the protection of
civilians. I would like to highlight four of them.
First, we must continue to develop the means to
ensure that the Security Council has prompt access to
accurate and objective information on threats to
civilians in armed conflict, impediments to
humanitarian access, and alleged violations of
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law.
Secondly, we must strengthen the tools to hold
accountable those who flout the laws of war. The

09-60204

S/PV.6216

Security Council must be prepared to impose
sanctions — whether by freezing assets, banning
international travel or restricting the flow of goods and
arms — on those who violate international
humanitarian law. Establishing accountability and
promoting reconciliation through credible and effective
national courts, when possible, or through international
or hybrid tribunals, when necessary, is essential to
ending impunity. Those responsible must be held to
account.
Thirdly, we need to support the capacity of
countries emerging from conflict to rebuild their
infrastructure and institutions, including those dealing
with protection and security for their citizens.
Finally, members of the Security Council, troop
and police contributors, and the Secretariat all need to
forge a shared understanding of what the protection of
civilians entails in peacekeeping contexts. Missionwide strategies to protect civilians, involving military,
police and civilian components, are critical.
Peacekeepers need to be prepared, trained and
equipped to employ force effectively when required, in
accordance with their mandates.
In this regard, we look forward to early
discussions on the study on protecting civilians
recently completed by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, including at the forthcoming
session of the General Assembly’s Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations.
We have the tools and mechanisms to protect
civilians in armed conflict, but we still have
considerable work to do to improve them, to develop
new ones and to summon the will to use them more
consistently. We must also consider taking additional
measures to enhance the safety and security of United
Nations personnel undertaking this vital work. And we
must do all of this concurrent with our efforts to
prevent, halt and end the armed conflicts themselves.
Let me thank you once again, Mr. President, for
organizing this meeting on such an important issue. We
regret, however, that, as we have just heard, some have
sought to use this opportunity to promote other
objectives.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.

09-60204

Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I thank the
Austrian presidency for taking the initiative of
convening this open debate of the Council on the
important issue of protection of civilians in armed
conflict. I thank the Secretary-General, the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and the
Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights for their
statements.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement of
the Non-Aligned Movement to be delivered by the
representative of Egypt.
As we mark the tenth anniversary of the Security
Council’s consideration of the issue of protection of
civilians in armed conflict, we are encouraged by the
efforts of many Member States in establishing national
mechanisms and institutions to ensure better protection
of civilians. We commend United Nations entities in
general and, in particular, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and
peacekeeping missions with mandates to protect
civilians, for their work in protecting and helping
civilians in armed conflict over the past years.
We remain concerned about the indiscriminate
and excessive use of force against civilians, the
widespread attacks against schools, hospitals and other
civilian targets, as well as other violations resulting in
numerous deaths, injuries and suffering of innocent
civilians.
We strongly condemn the use of civilians as
human shields during conflicts. It is alarming that the
number of refugees and displaced persons as a result of
conflicts now totals nearly 40 million, causing
considerable social and economic difficulties for the
host countries and localities. It is also alarming that, in
many cases, humanitarian access for civilians,
including access to food, fuel and medical care, has
been almost totally hindered, and that humanitarian
personnel continue to be attacked or prevented from
delivering humanitarian assistance to civilians.
We condemn all those inhumane acts against
civilians and call on all parties to conflicts to strictly
comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian and human rights law to protect civilians
in armed conflict. To ensure favourable conditions for
and the effectiveness of the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to civilians in armed conflict, we emphasize
the need to respect and strictly observe the principles

21

S/PV.6216

of neutrality, impartiality and independence in the
provision of such assistance.

better understanding and a more appropriate treatment
of the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

Viet Nam reiterates its consistent view that States
bear the primary responsibility within their respective
jurisdictions to protect their own populations. The
United Nations, regional organizations and the
international community have an important role to play
in supporting and assisting Member States, particularly
through political mediation and humanitarian
assistance. In this connection, the engagement and
cooperation with national Governments is vital.
Coordination and cooperation among United Nations
entities should also be further strengthened,
particularly among OCHA, United Nations missions
and country teams.

Since the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999)
10 years ago and of the Geneva Conventions 60 years
ago, the Security Council has on many occasions
addressed this issue, which has become more complex
as various conflicts of different natures have broken
out. In addition to classic warfare, today we are seeing
tribal and interethnic wars leading to pogroms against
civilians. The massacres in Sierra Leone and in Liberia
during their civil wars and, closer to us, the atrocities
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Darfur, Sri
Lanka and Gaza, show the extent to which, despite the
goodwill and efforts of people and the powerful means
deployed, the protection of civilians in conflict remains
a challenge, and one that is far from being successfully
met. However, the Security Council’s regular
examination of this problem demonstrates its resolve to
find fitting solutions.

We are convinced that the issue of protection of
civilians in armed conflict should be approached from
a holistic perspective. Measures to protect civilians in
armed conflict, including refugees and internally
displaced persons, can only be viable if the practical
needs of civilians, including those for subsistence,
education and health care, are adequately addressed. In
designing such measures, the methodologies used in
collecting accurate, timely and reliable information
from the field should be carefully considered to ensure
effectiveness and efficiency. The Council and other
United Nations bodies should adhere to their lines of
responsibility and make the best use of existing
mechanisms, with a view to avoiding duplication, thus
contributing to the best possible performance of the
entire United Nations system.
Resolution 1894 (2009), which the Security
Council has just adopted, constitutes another effort in
the international community’s humanitarian cause of
protecting civilians in armed conflict. I would like to
thank you, Sir, and the delegation of Austria, for your
efforts towards the adoption of such an important
resolution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Burkina Faso.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
Since the Alpbach retreat, Mr. President, we have been
aware of how meticulously you have prepared today’s
discussion on an issue that is central to the
responsibilities of the international community and, in
particular, the Security Council. We wish to commend
you for that, in the belief that we will not hold just
another discussion but will bring a new vision for a

22

Here, the legal arsenal to address the matter has
grown over time. Resolution 1674 (2006) has the merit
of having included the concept of impunity with that of
the protection of civilians. Six other resolutions
pertaining to specific aspects of the protection of
civilians have made it possible to draw attention to the
situation of women and children, as well as sexual
violence. In parallel, the Council has adopted eight
presidential statements and the updated aide-memoire
of January 2009 (S/PRST/2009/1, annex), and it has set
up sanctions committees and tribunals. So, the
framework does exist, and it is very clear.
Unfortunately, despite such notable progress,
much remains to be done because of the persistence of
grave violations of international humanitarian law and
in spite of all the relevant Security Council resolutions.
In fact, we witness, sadly, that civilians continue to be
the first targets and victims of the same atrocities:
sexual violence, fires, destructions of homes and
infrastructure, forced recruitment of children, sexual
slavery, denial of access to humanitarian aid, forced
displacement and others. In the face of those failures it
is only right to remind all actors, and first and foremost
combatants, of their duties and obligations.
States have the primary responsibility to protect
their populations from all grave abuses. They therefore
must facilitate the access of victims to redress, which
requires putting in place and strengthening credible
independent judicial mechanisms that are open to

09-60204

S/PV.6216

victims, and the firm enforcement of court decisions to
put an end to impunity. Also required are such
measures as the strengthening of military justice, the
establishment of boards of inquiry and truth and
reconciliation commissions. To those we must add the
bolstering of the rule of law in peacetime by protecting
and promoting human rights, good government,
socio-economic development and the consolidation of
social cohesion and national unity. Those are all things
that can prevent the outbreak of violence.
Just like States, armed groups also have
obligations
under
the
Geneva
Conventions.
Unfortunately, in some cases, we see a complete
ignorance of those basic texts, particularly on the part
of non-State armed groups. It is therefore absolutely
necessary to establish dialogue with them, within the
framework of cooperation with States, in order to
inform them of the content of those fundamental texts.
Such an approach, which has already shown
convincing results in the realm of children in armed
conflict, should not however be perceived as
legitimating their existence. Moreover, armed groups
must establish internal disciplinary sanctions and
implement them with due stringency, or, if they fail to
do so, group leaders must be made to answer for the
acts of their members.
One of the major challenges to the protection of
civilians in situations of armed conflict is humanitarian
access, given the obstacles and climate of insecurity
and violence. We urge all parties to respect
international humanitarian law and, as a matter of
priority, to guarantee the security of humanitarian
personnel and ensure conditions for the rapid delivery
of aid to civilians, including to refugee and internally
displaced person camps, through humanitarian
corridors.
The role of peacekeeping operations in the
protection of civilians is, by now, well established. It is
therefore now necessary to equip them with clear,
credible and realistic mandates supported by the
necessary logistic and financial resources, including
predeployment training on relevant legal norms for
contingents. These mandates must also be flexible, so
that they can be carefully reoriented to respond to the
situation on the ground and to protection needs.
Given the multisectoral nature of the protection
of civilians, it is imperative to improve coordination
between the Office for the Coordination of

09-60204

Humanitarian Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
the Special Representative on sexual violence to be
appointed and all other partners on the ground, in order
to meet the urgent needs of civilians.
Other
complementary
actions
must
be
undertaken. For example, there is a need to improve
the synergy of actions by means of an inclusive and
participatory mechanism of communication and
information-sharing among the United Nations, States
and civil society. Moreover, a structured analysis of the
problems would make it easier to examine the issue in
a comprehensive and coherent way, drawing on the
relevant elements in the aide-memoire.
Given the intrinsic responsibility that falls to the
Security Council, this body must ensure that its
resolutions and international humanitarian law are
observed and must speak with a united voice in all
instances of serious violations. It must emphasize
mediation by calling protagonists to a frank dialogue
that can be carried out in a climate of security and
mutual trust. It must establish independent
commissions of inquiry to establish the facts in cases
of serious violations and prosecute perpetrators before
the appropriate international judicial body. It must
intervene systematically from the first signs of armed
conflict, deploying peacekeeping operations as soon as
possible so as to limit damage. The prevarications
throughout the Rwandan genocide must serve as an
example for us here.
In conclusion, we wish to express our satisfaction
with the United Nations system, as well as with
regional and subregional organizations, for their
efforts. We welcome the adoption on 23 October 2009
of the African Union Convention on the Protection of
and Assistance to Internally Displaced Persons in
Africa. This unique convention is a binding legal and
institutional framework requiring States to take
appropriate measures to prevent and eliminate the
deep-rooted causes of forced displacement. The
Kampala Declaration of principles on this issue
specifically commits States to fight impunity by
ensuring individual responsibility for arbitrary
displacement, pursuant to domestic and international
criminal law. We wish also to thank the personnel of
peacekeeping operations and the humanitarian
community, who work on a daily basis side by side

23

S/PV.6216

with the civilian population, sometimes paying with
their lives.
The resolution that we have just adopted will
enable all parties concerned better to understand the
consequences of this human tragedy and to assume
their responsibilities to protect human rights in periods
of armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of China.
Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I wish to welcome your presence at the
Security Council, presiding over this open debate. I
should like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Under-Secretary-General Holmes and Deputy High
Commissioner for Human Rights Kang for their
briefings.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
Council’s discussion of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. Over the past decade, the Council has
been paying ever greater attention to the protection of
civilians and has made positive efforts to deal with this
issue. However, with the changes in the nature of
armed conflict and the effects of various complicated
factors, large numbers of civilians in many regions of
the world continue to be harmed by armed conflicts.
Thus the international community continues to face an
uphill struggle in addressing the protection of civilians.
We are deeply concerned over the threat and
harm to the lives and property of civilians in situations
of armed conflict. We urge parties to conflicts to
comply with international humanitarian law and
relevant resolutions of the Security Council and to
protect the lives, property and legitimate rights and
interests of civilians. We are in favour of strengthening
the Council’s efforts in this regard.
The issue of the protection of civilians involves
many aspects and is very complex indeed. The
countries concerned, relevant international agencies of
the United Nations and regional organizations should
make the most of their strengths and expertise, working
in a concerted manner to respond to this issue together.
The Security Council bears primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
and, as such, it is duty bound to keep the protection of
civilians in armed conflict on its agenda and to deal
with it accordingly. The Council must tackle this issue
at its root, devoting greater attention to preventing and

24

containing conflicts. At the same time, it is necessary
to make sure that this issue is addressed within the
overall framework of political processes aimed at the
peaceful resolution of conflicts.
Primary responsibility for the protection of
civilians lies with national Governments. When
providing assistance, the international community and
external organizations must comply with the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations, fully respect the
will, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country
concerned, and refrain from forceful interference.
Dialogue between the United Nations and non-State
armed groups may be helpful in the protection of
civilians, but such dialogue should be conducted within
the general framework of cooperation between the
United Nations and the country in question and with
the consent of its national Government.
With regard to the question of impunity, we
support the leading role played by the domestic judicial
system of the country concerned as the main avenue
for achieving justice. The international community has,
over the years, developed a relatively complete system
of international legal norms. The 1949 Geneva
Conventions and their 1977 Protocols provide a
comprehensive and systematic regime for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. However, in
the reality of today’s world, many provisions are yet to
be fully respected and observed. Therefore, the
pressing issue is to ensure the comprehensive, just and
effective implementation of the existing norms. In this
context, the competent United Nations entities and
international treaty bodies should continue to play their
important roles.
The Council has adopted many resolutions and
presidential statements on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. The priority for the next stage should
be to push forward the effective implementation of
these documents.
Tasking United Nations peacekeeping missions
with the protection of civilians is a decision that the
Council takes on a case-by-case basis. We are of the
view that a mandate to protect civilians should be
prepared in the light of real need, taking fully into
account the situation on the ground and the existing
capacities and conditions of a given peacekeeping
mission. A one-size-fits-all approach is not advisable.
We attach great importance to the protection of
civilians, but we are not in favour of indiscriminately

09-60204

S/PV.6216

expanding such mandates while ignoring real-world
conditions and the physical viability of implementing
such mandates.
It is necessary to emphasize that the key to
ensuring a successful peacekeeping mission is
adherence to the three principles governing
peacekeeping operations, namely established local
consent, mission neutrality and the non-use of force
except in self-defence. Any deviation from these
principles in implementing a mandate to protect
civilians would only create more controversy and
problems than it could solve, and could even
jeopardize the overall peacekeeping process.
In addressing the mandate to protect civilians in
armed conflicts, the efforts of the Council alone are far
from adequate. Tackling the problem through its
symptoms, while ignoring the root causes of a conflict,
will not contribute to finding a lasting solution to the
protection of civilians. Today, most conflicts take place
in the less developed areas of the world. The United
Nations should mobilize world resources and provide
the relevant countries with financial and technical
assistance to help them to develop their economies,
free themselves from poverty and thereby avoid
conflicts.
We hope that the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council, the United Nations
Development Programme, the World Bank and other
international institutions and regional organizations
will play a part in assisting the countries concerned in
areas such as economic development, conflict
resolution and the protection of civilians. We also
welcome non-governmental organizations playing a
more positive role in that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset, I wish to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, UnderSecretary-General
Holmes
and
Deputy
High
Commissioner for Human Rights Kang for their
comprehensive statements.
I would like to thank the Austrian presidency for
organizing this high-level meeting. We also commend
it for building consensus on resolution 1894 (2009),
which marks the tenth anniversary of the initial
consideration of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict in the Council as a thematic issue.

09-60204

Unfortunately, not a single day has passed in those 10
years without a civilian casualty in armed conflict or
without civilians being targeted. We should react to
such deliberate attacks. Indeed, we can say that the
international community is still failing to provide
security to civilians in armed conflict.
The issue of the protection of civilians has been a
priority topic on the agenda of the Council in recent
years, especially since the beginning of this year, given
the atrocities and human rights violations in different
parts of the world, in particular Gaza.
The
Secretary-General’s
recent
report
(S/2009/277) gives us a comprehensive account of the
latest situation in protecting civilians in armed
conflicts. The report indicates the difficulties and
challenges for the future. However, recent
developments offer hope as well. The adoption over the
past months of Security Council resolution 1882
(2009) on children and armed conflict, as well as
resolutions 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009) on women
and peace and security, indicates an important
evolution in protecting civilians in armed conflicts.
In the light of those developments, we are pleased
that the Austrian presidency has broadly included the
peacekeeping aspect in the resolution. We attach a high
priority
to
peacekeeping,
peacemaking
and
peacebuilding issues, as demonstrated during our
presidency of the Council. Naturally, the resolution
represents a balance and does not change the fact that
there are issues of a very sensitive nature that run the
risk of undermining or weakening our efforts if not
addressed carefully.
In that vein, I would like to emphasize four
points. The first concerns non-State armed groups.
Given the inevitable ambiguity of that term and the
many different kinds of entities that fall into that
category, we believe that one should be extremely
careful in dealing with such groups. That is particularly
important as many terrorist organizations attempt to
abuse the term and what it entails in their quest to gain
international attention and support.
Secondly, combating terrorism is both the right
and the obligation of every State. Nothing should be
allowed to weaken our resolve to fight that scourge.
The activities of terrorist organizations themselves put
the lives of civilians in danger. Thus, international
organizations, and non-governmental organizations in
particular, should be vigilant in conducting their work

25

S/PV.6216

in conflict areas and not allow themselves to be
exploited by such groups and organizations.
Thirdly, as a troop- and police-contributing
country to United Nations peacekeeping operations, we
wish to see more emphasis on the peacekeeping aspect
of this issue in the future. We look forward to a further
debate within the United Nations system on the
independent study commissioned by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations on the
protection of civilians in the context of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, which was released recently.
To that end, we hope that regional ownership and
cooperation will become a priority. Likewise, we
believe that the issue of cultural differences and
sensitivities should be taken into consideration in
predeployment training for peacekeeping operations by
all States. In that vein, the imbalance between wellfunded peacekeeping operations in some areas where
armed conflict has ended and other operations that
need urgent strengthening should also be immediately
addressed.
Fourthly, I would like to stress that it is in fact by
strengthening the rule of law, human rights, democracy
and good governance that we can secure the long-term
and lasting protection of civilians. Those should be our
main goals for the future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uganda.
Mr. Lukwiya (Uganda): We thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate on
the protection of civilians in situations of armed
conflict. We also thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon;
the
Under-Secretary-General
for
Humanitarian Affairs
and
Emergency
Relief
Coordinator, Mr. John Holmes; and the Deputy High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Kyung-wha
Kang, for their succinct and very informative briefings
this morning.
The year 2009, apart from being the sixtieth
anniversary of the 1949 Geneva Conventions, together
with their Additional Protocols, also marks 10 years
since the Security Council’s adoption of its resolution
1265 (1999) on the protection of civilians.
Uganda remains concerned that civilians still
account for the vast majority of casualties during
situations of armed conflict. Civilians continue to be

26

targeted by parties to conflicts and subjected to
indiscriminate attacks and other forms of violations,
such as forced displacement, sexual violence, forced
conscription, indiscriminate killings, mutilation,
maiming, hunger, disease and loss of livelihood. The
impact of those violations lingers on long after active
combat has ended. Sixty years of attempts at
understanding the concept of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict is a long period of time, especially
for the innocent civilians who wake up every day
confronted by those threats.
The proliferation and fragmentation of non-State
armed groups contribute to the complex nature of most
conflicts. Such groups do not subscribe to or even
realize their obligations under international law to
protect civilians, but instead view them as human
shields to fortify their numbers and gratify their social
needs. Of even greater concern is that most civilians
caught between warring parties for the most part
remain ignorant of their rights under international law,
being more concerned with simply trying to stay out of
the crossfire and to distinguish between friend and foe.
Resolution 1894 (2009) reaffirms those
obligations and calls upon States emerging from armed
conflict to prioritize security sector reform and
independent national judicial systems, and to take all
feasible steps to empower their populations through the
dissemination of information, education and training
on the rights and responsibilities of civilians in
situations of armed conflict. However, experience has
shown that such States cannot rebuild national
institutions on their own, and therefore require support
from the international community. The new resolution
(1894 (2009)) covers important areas that are often
taken for granted. It recognizes the need for safeguards
for vulnerable people, especially women, the elderly,
the disabled, and children, the civilians envisaged in
such terminology. In addition, the resolution addresses
the important component of refugees and internally
displaced persons.
Uganda is encouraged by the attention this
resolution gives to the proliferation and destabilizing
effects of small arms and light weapons, as well as to
the devastating impact of landmines and explosives left
after war. Even more significant for us is the
recognition of the needs of persons with disabilities as
a vulnerable group arising out of the indiscriminate use
of these weapons. Uganda calls upon all subregional
and regional organizations, civil society organizations

09-60204

S/PV.6216

and Member States to come to the aid of these people
and to take initiatives aimed at the clearance and
removal of unexploded ordnance and at educating
civilian populations about the dangers it poses.
Of the 26 million documented internally
displaced persons worldwide, 11.6 million are in
Africa. Today’s resolution notes the recent adoption of
the African Union Convention for the Protection and
Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa at
a summit held in Kampala on 23 October. Now known
as the Kampala Convention, it is an important
milestone in addressing the root causes of conflict in
Africa. The Convention provides a legal framework for
promoting and strengthening regional and national
measures to prevent, mitigate, prohibit and eliminate
the root causes of internal displacement.
My delegation also welcomes the Council’s
recognition of the need to address the issue of HIV and
AIDS as an important component of national
predeployment training information for peacekeeping
troops, as well as for personnel involved in
peacemaking,
peacekeeping
and
peacebuilding
activities. It is imperative to point out that HIV and
AIDS present a constant risk for populations, not just
during times of peace but even more so during times of
conflict. Soldiers are a high-risk group for HIV
infection during their deployments and can
unknowingly spread it as they are transferred from one
location to another.
Long after the guns have gone silent, affected
populations, many of whom end up losing everything,
are left to pick up the pieces with no assistance, even
from friendly forces. International law does not
provide for making amends to individuals who lose
property or livelihood as a result of armed conflict.
Today’s resolution calls for national reparation
programmes for victims as well as institutional
reforms. However, my delegation would like to go a
step further and also recognize the need for all parties
to armed conflict to emphasize the dignity of civilians
by recognizing losses that result from lawful combat
operations, as well as providing meaningful amends to
affected individuals and communities, such as financial
assistance or funding for humanitarian aid
programmes. My delegation encourages all Member
States to embrace the concept of making amends, not
because there is any legal obligation to do so, but
simply in the interests of mitigating suffering and
promoting humanity. That has been the policy of the

09-60204

Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) and
continues to be implemented by UPDF troops serving
in the African Union Mission in Somalia.
In conclusion, we thank the delegation of Austria
for spearheading the drafting of the resolution that we
have just adopted.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Mexico.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the Government and delegation of
Austria for convening this meeting, which reflects the
commitment of the United Nations to strengthening
international humanitarian law in order to protect
victims of armed conflict. We would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his detailed report, as well as
Mr. John Holmes, the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, and Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, the
Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Mexico attaches a great deal of importance to this
topic, and we commend the Security Council for the
work it has done in this area over the past decade. In
particular, we welcome the recent adoption of
resolutions 1882 (2009), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009),
to which we can now add the resolution adopted today
(1894 (2009)), which will no doubt revitalize the
protection in armed conflict of civilians, especially the
most vulnerable groups, such as women and children.
The improvements that have been made to
legislation and to international bodies of standards help
better to define the concepts relating to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict and are undoubtedly
important. However, despite good intentions, we have
not gone beyond the realm of theory. Sadly, the
situation on the ground gets worse by the day. That is
why it is essential that we achieve a better connection
between theory and practice, in order to avoid
situations where civilians become the chief victims of
violence during armed conflict. We should emphasize
that lack of adherence to the standards of international
humanitarian law, as well as the imperfect
interpretations of the law made by the parties to armed
conflict during that conflict, result in serious violations
of those laws that may constitute war crimes and fall
within the jurisdiction of the International Criminal
Court. For these reasons, it is essential to establish a
strategy based on three pillars: first, enforcing
compliance with international humanitarian law;
secondly, strengthening the work of humanitarian

27

S/PV.6216

organizations; thirdly, improving accountability, in
order to put an end to impunity.
International humanitarian law must be complied
with, regardless of the type of armed conflict in
question. The four Geneva Conventions of 1949, their
Additional Protocols and other instruments of
international humanitarian law, as well as customary
international law, form a solid foundation of principles
and norms that protect the life and dignity of all those
who no longer participate in hostilities or who never
have. We call on those States that have not yet done so
to accede to all international instruments in the area of
international humanitarian law, and on the parties to
conflicts to comply with their international obligations.
We know very well that the obligation to respect
international humanitarian law cannot be fulfilled
without due implementation, at the national level, of
these international obligations. This is why we would
also urge States to incorporate these standards and
principles in their national legislation and practices.
It is clear that denying or blocking humanitarian
assistance exacerbates the situation of populations in
armed conflict. When humanitarian assistance is
inadequate, given the cross-cutting nature of this topic,
peacekeeping missions and the specialized agencies of
the United Nations in conflict areas carry out the
essential task of protecting civilians, and this should be
acknowledged.
We also acknowledge the work carried out by
humanitarian institutions, in particular the International
Committee of the Red Cross, and by civil society,
especially with respect to the delivery of humanitarian
assistance and the importance of guaranteeing safe,
timely and unimpeded access to humanitarian
assistance in conflict and complex emergency
situations.
Access of humanitarian assistance to civilians in
armed conflict is a topic to which we attach particular
importance, as it is a sine qua non for protection. As
Mexico indicated during the debate in January (see
S/PV.6066), my delegation would like to reiterate our
disagreement with interpretations that can restrict or
exclude human dignity in complex situations and that
favour positions that set this humanitarian principle
against the principle of sovereignty.
When violent acts are committed against civilians
and other persons protected in situations of armed
conflict, justice must be done in order to put an end to

28

the impunity of the alleged perpetrators of serious
crimes or those ordering them to be committed in
contravention of international law. The existence of the
International Criminal Court and its complementary
role vis-à-vis national jurisdictions should not only
serve as an incentive to strengthen national justice
systems, but also represent an effective mechanism for
dealing with crimes when national judiciary structures
have disappeared as a result of conflict. That is why it
is important to achieve the universality of the Rome
Statute.
In conclusion, it is important to reflect on the
progress achieved and on the challenges to come, in
order to consolidate a culture of respect for the
principles and standards of international humanitarian
law and to eradicate impunity. The resolution that we
adopted this morning is a significant step in that
direction.
I would like to conclude by saying that this
reflection should lead us to face and overcome the
entrenched political interests that often prevent full
compliance with the obligations that flow from
international law, prevent rapid and resolute action to
deal with
humanitarian crises
and prevent
accountability in the face of flagrant impunity. We can
begin to move towards this goal by ensuring prompt
follow-up to the recommendations contained in the
relevant reports of the Secretary-General and the
decisions adopted by the Security Council and other
United Nations organs, with a view to ensuring their
full implementation. When this does not occur, robust
measures should be adopted to guarantee international
peace, justice and security.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Minister for European and International
Affairs of Austria.
At the outset, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and all other speakers for their presentations.
The numerous challenges in the protection of civilians
highlighted today show the urgent need to intensify our
efforts. The protection of civilians is central to the
mandate of the United Nations and the mandates of its
peacekeeping missions. It is of the utmost importance
that Security Council mandates for the protection of
civilians are effectively implemented by missions on
the ground. This requires that the Council address the
protection of civilians in its daily work in a systematic
manner.

09-60204

S/PV.6216

Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Sweden on behalf of
the European Union. Let me just add a few additional
points.
All parties to armed conflict must strictly comply
with their obligations to protect civilians under
international law. This applies to all parties in any
conflict in the world, be it in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Darfur, Afghanistan or Gaza. Austria has
reaffirmed on several occasions its position that serious
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law need to be thoroughly investigated.
Accountability for serious crimes must be ensured by
taking concrete measures to promote the rule of law,
prevent future violations and seek sustainable peace,
justice, truth and reconciliation. This requires action at
the national and — where necessary — international
levels. The Security Council has an important role in
ending impunity.
Austria is also greatly concerned about the
detrimental effects of small arms and light weapons on
civilians. They prolong conflicts, they endanger
civilians and they undermine security, peace and
stability. Parties to armed conflict need to take all
required measures to protect civilian populations from
the effects of landmines and cluster munitions. Victims
require enhanced protection and assistance.
Persons with disabilities are particularly affected
by armed conflict and have so far not received
adequate attention. The United Nations system has to
address more effectively the protection and assistance
needs of this vulnerable group.
It is clear that the primary responsibility to
protect civilians rests with national Governments. This
is reaffirmed by the concept of the responsibility to
protect civilian populations from war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide. The Security Council,
as the United Nations organ with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, has an important role to play. The
focus must be on saving lives through timely and
decisive action taken at the national, regional and
international levels.
We look forward to continuing this important
debate on the protection of civilians, and I would like
to underscore Austria’s full commitment to working
with other Council members and all relevant
stakeholders to implement resolution 1894 (2009),

09-60204

adopted today, in order to ensure the protection of
those who are most vulnerable in situations of armed
conflict.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
I now invite the representative of Sweden to take
the floor.
Mr. Lidén (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro, Iceland, Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia align
themselves with this statement.
Let me first thank Austria for organizing this
debate, which marks the tenth anniversary of the
beginning of the Security Council’s work on the
protection of civilians. Let me also commend the
Secretary-General for his statement today and for his
leadership on this important issue. The European
Union welcomes resolution 1894 (2009), just adopted,
in particular its emphasis on clarifying the role of
peacekeeping missions in the protection of civilians.
In the past 10 years, the protection of civilians in
armed conflict has assumed a prominent place on the
Council’s agenda. This prominence has been manifest
in regular open debates and by increased inclusion of
the protection of civilians in country-specific
deliberations and decisions. However, the reality on the
ground has not kept pace, and lip service to principles
is no substitute for real action. The European Union
joins calls for much greater efforts to turn rhetoric into
reality.
The lack of compliance with international
humanitarian law and human rights law leads to the
death and injury of thousands of civilians every year
and to the displacement of many more. We must
enhance respect for these standards by all parties to
armed conflicts, with particular attention given to the
protection of civilians.
The Council needs to systematically promote
compliance with international law in situations on its
agenda, and also in situations not formally on its
agenda but with dramatic impact on the protection of
civilians. The Council should consider imposing
targeted and graduated measures against parties to
armed conflict that violate applicable international law.
Furthermore, we must enable relevant actors to engage

29

S/PV.6216

and seek compliance by all parties to conflict,
including non-State armed groups.

a special representative to lead concerted international
action against sexual violence.

Regrettably, in many conflicts, impunity prevails
due to the lack of political will and action. The culture
of impunity in many conflicts allows violations to
continue to be committed. Violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law must have
consequences for the perpetrators. All measures,
including strengthened national legislation, should be
used to prevent violence and to bring perpetrators of
serious violations to justice.

Humanitarian actors carry out life-saving
protection activities in all complex emergencies.
However, as highlighted by the Secretary-General,
humanitarian access to populations affected by conflict
is too often unsafe and impeded. Millions of vulnerable
people are deprived of assistance and protection as a
result.

The European Union calls for the ratification of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
and for full cooperation with the Court by all States.
We also welcome and support the steps to implement
the responsibility to protect set out in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (A/63/677), the subsequent General
Assembly debate and its adoption of resolution 63/308.
The concept of responsibility to protect has to be
integrated into our overall normative framework.
Peacekeeping operations continue to make
significant contributions to the safety and security of
civilians. The Expert Group and the aide-memoire on
the protection of civilians have further contributed to
systematic and consistent attention to the issue in their
mandates. The challenge now is to maximize the
impact by addressing the gaps between mandates,
interpretations and implementation capacity.
Mission-specific protection strategies need to be
developed on a systematic basis. The capacity and
resources provided need to be genuinely appropriate to
the task of protecting civilians. The provision of
information and reports to the Council needs to be
enhanced, and missions on the ground need clear and
practical guidance on implementing protection
mandates. The European Union looks forward to
engaging with the Secretariat and Member States, in
particular the main troop- and police-contributing
countries, on the development of these operational
guidelines as part of the next steps in the New Horizon
process.
The European Union calls for the implementation
of resolutions 1325 (2000), 1612 (2005), 1820 (2008),
1889 (2009) and 1888 (2009), mandating peacekeeping
missions and all other relevant actors to take effective
measures to protect women and girls, as well as boys
and men, from sexual violence in armed conflict. We
look forward to the Secretary-General’s appointment of

30

The most worrying constraint on access stems
from violence against humanitarian staff. There has
been an alarmingly sharp rise in attacks affecting
United Nations and other humanitarian actors this year.
United Nations humanitarian workers are for the first
time being targeted for political reasons. The European
Union strongly condemns all attacks against
humanitarian workers, including against locally
recruited personnel. These incidents will not disappear
without concerted action. It is critical to broaden the
understanding and acceptance of independent, neutral
and impartial humanitarian action.
The European Union joins the call by the
Secretary-General to seize the opportunity afforded by
this anniversary of the protection of civilians to turn
words into action. Let me reassure the Security Council
of the European Union’s continued commitment to and
active engagement in enhancing the protection of
civilians.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Italy.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you for taking the initiative of convening today’s
high-level debate on this important anniversary and for
your delegation’s important work in negotiating
resolution 1894 (2009) adopted earlier today. Italy was
glad to join the list of sponsors. I also wish to express
my appreciation to the Secretary-General for providing
us with a complete picture of the progress achieved and
of ongoing concerns in the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts.
Italy fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Sweden on behalf of
the European Union. I will now touch on some points
of particular interest to my country.
Ending sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict is a key element of the protection of civilians
agenda. The Security Council has shown great

09-60204

S/PV.6216

leadership in this regard in the last year and a half,
starting with the adoption of landmark resolution 1820
(2008), which stated once and for all that sexual
violence, when used as a tactic of war, is a matter of
peace and security and therefore the business of the
Security Council. Resolution 1888 (2009), adopted in
September, is another important step forward, as it
provides the Council with effective new tools designed
to end impunity and to hold accountable the
perpetrators of these heinous crimes. It is now up to the
Council to use these tools and to implement these
resolutions in full and without delay. In this respect,
the Secretary-General’s early appointment of a special
representative for women, peace and security will
provide much-needed leadership, coordination and
advocacy in this field.
Turning now to peacekeeping, the protection of
civilians by United Nations Blue Helmets requires, in
our opinion, three elements. First, it needs guidelines,
by which I mean the instructions and principles that
should inform peacekeeper actions on the ground when
civilian lives are at risk. In this respect, we encourage
the Secretariat’s efforts to craft a policy over the next
few months that is shared by Member States.
Secondly, training should be standardized and
based on the aforementioned guidelines. It should
address the ability to manage crisis situations that pose
a threat to the lives of civilians, particularly women
and children. Italy is cooperating with the Secretariat
in this area through its Centres of Excellence. In this
spirit, it has helped to finance some Police Division
projects.
Thirdly, equipment is essential. Guidelines and
training should be accompanied by resources that
enable peacekeepers to protect civilians effectively and
securely.
I would also like to recall Italy’s commitment to
combating impunity for international crimes. In
situations where any civilian population is the target of
attacks, the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court provides the legal basis for holding accountable
those responsible for the attacks if a State is unwilling
or unable to do so. In this regard, we must reiterate our
commitment to ending impunity.

09-60204

International criminal jurisdiction should thus be
increasingly viewed as a complementary instrument in
the repression of international crimes. It is the States,
by adapting their laws and jurisdictions, that should be
the first to respond to serious breaches of law, such as
war crimes and crimes against humanity, committed in
their territories. At the same time, it is up to States —
in collaboration with the International Committee of
the Red Cross and other competent institutions on this
issue — to raise awareness of the basic principles and
the importance of international humanitarian law,
especially in armed forces.
Allow me to conclude, on a more general note, by
recalling the reaffirmation in resolution 1674 (2006) of
the principle of the responsibility to protect, which is a
cardinal achievement of the United Nations. I also
welcome the reference to that principle made in
resolution 1894 (2009), adopted by the Council today.
That principle implies that sovereignty brings special
responsibilities. Governments must protect their own
populations, and the best way for them to do so is to
promote human rights, the rule of law and democratic
governance.
Only when a Government manifestly fails to do
so should the international community intervene. The
responsibility to protect should not be perceived in a
confrontational manner; it should be seen, instead, as
an instrument available to the international community
to overcome crises, provided that the conditions
referred to in paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005
World Summit Outcome Document (General Assembly
resolution 60/1) are met. In that context, we welcome
the debate that took place in the General Assembly in
July on the report of the Secretary-General (A/63/677).
We look forward to the follow-up during the current
session.
The President: There are still a considerable
number of speakers remaining on my list for this
meeting. In view of the lateness of the hour, I intend,
with the concurrence of the members of the Council, to
suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.05 p.m.

31
