UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1997/759
30 September 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 30 SEPTEMBER 1997 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the fourth report received from the Chairman of
the International Monitoring Committee established pursuant to the mandate of
the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements
(MISAB), as requested by the Security Council in its resolution 1125 (1997) of
6 August 1997. I should be grateful if you would bring the letter and its
enclosure to the attention of the members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

97-25701 (E)

300997

300997

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1997/759
English
Page 2

Annex
[Original:

French]

Fourth report to the Security Council pursuant to
resolution 1125 (1997) concerning the situation
in the Central African Republic
(29 September 1997)

INTRODUCTION
1.
On 6 August 1997, the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution
1125 (1997), in which it approved the continued conduct by Member States
participating in the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the
Bangui Agreements (MISAB) of the operation to achieve its objective to
facilitate the return to peace and security by monitoring the implementation of
the Bangui Agreements. Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Council authorized the Member States participating in MISAB and
those States providing logistical support to ensure the security and freedom of
movement of their personnel. It decided that that authorization would be
limited to an initial period of three months, after which the Council would
assess the situation on the basis of the reports submitted to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations at least every two weeks by the Member States
participating in MISAB.
2.
This is the fourth report which the Security Council requested the Member
States participating in MISAB to provide pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution
1125 (1997). It was prepared by the International Monitoring Committee to
supervise the implementation of the Bangui Agreements, which includes the
representatives of the States members of the International Mediation Committee
(Gabon, Burkina Faso, Chad and Mali) and a consultant from the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), in collaboration with the MISAB Command, which
consists of high-ranking officers representing all of the Member States
participating in MISAB, including Senegal and Togo.
3.
This report describes developments in the situation in the Central African
Republic from 17 September to 1 October 1997.

POLITICAL LEADERSHIP
4.
Both the International Monitoring Committee to supervise the implementation
of the Bangui Agreements and the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements are under the political authority of
General Amadou Toumani Touré, former President of the Republic of Mali, Chairman
of the International Monitoring Committee and personal representative of the
heads of State concerned.
5.
The International Monitoring Committee to supervise the implementation of
the Bangui Agreements, chaired by General Touré, includes one representative of
/...

S/1997/759
English
Page 3

each of the four heads of State of the members of the International Mediation
Committee, as well as the consultant from UNDP, who acts as a diplomatic adviser
to the Committee.
6.
Thus, the International Monitoring Committee is the body which directs the
actions of MISAB, since it receives the necessary political guidance directly
from the heads of State concerned, and especially from the President of the
Gabonese Republic, who is Chairman of the International Mediation Committee.
7.
The International Monitoring Committee has adopted a plan of action which
reflects the gist of the main provisions of the Bangui Agreements in the form of
a timetable, which can be outlined as follows:
-

Formation of a government of national union;

-

Adoption of an amnesty act covering those who committed offences in
the context of the third rebellion;

-

Disarmament (surrender of weapons by the former rebels in honour and
dignity, and recovery of weapons by MISAB from militias and civilian
populations);

-

Implementation of the recommendations of the General Meeting on
National Defence;

-

Situation of former heads of State;

-

Suspension of the parliamentary audit;

-

Final phase of national reconciliation through a number of actions
aimed at consolidating peace and security (organization of regional
and sectoral awareness-raising seminars, organization of a National
Reconciliation Conference, elaboration of an electoral code, access by
political parties to the State media and other measures).

8.
MISAB is under the patronage of President El Hadj Omar Bongo of Gabon,
senior head of State of the International Mediation Committee. It is under the
political authority of General Amadou Toumani Touré, Chairman of the
International Monitoring Committee.
9.
From 17 September to 1 October 1997 the International Monitoring Committee
continued its work pursuant to its mandate.
Government of national union
10. It should be recalled that on 1 September 1997 the Government of Action in
Defence of Democracy was re-established in its original form, as constituted
prior to 6 May 1997, following four months of crisis. Thus the Government of
Action in Defence of Democracy in its entirety resumed its normal activities on
2 September 1997.

/...

S/1997/759
English
Page 4

11. The formal opening of the project to rebuild a number of major national
highways which had fallen into serious disrepair for want of regular maintenance
provided an opportunity for the President of the Republic and head of State to
be seen publicly not only with the Government of Action in Defence of Democracy
but also with the President of the National Assembly, former
President David Dacko, the heads of several institutions, the diplomatic corps,
the International Monitoring Committee, a delegation from the MISAB Command,
leaders from several political parties and a sizeable crowd. This ceremony,
which took place in an outlying area of Bangui, was the first of its type since
the onset of the crisis in April 1996. In the view of many observers of the
political scene in the Central African Republic, the presence of President
Patassé at the ceremony was an obvious indication that tensions are gradually
relaxing and thus that the process of national reconciliation is beginning,
although the absence of certain leaders of the radical opposition was noted. In
fact, the head of State had not taken part in any public events since the first
rebellion broke out in April 1996.
Implementation of the amnesty act covering offences relating to the third
rebellion and the misappropriation of public funds under investigation
12. The amnesty act, which was promulgated on 15 March 1997, is currently being
implemented with a great deal of pragmatism and understanding. It is not being
implemented blindly as regards the sanctions to be taken against citizens who
may be illegally in possession of weapons following the 15-day deadline
established by the law. The head of State and the relevant political
authorities have thus far shown a sense of responsibility and level-headedness
and have taken into account the exceptional political situation in which this
law should be applied in all its aspects.
13. This pragmatism has enabled the International Monitoring Committee to
negotiate with the former rebels and to persuade them to hand over their weapons
with honour and dignity. It is in that same context that
Lieutenant-Colonel Evariste Martial Konzzale, Minister to the Office of the
Minister for Territorial Administration, who is responsible for public security
and disarmament, has, as head of a technical commission consisting of,
inter alia, 10 resource persons (deputies, area heads, former rebels) paid by
UNDP, with the participation of the International Monitoring Committee and
MISAB, been conducting an awareness-raising and weapons recovery campaign among
the civilian population since 12 August 1997.
Disarmament
14. This is, without a doubt, the most sensitive phase of the national
reconciliation process. Two major phases are envisaged which will make it
possible to carry out this operation effectively:
(a)

The awareness-raising and voluntary participation phase;

(b)

The investigation, intervention and implementation-of-the-law phase.

15. The voluntary participation phase is the preliminary period which will end
on 30 September 1997 as stipulated in the ministerial order of 5 September 1997.
/...

S/1997/759
English
Page 5

Its purpose is to raise the awareness of the Central African people by a
campaign conducted on the radio, television and in the written press and also by
putting up banners and posters bearing slogans supporting peace, national unity,
national reconciliation and disarmament in the main streets of Bangui. Any
patriotic citizens who turned in their weapons of their own accord would be
rewarded for doing so, in order to encourage all the other ones to return any
weapons they might have in their possession. It should be pointed out here that
this is in no way a weapons buy-back operation.
16. After recovery of the weapons of the former rebels, the second phase of
disarmament will involve collecting weapons from civilians, militias and illegal
holders of weapons. For this purpose the International Monitoring Committee, in
agreement with the Government of the Central African Republic, has recruited 10
resource staff (deputies, neighbourhood leaders, former rebels, opinion leaders)
as chairmen of local disarmament committees in their respective zones. This
staff, following deployment to districts, established disarmament committees in
each neighbourhood. Their role is to inform the local population through
neighbourhood meetings, rallies, talks, discussions and small gatherings and
neighbourhood visits, so as to convince the population of the need to turn in
illegally held weapons.
17. UNDP has established funding in the amount of 40,000 United States dollars
for the 10 resource staff, dignitaries, neighbourhood leaders and opinion
leaders. People voluntarily turning in weapons or helping in their collection
will receive a token reward. The reward, in the amount of 2,500 to 5,000 CFA
francs ($5 to $10) according to the type of weapon, is intended primarily to
exonerate civilians turning in weapons. There are special terms for heavy
weapons: CFAF 15,000 to CFAF 75,000 ($30 to $150), depending on the type of
weapon. With effect from 1 October 1997, anyone with weapons in their
possession will be the target of legal action and the authorities will make use
of the police and constabulary as needed. MISAB will be prepared to deal with
the situation, should matters get out of hand.
18. The investigations, intervention and implementation-of-the-law phase will
begin immediately following the first one. It will involve collaborating with
informers compensated according to the quality of their information. This will
make it possible to locate any weapons caches. During this second period anyone
found to be illegally in possession of a weapon will be handed over to the
authorities. In addition, MISAB will conduct searches, together with the
national defence and security forces other than the presidential security force.
19. The awareness-raising campaign of the Technical Commission on Disarmament,
headed by Lieutenant-Colonel Konzzale, was started on 12 August 1997 and is
continuing in the various areas of Bangui and at the level of the various
religious groups, as well as on radio and television.
20. The involvement of religious groups in the campaign to promote awareness of
national reconciliation in general and of disarmament in particular is extremely
valuable in a country where religions exert a major influence on the people. No
tensions exist in the Central African Republic between the various faiths
practised by the population. Protestants of all denominations, Roman Catholics,
Muslims and animists have peacefully coexisted for decades. This was borne out
/...

S/1997/759
English
Page 6

on 28 September when an ecumenical day was organized by leaders of all religions
and their congregations united in a single faith: the conviction that they were
making an effective contribution to the restoration of peace by fostering a
collective awareness among all those still in illegal possession of weapons that
would lead them to cooperate with the neighbourhood disarmament units. This day
led to the holding of a major worship service in the National Assembly gardens
sponsored by the head of State and with the participation of many political
figures from both the majority party and the opposition.
21. On Friday, 26 September 1997, Minister Konzzale and his counterpart for
human rights, national reconciliation and the promotion of democratic culture,
Mr. Laurent Gomina-Pampali, held a working meeting in a hall of the National
Assembly in which members of the International Monitoring Committee and leaders
from political parties of every persuasion participated. The meeting assessed
the progress made in the area of disarmament and thus of national
reconciliation. While all the participants welcomed the progress achieved thus
far in recovering weapons taken from the State arsenal during the rebellion,
some concern was expressed from different sides at the proliferation of military
weapons that appeared to have been brought in illegally by certain political
groups. This allegation has yet to be verified. In the interest of all
parties, the Technical Commission on Disarmament will take all appropriate and
necessary steps to locate and recover these weapons, if any are still in
circulation after 30 September 1997.
22. After this meeting, it was decided to observe a national day of disarmament
and peace on 30 September, during which prayers would be said in all churches
and mosques in the Central African Republic. All political parties agreed to
sign and issue a joint appeal to the people of the Central African Republic on
30 September, calling upon them to commit themselves firmly to the way of peace
and national reconciliation and to turn in any weapons held illegally.
23. At the invitation of the International Monitoring Committee,
Captain Anicet Saulet, who has primary responsibility for the former rebels,
joined the chairmen of the neighbourhood disarmament committees, including
Lieutenant Parfait Mbay (former spokesman for the former rebels) in making a
final appeal on radio and television on 26, 27 and 28 September 1997 to those
civilians and military personnel who had not yet turned in weapons that were in
their possession illegally.
24. All these initiatives show the extent to which the overwhelming majority of
Central African citizens, including the former rebels, are in favour of peace
and national reconciliation.
25. Since the signing of the Truce Agreement on 28 June 1997 and the Ceasefire
Agreement on 2 July 1997, the following weapons have been turned over to MISAB:

/...

S/1997/759
English
Page 7

Heavy weapons

Designation

Quantity

Increase
(17-29 September 1997)

120 mm mortars

surrendered:

2 out of a total of 4

2

81 mm mortars

surrendered:

9 out of a total of 15

3

60 mm mortars

surrendered:

12 out of a total of 19

1

14.5 mm machine-guns

surrendered:

6 out of a total of 6

12.7 mm machine-guns

surrendered:

2 out of a total of 3

75 mm recoilless
guns

surrendered:

2 out of a total of 2

73 mm anti-tank
rocket launchers

surrendered:

66 out of a total of 67

2

Rocket-propelled
grenades

surrendered:

7 out of a total of 11

1

Total

surrendered:

106 out of a total of 127

9

(weapons recovered:

83.46 per cent)

7.09 per cent

Light weapons

Designation

Quantity

Increase
(17-29 September 1997)

Hand-guns (misc)

surrendered:

11 out of a total of 111

4

Submachine-guns

surrendered:

281 out of a total of 459

60

Assault rifles

surrendered:

241 out of a total of 541

43

MAS 36-49/56-M14
rifles + muskets

surrendered:

608 out of a total of 1,181

119

Light machineguns

surrendered:

51 out of a total of 80

.30-calibre
machine-guns

surrendered:

13 out of a total of 17

surrendered:

1,205 out of a total of 2,389

Total

(weapons recovered:

50.43 per cent)

4

230
9.62 per cent

/...

S/1997/759
English
Page 8

26. The relatively low rate of recovery of light weapons can be explained as
follows:
(a) These are light personal weapons that are easily transported and have
probably been taken out of Bangui;
(b) Some of these weapons were probably buried: efforts to dig them up
are continuing as information is provided, with varying degrees of success;
(c) Others, particularly hand-guns (automatic pistols), are easily
camouflaged and may have been sold to as yet unidentified persons;
(d) Still others may have been taken from the State arsenal during the
second rebellion (May 1996) and were never returned before the outbreak of the
third rebellion;
(e) An indeterminate number of light weapons that have not been recovered
may have been thrown into the Ubangi River or into the forest by former rebels
fleeing in June 1997 after encounters with MISAB;
(f) Some former rebels, equal in number to a company (132 men) and all
armed with light weapons, never returned to their barracks. According to
knowledgeable sources, many of these may have left the Central African Republic
taking their weapons with them.
27. The recovery of light weapons is thus slow, despite intensive efforts by
the neighbourhood disarmament units and the active collaboration of many upright
citizens.
28. A sizeable quantity of munitions of various types was recovered and
packaged. The status of these munitions as at 29 September 1997 is set out
below:

/...

S/1997/759
English
Page 9

Designation

Quantity

5.56 mm rounds

68 616

7.5 mm SLC rounds

14 000

7.5 mm S/B rounds

104 895

7.5 mm X rounds

34 000

Remarks
+ 466

+ 17 625

7.5 mm X S/B rounds

135

7.62 mm rounds, NATO

15 962

7.62 mm Kalashnikov rounds

13 862

+ 13 862

7.62 mm long rounds

120 497

+ 2 856

7.62 mm Tokarev rounds
9 mm Para rounds

900
3 434

+ 2 084

.12-calibre riot control rounds

711

12.7 mm rounds

271

+ 271

14.5 mm rounds

14 192

+ 292

37 fragmentation hand grenades

1 750

+ 137

Fragmentation hand grenades, China

2 670

+ 646

GR FLG AP34

3

RPG 7 rockets

440

+ 86

37 stun hand grenades

1 004

+ 25

FL LAC F4 hand grenades

1 282

+ 57

F4 hand grenades
DFRUSS

316
1

60 mm mortars

1 705

+ 81

81 mm mortars

667

+ 34

120 mm mortars

57

+ 5

75 mm recoilless rifle rounds, US

166

75 mm recoilless rifle rounds, China

223

No weapons in inventory

M79 40 mm rounds, US

6 060

No weapons in inventory

Time fuses (inactive)

23 252 325

7.5 mm grenade cartridges

755

A significant quantity of miscellaneous munitions, handed over loose, not
suitable for firing, will be destroyed by the competent weapons and munitions
units. An analysis will be made available in due course.
Recommendations from the General Meeting on National Defence
29. It appears that quite a few of the claims made by the former rebels could
be answered by responsible implementation of the 282 recommendations made at the
General Meeting on National Defence which was held in August 1996 at Bangui.
/...

S/1997/759
English
Page 10

That is why the International Monitoring Committee, true to the spirit of the
Bangui Agreements, proceeded, in April 1997, to set up an ad hoc committee to
examine the said recommendations carefully and to set up a schedule for their
implementation, breaking them down into categories according to what could be
applicable in the short-, medium- and long-term based on the sensitivity of the
areas to which the recommendations relate and, above all, the financial
resources that would have to be mobilized. The results of the work of the
ad hoc committee, which was presided over by a leader of the opposition,
General Timothée Malendoma, a former prime minister, have already been
transmitted by the International Monitoring Committee to the Ministry of Defence
for implementation at the various relevant levels. Since the International
Monitoring Committee is merely a mediating body, it must leave the decisions on
these matters to the relevant Central African authorities, while remaining ready
to serve as arbitrator should the need arise.
Situation of former heads of State
30. A revised bill has just been prepared by the Government for submission to
the National Assembly at its next session, which will be held in October.
Assurances in this regard were provided to the International Monitoring
Committee by the expanded bureau of the National Assembly at the meeting on
4 September 1997.
Suspension of the parliamentary audit
31. The Bangui Agreements call for the suspension, then the abandonment "of the
judicial enforcement of the parliamentary audit" opened in respect of persons
presumed to have misappropriated public funds under the previous regime, for it
was understood that the audit had been conducted in a very selective manner and
was creating more problems than it was resolving. The International Monitoring
Committee, respecting the spirit of the Bangui Agreements, proposed that the
Central African Republic should, by a legislative act, formally renounce
proceedings against authors of offences identified by the parliamentary audit.
It was generally agreed that such an act would undoubtedly be taken in the
context of the next session of the National Assembly.
National reconciliation
32. Each of the points mentioned above constitutes as many phases on the road
leading towards national reconciliation. The present section therefore concerns
the final phase of this exciting process.
33. The International Monitoring Committee, supported by UNDP, is already
engaged in making preparations for awareness-raising seminars, symposia and
meetings; the first phase will take place at the provincial level and be
targeted at specific groups (such as trade unions, women's organizations and
youth movements), and the second phase will take place nationally, in the form
of a national reconciliation conference, as recommended by the Bangui
Agreements. For this purpose, the Committee is working in close cooperation
with the Minister for Human Rights, National Reconciliation and Promotion of a
Democratic Culture, who chairs the technical commission on awareness-raising
under the patronage of the Prime Minister. At the most recent weekly meeting,
/...

S/1997/759
English
Page 11

held on 27 August 1997, the participants appraised the cost of each of the
activities in question and targeted potential sources of funding. In this
regard, the Central African Government, the International Monitoring Committee
and UNDP are determined to involve the backers closely in the activities
scheduled to be carried out under the process of national reconciliation.
34. A timetable of activities covering the period 1 October to 1 December 1997
(the national holiday of the Central African Republic) has been prepared jointly
by the Minister for National Reconciliation, the UNDP Resident Representative
and the International Monitoring Committee. This will be useful in coordinating
the many activities to be carried out in this last phase of the process that
began with the signing of the Bangui Agreements.
35. In the context of the restructuring of the Central African Armed Forces,
the International Monitoring Committee had requested UNDP to set up a fund to
assist military personnel wishing to leave active service in returning to
civilian life, and UNDP had agreed to do so. UNDP launched a project on
demobilization, retraining and reintegration for the Central African Armed
Forces, which would make it possible to reduce the cost of operating the armed
forces and facilitate their restructuring. All Member States and international
organizations may make contributions to the fund in question, which will
initially be for an amount of approximately $2 million.
36. A first estimate indicates that 1,000 or more soldiers will be involved in
this project. UNDP has proposed Mr. Gustave Fernando González Gasques as head
of the project. Of Argentine nationality, he has solid experience in the area
of demobilization and reintegration of former soldiers into civilian life. He
has managed this type of activity in Nicaragua, Mozambique, Liberia and Angola.
His candidature has been accepted by the Central African Government. The UNDP
Resident Representative in Bangui is awaiting the arrival of the project head to
launch the operational phase.

COOPERATION WITH THE CENTRAL AFRICAN AUTHORITIES AND
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
37. Pursuant to its mandate, the International Monitoring Committee maintains
constant contact with the various Central African authorities to ensure the
implementation of the provisions of the Bangui Agreements. In this connection,
it is regularly consulted both by the President of the Republic and head of
State and by the Prime Minister and head of Government, as well as by the
National Assembly, on a considerable number of issues concerning the life of the
Central African nation.
38. The International Monitoring Committee, acting on behalf of MISAB and/or on
its own behalf, maintains regular contacts with international organizations,
including UNDP and foreign diplomatic missions based in Bangui, with a view to
requesting their diplomatic, financial and material support for mediation
initiatives in the Central African Republic.
39. In the period covered by this report, the International Monitoring
Committee was received by the President of the Republic to discuss, among other
/...

S/1997/759
English
Page 12

things, issues relating to the recovery of weapons in circulation among the
civilian population and various measures relating to the clandestine
infiltration of a number of partisans of the late President Mobutu, who made no
secret of their intention to join forces to destabilize the new regime of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. President Patassé informed the International
Monitoring Committee and MISAB that, under the policy of good-neighbourliness he
had always practised towards his sister country, he would not allow his country
to become a base of operations for opponents engaged in a policy of
destabilization.

LOGISTICAL AND TECHNICAL SUPPORT TO THE INTERNATIONAL
MONITORING COMMITTEE
40. Project CAF/97/001, through which UNDP contributes its logistical and
technical support, was to be terminated at the end of September 1997 for lack of
funds. In a letter dated 4 September 1997 addressed to the Chairman of the
International Monitoring Committee, the Resident Representative of UNDP in
Bangui drew attention to this situation, but noted that Ambassador
René-Valéry Mongbé and the consultant Abel Balenguele, whose contracts expire on
31 October, could continue their mission until that date. In another letter,
dated 23 September 1997, the UNDP Resident Representative in Bangui notified the
Chairman of the International Monitoring Committee that his agency was willing
to maintain its logistical and technical support to the Committee with a reduced
staff, so that it could carry out its mission.
41. The new measures taken by UNDP would certainly allow the Committee to
continue to function, but this will apparently not be sufficient to solve the
many political problems that would arise with mediation, given that the
Committee will enter a new phase in the implementation of its action plan in the
first few days of October:
-

Consideration of the situation of former heads of State;

-

Abandonment of the judicial enforcement of the parliamentary audit;

-

Coordination of activities relating to the organization and conduct of
various seminars and conferences provided for in the context of
national reconciliation;

-

Solving of problems arising in the execution of the project on
demobilization, retraining and reintegration for the Central African
Armed Forces.

In any case, it is difficult to see how the mediation effort, and thus the rest
of the process, can continue without a mediator.
42. The sending of one or two civilian and/or military officials to Bangui to
seek clarifications that may be requested by the Security Council seems an
interesting idea, but it deserves to be more carefully studied. Perhaps a
military liaison officer could be sent to the field to study, in collaboration
with the International Monitoring Committee and MISAB, the ways in which the
/...

S/1997/759
English
Page 13

international community could help set up an international observer force and
strengthen the mandated force of MISAB so as to ensure the peaceful conduct of
the forthcoming elections. The idea of sending a person to deal with political
matters is not necessary, since the UNDP consultant, Ambassador Mongbé, using
his considerable knowledge of the field, is playing that role to the
satisfaction of all the parties concerned. For the moment, the crisis situation
has not worsened. On the contrary, the International Monitoring Committee, with
which Ambassador Mongbé is closely associated, has entered the final phase of
national reconciliation with a well-targeted programme. The International
Monitoring Committee is ready to provide, impartially and neutrally, any
information or clarification which the United Nations Security Council or
Secretariat may request.

DEPLOYMENT OF THE FORCE
43. It should be recalled that, at the request of the mediator,
General Amadou Toumani Touré, and with the agreement of the Conference on
Consensus-Building and Dialogue, held in Bangui from 11 to 16 January 1997, the
heads of State of Gabon, Burkina Faso, Mali and Chad decided to send an
inter-African force with logistical support from France. This force, known as
the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui
Agreements, includes, in addition to troops from Gabon, Burkina Faso, Mali and
Chad (the countries members of the International Mediation Committee), troops
from Senegal and Togo, as a result of the decision of President Abdou Diouf and
President Gnassingbé Eyadema to contribute to this gesture of African
solidarity.
44. The activities of MISAB are governed by the mandate assigned to it by the
heads of State concerned (see S/1997/561). These daily activities are many and
complex, and can be summed up as actions aimed at preventing confrontation
between the two main forces in question, the loyalists of the Central African
Armed Forces and the former rebels.
45. MISAB, which is deployed throughout the city of Bangui, is ensuring
security in all neighbourhoods of the Central African capital by occupying 20
surveillance posts, and is carrying out patrols nightly in each of the city's
eight districts.
46. The MISAB force currently consists of six contingents with a strength of
796 soldiers (officers, non-commissioned officers and other ranks), distributed
as follows:
Burkina Faso

114

Chad

147

Gabon

149

Mali

113

Senegal

153

Togo

120
/...

S/1997/759
English
Page 14

The force is provided with a French logistical support command unit, with
88 men. A French liaison and assistance detachment, with 39 men, has been made
available to MISAB.
47. Owing to the development of organized crime, with the passive or active
complicity of the former rebels, the activities of MISAB have been extended,
with the agreement of the parties concerned, to operations to maintain security
in the various neighbourhoods. Since the signing of the Ceasefire Agreement on
2 July 1997, MISAB has participated, on the basis of a consensus, in joint
security patrols with approximately 120 men, consisting of MISAB personnel and
Central African security and defence forces in all districts of Bangui.
48. Apart from the security patrols which have brought peace and quiet to
Bangui, MISAB is the only force to receive requests for assistance from all
neighbourhoods in the city. During the period from 17 to 29 September 1997
these included:
Humanitarian assistance
7 medical evacuations for various injuries;
8 medical evacuations during the night for childbirth;
2 medical evacuations for various illnesses.
Responses to night-time calls relating to assaults
3 cases involving threats;
5 cases of assault or appeals for help;
2 cases of armed robbery;
6 cases of various types of theft.
49. In the daytime, it is also MISAB that provides security and escorts for
convoys to supply fuel, a strategic product to be delivered to all the stations
of PETROCA, the national petroleum products distribution company, from the
Kolongo fuel depot, which is located in an area previously controlled by the
former rebels. MISAB was deployed to complement the actions of the various
security services, which had been weakened by the rebellion.
Reports of incidents
50. During the fortnight from 17 to 29 September 1997, MISAB security
activities resulted in the following:

/...

S/1997/759
English
Page 15

1 murder;
3 violent physical attacks resulting in injury;
4 robberies (cash, various articles and items of equipment).
The perpetrators of these offences were apprehended and turned over to the
Gendarmerie Nationale Centrafricaine, which conducted investigations and filed
reports. It should be noted that the crime rate in Bangui and the surrounding
area has continued to fall. There has been a distinct improvement in the
security situation. There has been a considerable relaxation of tension, and
Bangui is looking more and more like a peaceful city. Economic and cultural
life and organized sports are resuming, as are international contacts.

LOGISTICAL SUPPORT TO THE MISSION
51.

MISAB receives logistical support from the following sources:

(a) Each of the participating States with troops in Bangui provides its
personnel (officers, non-commissioned officers and other ranks) with their
regular pay and supplies them with weapons;
(b) France, which signed the Bangui Agreements as an observer, has agreed
to provide logistical support to the various contingents as follows:
-

Payment of the soldiers' total food allowance and daily subsistence
allowance at the rates currently applicable to Central African
military personnel;

-

Payment of rents for the buildings used by military personnel and the
MISAB Command;

-

Provision of tactical and support vehicles for the force;

-

Supply of fuel and vehicle maintenance;

-

Supply of office equipment.

An overall evaluation of the cost of deploying MISAB in Bangui cannot be
conducted until the end of the mission. However, taking all expenses into
account, the cost of the logistical support provided to MISAB by France amounts
to some CFAF 350 million a month, or approximately $600,000;
(c) The Government of the Central African Republic is supplying vehicles
for use by command personnel;
(d) The Organization of African Unity (OAU) made a special grant in the
amount of $40,000 in March 1997 to assist the various contingents. A second
special grant of $60,000 has been made jointly to the International Monitoring
Committee and MISAB.

/...

S/1997/759
English
Page 16

52. In the course of the various operations conducted by MISAB, and
particularly during the confrontations of 22 and 23 March and 20 to 26 June, the
force suffered the following losses: 6 dead (3 Chadian soldiers, 2 Gabonese
soldiers and 1 Senegalese soldier) and 20 wounded (13 Chadian soldiers, 5
Senegalese soldiers, 1 Malian soldier and 1 Gabonese soldier).

CONCLUSIONS
53. The current experience with the Central African crisis is unique and is all
the more stimulating in that it is unlike any previous experience. However,
there is a risk that this progress may be jeopardized in view of the social
problems associated with the payment of outstanding back wages, pensions and
scholarships.
54. It is fortunate that UNDP has been understanding enough to maintain its
logistical and technical support for the International Monitoring Committee so
that it may continue to fulfil its mission. The Committee pays tribute to UNDP
for its willingness to cooperate, without which the current experience would
have been only an illusion.
55. It is strongly recommended that the mandate of the Inter-African Mission to
Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements be extended (even if it must
be modified eventually) in order to continue to ensure security and consolidate
peace until the elections are held in 1998.
56. It must be pointed out that, owing to the insufficiency of the African
countries' own resources, logistical support from the international community,
along the lines of the support which France has provided to MISAB and which
remains open to contributions from all other States, is still needed.
57. The International Monitoring Committee and MISAB welcome the understanding
of this issue expressed by the Security Council after its consideration of the
first three reports. They hope that the appeal made to the international
community by the President of the Council will be met with action.
58. It is fitting to mention here the ways in which life in Bangui and the rest
of the country has returned to normal (or nearly so):
Virtually all government offices have resumed operations as a result
of the newly restored peace and the recent efforts by the Government
to pay them a month's wages; even if wages continue to be paid
monthly, the Government is not yet in a position to solve the
sensitive issue of back pay;
Hotels, restaurants, refreshment stalls and bars, night clubs and
dance halls have reopened;
Schools and universities ended the academic year under satisfactory
circumstances: even examinations went forward as usual;
Almost all businesses have reopened;
/...

S/1997/759
English
Page 17

Markets have resumed their normal operations;
Public transport is working and traffic is once again heavy in
commercial areas and the surrounding neighbourhoods;
Airlines (Air Afrique, Air France and Air Gabon in particular) have
resumed regular service to Bangui;
Lastly, the free movement of persons and goods from place to place
within the capital, which had been a divided city since the third
rebellion, has become a reality.
59. Bangui has entered a new era with determination, an era marked by a gradual
rebuilding of confidence and the resumption of activities in numerous spheres,
which is a sign that peace has been restored. That peace must now be
consolidated.

-----
