General A11embly-Ei1hteenth Sea1ion

2. Invites the International Atomic Energy Agency,
the specialized agencies, international and national nongovernmental scientific organizations and individual
scientists to continue to extend to the Scientific Committee the co-operation which it requires;
3. Recommends the Governments of Member States,
the International Atomic Energy Agency, the specialized agencies, and international and national nongovernmental scientific organizations to take appropriate action to carry out, with the means at their
command, information programmes on the effects of
atomic radiation;
4. Urges the World Meteorological Organization to
proceed with the implementation of the scheme for
monitoring and reporting levels of atmospheric radioactivity, taking into account the recommendations made
by the Scientific Committee at its twelfth session ;
5. Requests the Scientific Committee to continue its
programme and its co-ordinating activities to increase
the knowledge of the levels and effects of atomic radiation from all sources ;
6. Notes the intention of the Scientific Committee
to submit to the General Assembly at its nineteenth
session a further report on the results of its work.
1256th plenary meeting,
11 November 1963.

1912 (XVlll). Report of the Comml11loner■
General of the United Nation, Relief and
Work, Agency for Palel'line Refugee• in the
Near Ea1t
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 194 (III) of 11 December
1948, 302 (IV) of 8 December 1949, 393 (V)
and 394 (V) of 2 and 14 December 1950, 512 (VI)
and 513 (VI) of 26 January 1952. 614 (VII) of
6 November 1952, 720 (VIII) of 27 November 1953,
818 (IX) of 4 December 1954, 916 (X) of 3 December
1955, 1018 (XI) of 28 February 1957, 1191 (XII)
of 12 December 1957, 1315 (XIII) of 12 December
1958, 1456 (XIV) of 9 December 1959, 1604 (XV)
of 21 April 1961, 1725 (XVI) of 20 December 1961
and 1856 (XVII) of 20 December 1962,
Noting the annual report of the CommissionerGeneral of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, cover·ing the period from 1 July 1962 to 30 June 1963,'
Noting with deep regret that the repatriation or compensation of the refugees as provided for in paragraph 11 of resolution 194 (III) has not been effected,
that no substantial /regress has been made in the
programme endorse in paragraph 2 of resolution
S13 (VI) for the reintegration of refugees either by
repatriation or resettlement and that, therefore, the
situation of the refugees continues to be a matter of
serious concern,
1. Expresses its sincere appreciation to Dr. John H.
Davis, on the occasion of his resignation as Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, for
his efficient administration of the Agency during the
past five years and for his dedicated servke to the
welfare of the refugees ;
2. Expresses its thanks to the staff of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refu•Jbid., Eight,mth Smitm, Supplnnfflt No. 13 (A/5S13).

gees in the Near East for their continued faithful
efforts to provide essential services for the Palestine
refugees, and to the specialized agencies and private
organizations for their valuable work in assisting the
refugees;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
staff and facilities that the United Nations Conciliation
Commission for Palestine may require in carrying out
its work;
4. Calls upon the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine to continue its efforts for the
implementation of paragraph 11 of resolution 194 (III) ;
5. Again directs attention to the precarious financial
position of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and urges
non-contributing Governments to contribute, and contributing Governments to consider increasing their
contributions, so that the Agency can carry out its
essential programmes.
1269th plenary meeting,
3 December 1963.

1978 (XVlll). The pollclea of apartheid of the
Govemment of the Republic of South
Africa

A
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Special Committee on the Policies of apartheid of the Government
of the Republic of South Africa,1
Recalling its resolutions 1761 (XVII) of 6 November
1962 and 1881 (XVIII) of 11 October 1963,
Taking note of the Security Council resolutions of
7 August1 and 4 December 1963,11
1. Appeals to all States to take appropriate measures
and intensify their efforts, separately and collectively,
with a view to dissuading the Government of the Republic of South Africa from pursuing its policies of
apartheid, and requests them, in particular, to implement
fully the Security Council resolution of 4 December
1963;
2. Noles with appreciation the reports of the Special
Committee on the Policies of apartheid of the Government of the Republic of South Africa, and requests
it to continue to follow constantly the various aspects
of this question and to submit reports to the General
Assembly and to the Security Council whenever
necessary;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to furnish the
Specia! Committee with all the necessary means for the
effective accomplishment of its task;
4. Invites the specialized agencies and all Member
States to give to the Special Committee their assistance
and co-operation in the fulfilment of its mandate.
1283rd plenary meeting,
16 December 1963.
B
The General Assembly,
Taking note of the report of the Special Committee
on the Policies of apartheid of the Government of the
Republic of South Africa, in which the Committee
drew attention to the serious hardship faced by the
II Offieial Rtcords of th, S,cvrit-y C011ncil, Eight,mth Y,a,,
S11ppln,wnt for Octob,.,-, N OVl?llbtr and Dtctmbtr l96J, document S/5471.

Re1oludon1 adopted on the reportl of the Special Polidcal Committee

families of persons persecuted by the Government of
South Africa for their opposition to the policies of
apartheid, and recommended that the international community, for humanitarian reasons, provide them with
relief and other assistance, 8
Considering that such assistance is consonant with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations,
Noting that those families continue to suffer serious
hardship,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to seek ways and
means of providing relief and assistance, through the
appropriate international agencies, to the families of
all persons persecuted by the Government of the Republic of South Africa for their opposition to the
policies of apartheid ;
2. Invites Member States and organizations to contribute generously to such relief and assistance;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its nineteenth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
1283rd plenary meeting,
16 December 1963.

1990 (XVIII). Question of the composition of
the General Committee of the General As. 1embly1 amendments to rules 31 and 38 of
the Asaembly's rules of procedure
The General Assembly,
Taking into account the considerable increase in the
membership of the United Nations,
Taking also into account that the General Committee
of the General Assembly should be so constituted as
to ensure its representative character on the basis of a
balanced geographical distribution among its members,
Believing that for those reasons it is desirable to
enlarge the composition of the General Committee,
Noting that the General Committee is composed of
the President of the General Assembly, the VicePresidents of the Assembly and the Chairmen of the
Main Committees,
1. Decides to amend rules 31 and 38 of its rules of
procedure as follows:
"Rule 31
"The General Assembly shall elect a President and
seventeen Vice-Presidents, who shall hold office until
the close of the session at which they are elected.
The Vice-Presidents shall be elected, after the election
of the Chairmen of the seven l\Iain Committees referred to in rule 101, on the basis of ensuring the
representative character of the General Committee."
"Rule 38
"The General Committee shall comprise the President of the General Assembly, who shall preside, the
seventeen Vice-Presidents and the Chairmen of the
seven Main Committees. No two members of the
General Committee shall be members of the same
delegation, and it shall be so constituted as to ensure
its representative character. Chairmen of other committees upon which all Members have the right to
be represented and which are established by the
General Assembly to meet during the session sh:ill
be entitled to attend meetings of the General Com-

e Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighteenth SessioJl, Annexes, agenda item 30, document A/5497, para. 513.

21

mittee and may participate without vote in the discussions."
2. Decides that the President of the General Assembly, the seventeen Vice-Presidents of the Assembly
and the seven Chairmen of the Main Committees shall
be elected as provided in the annex to the present
resolution;
3. Decides to cancel all previous resolutions and
stipulations in connexion with the composition of the
General Committee and to modify all related provisions
in its rules of procedure.
1285th plenary meeting,
17 December 1963.

ANNEX
1. In the election of the President of the General Assembly,
regard shall be had for equitable geographical rotation of this
office among the regions mentioned in paragraph 4 below.
2. The seventeen Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly
shall be elected according to the following pattern, subject to
paragraph 3 below :
(a) Seven representatives from African and Asian States;
(b) One representative from an Eastern European State;
( c) Three representatives from Latin American States;
(d) Two representatives from Western European and other
States;
(c) Five representatives from the permanent members of the
Security Council.
3. The election of the President of the General Assembly
will, however, have the effect of reducing by one the number
of vice-presidencies allocated to the region from which the
President is electecl in accordance with paragraph 2 above.
4. The seven Chairmen of the Main Committees shall be
elected according to the following pattern :
(a) Three representatives from African and Asian States;
( b) One representative from an Eastern European State;
(c) One representative from a Latin American State;
(d) One representative from a Western European or other
State;
(e) The seventh chairmanship shall rotate every alternate
year among representatives of States mentioned in sub-paragraphs ( c) and (d) above.

1991 (XVIII). Question of equitable representation on the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council
A
The General Assembly,
Considering that the present composition of the
Security Council is inequitable and unbalanced,
Recognizing that the increase in the membership of
the United Nations makes it necessary to enlarge the
membership of the Security Council, thus providing
for a more adequate geographical representation of nonpermanent members and making it a more effective
organ for carrying out its functions under the Charter
of the United Nations,
Bearing in mind the conclusions and recommendations
of the Committee on arrangements for a conference for
the pu:-pose of reviewing the Charter ,7
1. Dcc;des to adopt, in accordance with Article 108
of the Ch:1rter of the United Nations, the following
amendments to the Charter and to submit them for
1 Ibid.,

agenda item 21, document A/5487, para. 9.
