52

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

2767 (XXVI). United Nations Institute for Training and Research

The General Assembly,
Recalling its past resolutions relating to the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research, particularly resolution 2640 (XXV) of 19 Nove1?-ber 197~,
and the resolutions of the Econornic and Social Council
on the sarne subject,
l. Takes note of the report of the Execut~v~ Director of the United Nations Institute for Trammg and
Research· 1
2. No;es with satisfaction the incr~asing effec~i~~~ess
of the Institute in the discharge of 1ts respons1b1htles;
3. Expresses the hope that the Institute will have
greater and wider financial support.
1988th plenary meeting,
18 November 1971.
2768 (XXVI). Identification of the least developed among the developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2626 (XXV) of 2_4 O~tober
1970, in which it provided a separate sectron m the
International Developrnent Strategy for the_ Second
United Nations Developrnent Decade on special measures in favour of the least developed among the developing countries to enhance their capacity to benefit
fully and equitably from the policy measures of the
Decade,
Further recalling its resolution 2724 (XXV) of 15
December 1970 in which it affirmed the urgency of
identifying the ieast developed among t~e developing
countries in order to enable those countnes to benefit
as early as possible from the special measures in their
favour adopted in the various forurns,
Considering that the criteria used so far for the identification of the hard core least developed among the
developing countries need to be reviewed and refined,
Further considering that there is a lack of necessary
comparative data in most developing countries,
Mindful of the varying stages of economic development arnong the developing countries as a whole,
1. Commends the report of the Committee for Developrnent Planning on its seventh session~ and that of
the Ad Hoc Group of Experts on specml measu~es
in favour of the least developed among the developmg
countries3 of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development;
2. Takes note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1628 (LI) of 30 July 1971;
3. Takes note also of Trade and Developrnent Board
resolution 82 (XI) of 18 Septernber 1971 ;4
4. Approves the list of hard core least developed
countries contained in paragraph 66 of the report of
the Cornrnittee for Development Planning on its seventh
session;
1 Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/8414).
2 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Fiftyfirst Session, Supplement No. 7 (El 4990), chap. JI.
3 TD/B/349.
4 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/8415/Rev.1), part three,
annex I.

5. Requests the Econornic and Social Cour~cil to
instruct the Cornrnittee for Development Plannmg to
continue in close collaboration with the United Nations Co~ference on Trade and Developrnent, the review
of criteria now being used, as well as any other _criteria
which may in due course be deerned appropnate _for
the identification of the least developed countnes,
keeping in view the possibility of modifications in the
list of those countries as early as possible;
6. Commends the request of the Trade and Development Board in resolution 82 (XI) that the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Developrnent work out a detailed and comprehensive action-oriented prograrnme, within the cornpetence
of the Conference, for the irnplernentation of the relevant provisions of the International Development
Strategy for the Second United Nations Devel~prnent
Decade in favour of the least developed countnes;
7. Requests other organs and programmes of the
United Nations, including the United Nations Developrnent Prograrnrne and the United N ations Industrial
Developrnent Organization, to initiate, as appropriate,
similar action-oriented prograrnmes, within their respective fields of competence, in favour of the least
developed countries;
8. Further requests the international organizations
within the United Nations system to take fully into
account the special needs of the least developed arnong
the developing countries when formulating their prograrnrnes of activities or selecting the projects they
finance;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to include information on the irnplernentation of paragraphs 6, 7 and 8
above in the reports to be submitted by hirn under
paragraph 83 of General Assernbly resolution 2626
(XXV).
1988th plenary meeting,
18 November 1971.

2800 (XXVI). Dissemination of information and
mobilization of public opinion relative to
the review and appraisal of progress in the
implementation of the lnternational Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade

The General Assembly,
Recalling Econornic and Social Council resolution
1357 (XLV) of 2 August 1968 on the rnobilization of
public opinion in developed and developing countries
regarding the Second United Nations Developrnent
Decade,
Recalling also its resolution 2567 (XXIV) of 13 Decernber 1969 on the rnobilization of public opinion and
taking note of the administrative arrangernents for the
Centre for Econornic and Social Inforrnation which
the Secretary-General has made in pursuance of that
resolution,
Bearing in mind paragraph 84 of the International
Developrnent Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development Decade, contained in resolution 2626
(XXV) of 24 October 1970, on the mobilization of
public opinion, which is an essential cornponent of
the Strategy,

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recognizing that through the intensive dissemination of the objectives and policy measures of the International Development Strategy in both developed and
developing countries a favourable world public opinion
will be achieved that will help promote and ensure the
implementation of the goals and measures set forth in
the Strategy,
Realizing that in order to make policy-makers and
peoples conscious of the tasks and objectives to be
pursued during the Second United Nations Development
Decade there must be full and effective utilization of
the resources available in the United Nations system
for this particular endeavour, as well as the support
and co-operation of Governments,
Convinced that a favourable public opinion at the
national, regional and global levels can have a persuasive influence and can provide dynamism to the review
and appraisal of the progress achieved in the implementation of the objectives and policies of the International Development Strategy,
l. Welcomes the statement of the Secretary-General5
that efforts to achieve the objectives set forth in General Assembly resolution 2567 (XXIV), relating to
the dissemination of information and the mobilization
of public opinion with regard to the progress in the
implementation of the goals and objectives of the Second United Nations Development Decade should be
intensified;
'
2. Urges Governments and the organizations concerned within the United Nations system to conduct,
in co-ordination with the Secretary-General, such campaigns as they may deem appropriate for the dissemination of information relative to the objectives and
policy measures, as well as to the progress achieved
and the shortfalls, within the framework of the International Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade, and also for the promotion of those objectives and measures.
2017th plenary meeting,
14 December 1971.
2801 (XXVI). Review and appraisaI of the oh.iectives and policies of the lnternational
Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development D~ade

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2626 (XXV) of 24 October
1970, containing the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade, and in particular paragraphs 79 to 83 thereof,
Recalling also its resolution 2641 (XXV) of 19 November 1970, in which it requested the SecretaryGeneral to submit a report to the General Assembly at
its twenty-sixth session outlining the details of the system of over-all review and appraisal of the progress
in implementing the International Development Strategy to enable the Assembly to take a final decision on
the matter,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolutions 1621 C (LI) and 1625 (LI) of 30 July 1971,
Taking note also of Trade and Development Board
resolution 81 (XI) of 17 September 1971, 6
• 5 /bid., Twenty-sixth Session, Fifth Committee, 1456th meetmg, paras. 11-16.
6 /bid., Twenty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/8415/
Rev.1), part three, annex I.

53

Reiterating that the International Development
Strategy should be viewed in a dynamic context involving continuing review to ensure its effective implementation and adaptation in the light of new developments,
Convinced that the review and appraisal exercises at
the sectoral leve! by the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development and the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization should be conducted by their respective intergovernmental bodies with
a view to seeking new areas of agreement and widening
the existing ones in the context of the International
Development Strategy,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on a system of over-all review and appraisal of the
objectives and policies of the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade;7
2. Expresses its conviction that the appropriate
discharge of the function of over-all review and appraisal requires the adoption of comprehensive guidelines for this purpose;
3. Reaffirms its responsibility for carrying out,
through the Economic and Social Council, the overall review and appraisal of the progress in implementing the policy measures and the realization of the goals
and objectives of the International Development Strategy;
4. Resolves that:
(a) Review and appraisal at ali levels should be
informed by the common purpose of assessing the
manner in which the operation of the International
Development Strategy has contributed to economic
growth and social progress with a view to identifying
shortfalls in the achievement of the goals and objectives of the Second United Nations Development
Decade, and the factors which account for them, and
also to recommending positive measures, including new
goals and policies as needed;
( b) Toe scope of the exercise should be sufficiently
wide to ensure that, in addition to assessing the extent
to which the operation of the International Development Strategy has promoted the growth and progress
of the developing countries, the contribution which the
developed countries have made to global economic
development should also be assessed;
5. Decides that the Committee for Development
Planning, in the light of the purpose and scope explained above, will prepare, at the expert leve!, comments and recommendations relating to the over-all
review and appraisal which is to be undertaken every
two years and to the major mid-term review in 1975;
6. Endorses the measures set out in Economic and
Social Council resolution 1625 (LI) to enable the
Committee for Development Planning to assist the
Council in discharging its responsibilities to the General Assembly in respect of the over-all review and
appraisal;
7. Requests competent secretariats at the scctoral
and regional levels to co-operate with the Committee
for Dcvelopment Planning in the fulfilment of its task
by collecting, processing and making available the
necessary data and information;
8. Invites the United Nations Confcrence on Trade
and Development, the United Nations Industrial De7 E/5040.
