V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Council declared that the situation in Southern Rhodesia constituted a threat to international peace and
security, and resolution 253 (1968) of 29 May 1968,
in which mandatory sanctions were imposed against
Southern Rhodesia,
Recalling with appreciation the decision of the Government of Mozambique to implement mandatory sanctions against Southern Rhodesia in accordance with
Security Council resolution 253 (1968),
Having regard to the very substantial sacrifices made
by the Government and the people of Mozambique as
a consequence of the closure of its border as well as
the Zambian border with Southern Rhodesia,
Recalling Security Council resolution 386 (1976)
of 17 March 1976, in which the Council appealed to
all States to provide immediate financial, technical and
material assistance to Mozambique and requested the
Secretary-General, in collaboration with the appropriate
organizations of the United Nations system, to organize,
with immediate effect, all forms of financial, technical
and material assistance to enable Mozambique to carry
out its policy of economic independence from the racist
regime of Southern Rhodesia and enhance its capacity
to implement fully the United Nations mandatory sanctions,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions 1987 (LX) of 11 May 1976 and 2020 (LXI)
of 3 August 1976, in which the Council strongly
endorsed the appeal of the Security Council to the
international community to provide immediate financial,
technical and material assistance to Mozambique,
Taking note of the report of the United Nations
Mission to Mozambique, 8 which in April 1976 ascertained the financial, technical and material assistance
required by Mozambique to pursue its normal development and to overcome the economic difficulties arising
from the application of economic sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia,
Noting further the report of the Secretary-General
to the Economic and Social Council on the mobilization of a programme of financial, technical and material
assistance to Mozambique, 9
Having studied the report, transmitted by the Secretary-General, reviewing the economic situation in Mozambique10 as at August 1976 and containing, inter alia,
an assessment of the status of emergency projects formulated by the Government of Mozambique, as well
as estimates of specific food and material requirements
for the remainder of 1976 and the outlook for 1977,
1. Expresses its deep appreciation of the measures
taken by the Secretary-General to organize an effective
programme of international assistance to Mozambique;
2. Notes with satisfaction the assistance so far contributed or pledged to Mozambique by Member States,
regional and intergovernmental organizations and the
United Nations system;
3. Expresses concern that the total assistance so far
contributed or pledged falls far short of the amount
required by Mozambique to deal with the special economic problems arising from the implementation of
the measures decided upon in Security Council resolution 253 (1968);
s E/5812 and Corr.I and Add.I.
9 E/5872/Rev.1.

1o A/31/266.

57

4. Draws the attention of the international community to the list of emergency projects required by
Mozambique and described in the reports submitted
by the Secretary-General; 11
5. Further draws the attention of the international
community to the assessment contained in the report
of the Secretary-General reviewing the economic situation in Mozambique that, in addition to significant financial assistance, Mozambique will require substantial
assistance, in cash or in kind, to meet the food and
other material needs listed in tables 2 and 3 of that
report;
6. Urges all Member States and regional and intergovernmental organizations to respond generously and
to provide assistance, bilaterally and multilaterally,
whenever possible in the form of grants, to enable Mozambique to bear the cost arising from the implementation of sanctions and to carry out its normal development programmes;
7. Calls upon all Member States which have not
yet responded to the appeal of the Security Council to
provide immediate financial, technical and material
assistance to Mozambique, so that Mozambique can
carry out its economic development programme normally and enhance its capacity to implement fully the
system of sanctions;
8. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, including the
United Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations Children's Fund and the World Food Programme, to continue to assist Mozambique and consider periodically the question of economic assistance
to Mozambique;
9. Requests the United Nations Special Fund to
give special and favourable consideration to Mozambique's application for assistance;
10. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts for the mobilization of
resources necessary for an effective programme of financial, material and technical assistance to Mozambique during 1977;
( b) To ensure that adequate financial and budgetary arrangements are made to continue the mobilization of resources and to co-ordinate the international
programme of assistance to Mozambique;
( c) To arrange for a new assessment of the economic situation during the first quarter of 1977 and to
give the resulting report the widest possible circulation;
( d) To keep the situation under constant review
and maintain close liaison with Member States, regional
and other intergovernmental organizations, specialized
agencies and international financial institutions, and to
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session.
84th plenary meeting
1 December 1976
31/107.

United Nations Institute for Training
and Research

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
( S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration
11 E/5812 and Corr.I

and Add.I, A/31/266.

58

General Assembly-Thirty-first Senion

and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of
a New International Economic Order,
Recalling also its resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12
December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States,
Recalling further its resolution 3403 (XXX) of 28
November 1975 on the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research,
Considering its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 which set in motion measures that form
the basis and framework for the work of the competent
bodies and organizations of the United Nations system,
1. Takes note of the report of the Executive Director of the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research;12
2. Invites the United Nations Institute for Training
and Research to continue concentrating its work in
the sphere of economic and social training and research
so as to include specific projects on the problems in
the areas identified by the General Assembly at its
sixth and seventh special sessions and in the relevant
decisions of the Assembly at its twenty-ninth session;
3. Expresses the hope that the United Nations Institute for Training and Research will have greater and
wider financial support from Member States and organizations.
10 I st plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/108.

United Nations Conference on Desertification

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3337 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974, in which it decided to initiate concerted
international action to combat desertification,
Recalling further its resolution 3511 (XXX) of 15
December 1975 on the United Nations Conference on
Desertification,
Having considered the relevant parts of the report
of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on its fourth session relating to
the implementation of General Assembly resolution
3337 (XXIX), 13
Noting decision 73 (IV) 14 of 13 April 1976 of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme acting in its capacity as the intergovernmental preparatory body for the Conference,
Noting also Economic and Social Council resolution
2013 (LXI) of 3 August 1976,
l. Urges Member States to continue to co-operate
with the secretariat of the United Nations Conference
on Desertification in the preparations for the Conference, including the case studies and the proposed transnational activities to combat desertification;
2. Requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme, in addition to his

other responsibilities as Executive Director, to assume
the responsibility of Secretary-General of the Conference;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to invite:
(a) All States to participate in the Conference;
( b) Representatives of organizations that have received a standing invitation from the General Assembly to participate in the sessions and the work of all
international conferences convened under its auspices
in the capacity of observers, in accordance with Assembly resolution 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974;
( c) Representatives of the national liberation movements recognized in its region by the Organization of
African Unity, in the capacity of observers, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 3280
(XXIX) of 10 December 1974;
(d) The United Nations Council for Namibia to
participate as an observer;
( e) The specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency, as well as interested organs of
the United Nations, to be represented at the Conference;
(f) Interested intergovernmental organizations to
be represented by observers;
(g) Interested non-governmental organizations in
consultative status with the Economic and Social Council to be represented by observers;
4. Authorizes the Secretary-General to invite other
interested non-governmental organizations that might
have a specific contribution to make to the work of
the Conference to be represented by observers;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
the necessary arrangements are made for the effective
participation in the Conference of the representatives
referred to in paragraph 3 ( b) and ( c) above, including the requisite financial provisions for their travel
expenses and per diem;
6. Decides to include Arabic as a language of the
Conference;
1. Approves the provisional agenda for the Conference annexed to the present resolution;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the
results of the Conference, through the Economic and
Social Council, to the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session.
101st plenary meeting
16 December 1976
ANNEX
Provisional agenda for the United Nations Conference
on Desertification

1.

2.

Opening of the Conference and election of the President.
Organization of the work of the Conference:
(a)
( b)

Adoption of the rules of procedure;
Adoption of the agenda;

(c)

Establishment of committees and other sessional
bodies;

(d)

Election of officers other than the President;

(e)

Credentials of representatives to the Conference:
appointment of the Credentials Committee.

12 Official

Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first
Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/31/14).
1 3 Ibid., Supplement No. 25 (A/31/25), chap. VII and annex II.
14 Ibid., annex I.
