UVITED

NATIONS
t

TIIIRTY-SECOND

YEAR

th
MEETING: 29 JUNE 1977
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/201 6) . . . . . . . , . . , . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . .

1

Adoption

of the agenda . , , . . , . . . . . . . . , e , . . , . . . , . . . , . . , . . . . . . .

1

C:om plaint by Mozambique:
Letter dated 22 June 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12350 and Add.1) . , . . , . . , . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . , +. . . . . .

1

s/W.201 6

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , ,) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Cowtcil. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions arld Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2016TH
Held in New

York

MEETING

on Wednesday,

Preslderzt: Mr. William H. BARTON (Canada),

29 June 1977, at 10.30 a.m.
Meguid (Egypt), Mr. G, Rawiri (Gabon), Mrs. Jeanne Martin
Cisse (Guinea), Mr. C. D. Molapo (Lesotho), M,. J, N.
Garba
(Nigeria), A@+C. B. Djigo (Senegal), Mr. M. AUaf
(Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. L3. Mkapa (United Republic of
Tanzania) and Mr. S. G. Mwale (Zambia) took the places
reserved jbr them at the side of the Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of. India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

3. The PRESIDENT:
I have received letters from the
representatives of the Ccrman Democratic Republic and the
Sudan in which they request to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the question on the agenda. Accordingly, 1
propose, in conformity with the usual practice and with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote,
under the provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule
37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/201 6)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Complaint by Mozambique:
Letter dated 22 June 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Mozambique to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/ 12350 and Add.1 )

4. In view of the limited number of places available at the
Council table, I invite the representatives of the German
Democratic Republic and the Sudan to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber, on
the understanding that they will be invited to take a place
at the Council table whenever they wish to address the
Council.

Tlze meeting was called to order at IO. 55 a. m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted,

At the invitation of the President, Mr. P Not-in (German
Uernocratic Republic) and Mr. M. Medani (Sudan) took the
places reserved jbr them at the side of the Council chamber.

Complaint by Mozambique:
Letter dated 22 June 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12350 and Add.1)

5. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the Minister of
Transportation of Gabon. I welcome him and invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
6. Mr. RAWIRI (Gabon) (interpretation from French):
The Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity, which is at present meeting at Libreville, hasjust
chosen the Republic of Gabon asits president.On behalf of
the Council of Ministers and on behalfof Gabon,for which
I am spokesman, I should like to avail myself of this
opportunity to extend to you, Sir, our warmes~congratulations on the work you have done as Pr’&ident of the
Security Council and to expressOUIplea&e at seeingYou
presiding over the present debate. We are aware of the
efforts you have not ceasedto make in the dischargeof
your duties, and we know full well the traditional position
of your country in the constant quest for a just and
equitable solution to the problem of Zimbabwe.We are
sure that, under your guidance,this meetingof the Council
will once again confirm the unanimousagreementof its
members in condemning the obstinacy of the white
minority in Rhodesia and the folly of the advocatesof
apartheid.

I. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2014th meeting, I invite the Minister For
Development and Economic Planning of Mozambique to
take a placeat the Council table.
At the invitatiorl of* the Presidellc, Mr. M. dos Cantos
(Mozambique) took a placeat the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
taken at the 2014th and 2015th meetings, I invite the
representativesof Algeria, Angola, Botswana, Cuba, Egypt,
Gabon, Guinea, Lesotho, Nigeria,Senegal, the Syrian Arab
Republic, the United Republic or Tanzania and Zambia to
take the placesreservedfor them at the sideof the Council
chamber.
At the invitatiorl of the President,Mr. A. Rahal(Algeria),
Mr. J. E, dos Santos (Angola), Mr. LX Ii. Kwelagobe
[Botswana), Mr. R. Alarcdn (Qlba J, Mr. A. 1:: Abdel
1

13. The obduracy of the racist minorities in southern
are alone responsiblefor the climate of
deliberateviolencecharacterizedby attacks, reprisals,assas.
sinationsand destruction-will inevitably lead to a general
flare-upunlessreasonprevails.

7. The Security Council is meeting at the request of the
People’s Republic of Mozambique, which has been the
victim of yet another aggression perpetrated by the illegal
r6gime of Ian Smith. That is why the OAU Council of
Ministers decided, regardless of the importance and urgency
of its work, to send a delegation comprising Gabon, Nigeria,
Algeria, Tanzania and Lesotho, to express to the Council
the profound indignation of Africa at the unwarranted and
intolerable attacks of the Salisbury clique against the
territory of a Member State. The persistently criminal
behaviour of Ian Smith with regard to Africa is causing a
climate of real danger to international peace and security to
prevail in that region of our continent.

Africa-w110

8. This is not the first time that the villain Ian Smith, his
hands red with the blood of innocent victims, has engaged
in barbaric extortion in respect of the independentAfrican
Stateswhich are neighbours
of Zimbabwe.The list of those
hateful acts is known to all; it becomeslongerevery day
and increasinglyincenses
our internationalcommunity.

14, Throughout the world, political leadersare strivingto
increasethe well-beingand happinessof the peoplesfor
whom they are responsible.But in Zimbabwe and South
Africa, the folly of the menin power bringsonly desolation
and hatred, settingagainsteachother men and womenwho
could have lived and worked together and teaching [he
black child that the white man is his executioner and the
white child, who isalsoAfrican, that he is a foreignerin the
country wherehe wasborn.

1.5. For us, Rhodesiaremainsa British colony, in spiteof
the rebellionof the white settlersand the proclamationby
Ian Smith of a so-calledindependentState. Accordingly,
the administeringPower, the United Kingdom, must fully
assume
its responsibilities
to put an end to that rebellion,to
9. From 1976 until today, the armed bands of the restorelegality as it hasdonein other placesand at other
bloodthirsty Ian Smith have committed more than 143 times and to start the processwhich would lead to the
aggressions
againstthe People’sRepublicof Mozambique independenceof Zimbabweby transferring power to the
alone, inflicting many casualtiesand destroyingproperty. African majority. Unhappily,we are disturbed to note that
The crimescommitted in Mozambiqueby the banditsof
the British Governmenthasso far dealt with this problem
Ian Smith have lately attained a magnitudeout of all with reprehensible
meekness.
proportion with their allegedobjective. They are actual
military expeditions involving considerableforces--heavy 16. Here we must solemnlyrenew the appealswhich the
artillery, tanks, armouredcars,helicopters,fighter planes. African countriesand their friends have already so often
Those mercenarytroops have massacred
without pity the made to the British Government, calling on it fully to
peaceful populationsof Mozambique,destroyedtheir vil- assumeits responsibilitiesto bring about an equitable
lages and burned the plantations, sowing terror and solution to this dangerous
conflict which affects the entire
desolationin their wake,
regionand, in particular, the People’sRepublic of Mozambique,Zambiaand Botswana.
10. In the 143 actsof aggression
committedsinceMarch
1976, more than 216 personshave beenkilled and 50 17. In his statementat the openingof the meeting of the
wounded in the Tete region,1.066personshavebeenkilled OAU Ministersfor ForeignAffairs at Libreville, the headof
and 319 woundedin the provinceof Manica,andmorethan State of Gabon, His Excellency El Hadj Omar Bongo,
140 personshave been killed and 148 woundedin the stated:
province of Gaza. Thus, therehavebeenmore than 1,430
casualtiesamong the population of the peaceful small
“With regard to the burning problem of southern
frontier villages.
Africa, it is your duty to continue to seek the most
appropriateways and meansto bring the white minority
11. As can be seen,we are no longer speakingof small
rCgimesof Ian Smith and of the FascistVorster to bay
commandoincursionsacrossbordersor violations of air
and to increasemoral and material assistanceto the
space.What we have hereis a war of destructionbringing
freedomfightersin that part of our continent.”
into operation the most deadly implementsof war and
undertaken in order to weakenthe friendly neighbouring 18. That is why I repeathere that appealof the headof
countrieswhich assistZimbabwein its just struggleagainst ‘State of Gabon to assistthe freedom fighters and OUI
the oppressionof the white settlers.For thosecountries,to
brother countrieswhich are the victims of aggression
at the
keep UP the struggle, have abandonedtheir national handsof the armedbandsof Ian Smith. One of the forms
development programmesin order to devote enormous of such assistancemust be the implementation by all
sumsto rebuildthe zonesravagedby war andto acquirethe
Membersof the United Nations of the relevant OAU,
military equipment they need to defend themselvesand GeneralAssemblyand Security Council resolutionswhich
better to counterthe unjustifiedaggression
of the hysterical call for the strict application of economic, political,
Ian Smith.
diplomatic and other sanctioJisin order to put an end to
the illegalminority andrebelrBgimeat Salisbury.
12. The People’s Republic of Mozambique, Zambia,
Botswanaand the other countriesthat havebeenvictimsof
19. The OAU Council of Ministers meeting at Libreville
aggression,
have respondedwith courageanddetermination has adopted a resolutionconcerningthe Rhodesianrebel
to thoseperfidiousandbrutal attacksof the killershiredby
invasion of the People’sRepublic of Mozambique [see
Ian Smith, giving blow for blow and inflicting heavylosses s/12352/. That resolution calls for the energetic conon the aggressor.
demnationof the Rhodesian
regimeand aimsat putting an
2

e

end completely and for all time to Rhodesian intervention
in the internal affairs of African States and to threats
against their territorial integrity and violations of their
sovereignty.

with the decision taken by the Security Council to impose
economic sanctionsagainstRhodesia.
2.5. The ongoing struggle in Rhodesiais aimed at putting
an end to racist domination and restoring to the African
majority its rights, its responsibilitiesan? its dignity. That
struggle is part and parcel of the overall liberation struggle
which has shakenthe African continent and which is being
carried on particularly in southern Africa. It is supported.
by all African peoples, and the numerous resolutions
adopted in connexion with it by the Security Council and
other United Nations bodiesconfirm that that strugglealso
enjoys the support of the entire international community.
The assistanceprovided to the liberation movement of
Zimbabwe by neighbouring countries, particularly Mozambique, is hence not only the expressionof a normal senseof
solidarity with an African people engagedin a strugglethe
ideals of which they share. It is a duty which they are
fulfilling as members of the international community,
bound as they are by the decisionsof the Organization to
give their full support to the liberation movements.

20. Gabon accordingly proposes that the Security Council
should also adopt a resolution along the same lines. It is our
hope that the economic interests of some will not prevent
them from associating themselves with that resolution, so
that the inalienable rights of the people of Zimbabwe to
dignity, freedom and sovereignty with justice and peace
may prevail.
21. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Minister for
Higher Education and Scientific Research of Algeria. I
welcome him and invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
22. Mr. RAHAL (Algeria) (interpretation from French):
Mr, President,I have not beenaway from this Organization
long enoughto have forgotten its customsand traditions. I
should therefore like, with your leave, to begin by
addressingto you my congratulations and those of my
delegation on the effective manner in which you are
conducting this debate, one which is marked by a senseof
gravity and urgency and which is being followed with the
keenestinterest by the entire African continent. I should
like also to thank the Council for having so promptly
acceded to the request of Mozambique and for having
allowed the African delegations,in accordance with the
mandatethey received from the Council of Ministersof the
Organization of African Unity, to participate in this
discussionand to make known the concerns and the
aspirationsof their continent. By way of striking a personal
note in my statement, I shouldlike, lastly, to expressto all
the membersof the Council and to you, Mr. President,my
feelingsof gratitude and friendship, a friendship which was
born and hasgrown in strength asa result of our long years
of working together in this great Organization.

26. The aggression-or, rather, the many acts of aggression-committed by RhodesiaagainstMozambique is motivated by two reasons,first, that Mozambique doesnot wish
to have any relations with Rhodesiaand, secondly, that it is
giving to the Zimbabwe liberation movement. assistance
which is profoundly displeasingto the racists at Salisbury.
That aggressionis in fact being directed by an illegal
government not recognized by the United Nations and the
subject of the economic sanctionsimposedby the Security
Council against a State Member of the Organization which
only seeksto abideby those decisionsand other resolutions
of the United Nations. Thus it is apparent that the only
reason Mozambique is exposed to the repeated acts of
aggressionon the part of Rhodesiais becausethe former is
implementing the decisionsof the Organization.
27. The complaint of the People’s Republic of Mozambique is therefore one which puts to the test the authority
of the Security Council, whose mission of maintaining
peace in the world would not be credible without the
foundation of authority and respect given it by the
common adherence to its decisions of the permanent
members. Our purposein coming before the Council today
is to convey to membersour anxiety, to give them some
idea of the degreeof our impatience, but at the sametime
to gain assurance of their desire and willingness to
command respect for all the principles on which we all,
both great and small, have agreed to base international
relations.

23. The events which led to the convening of the Council
have already been discussedin detail by previous speakers,
particularly by our friend Marcelino dos Santos, VicePresidentof the People’sRepublic of Mozambique [2014th
meeting/. I do not wish to prolong this statement needlesslyby repeating what hasalready been said,but I should
like in turn to emphasizethe gravity of the aggression
which has been perpetrated by the illegal rCgime of
Rhodesiaagainst Mozambique, not only becauseof the
extent of the damageand the number of the victims it
created but, above all, becauseof the fact that we are
concernedhere with repeatedacts of aggressionwhich may
well recur in future, This situation representsa permanent
threat to the security and independenceof Mozambique, a
country which, it must be recalled,succeededin winning its
freedom scarcely two years ago after a long struggle for
nationalliberation.

28. In this discussiontoday of the aggressionagainst
Mozambique, the Council has been induced once again to
reopen the file on the Rhodesianproblem, becauseit is the
very persistenceand the worseningof this problem which
have led and undoubtedly will continue to lead to
ever-growing tension throughout that region. This situation
has been going on for 12 years now, that is, since
independence was unilaterally declared by Ian Smith’s
racist group. For 12 years the Zimbabwe Africans have
been struggling to free themselvesfrom a domination which
deprives them of their freedom, their property and their
dignity. For 12 years efforts have been made to convince

24. The dangers which Mozambique must face undoubtedly stem from its geographicallocation which leaves
it exposedalmostwithout any defenceto the attacksof the
racist rCgimesof Rhodesiaand South Africa, It is that same
geographicallocation which explainsthe difficulties which
Mozambique has freely undertaken to bear in complying
3

support and of our involvement, side by side with it, in a
struggle which is ours as well as that of the entire African
continent, We are here also to urge the Security Council to
take account of the anxieties of the African countries, to
respond to their desire to strengthen their independence, to
protect their freedom and to put an end to colonial
domination and racial discrimination, which are the source
of the present tensions in southern Africa. Our hope is that
this appeal of Africa will be heeded.

.them of the virtues of patience, of moderation and
dialogue, in order to discourage them from resorting in any
way to violent action. But can we still assert today that this
advice was the best that could be given them when history
does not seem to provide many examples of peaceful
liberation? The struggle in which the Africans of Zimbabwe are already engaged can only grow in strength and
scope as the blind stubborness and obstinacy of Ian Smith
and his rdgime become more and more obvious. Active
diplomatic steps in recent months have undoubtedly been
more meritorious than effective. Possibly those steps did
not take the bad faith of lan Smith sufficiently into
account, while being designed, above all, to protect the
interests of the white minority.

33. Mr. AL GAYED [Libyan Arab Jamahiriya): Sir, I
should like first to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council. My delegation has had ample
opportunity to witness at first hand your skill and wisdom
as a diplomat and as a representative of your country, and
we are confident that with these abilities you will be able
successfully to guide the affairs of the Council this month,

29. Of course, we are not fanatically bent on violence; we
are as devoted as anyone to developing understanding
among peoples and preserving peace in the world. But
violence has been and remains the last resort of peoples
who are persistently deprived of their most elementary
rights. It is deprivation of that sort which the people of
Zimbabwe have had to encounter for the last 12 years. Who
can blame them, then, for seeking to show in their turn that
they are capable of dying for their freedom?

34. May I, on behalf of the delegation of the Socialist
People’s Libyan Arab Jamafliriya, also take this opportunity to commen,d your predecessor in this high post,
Ambassador Boya of the People’s Republic of Benin. He
presided over and skilfully and successfully guided the
Security Council last month through a number of debates
on some very important issues.

30. But this situation in Rhodesia is itself closely linked
with that which prevails throughout southern Africa, We
have already had occasion to emphasize here and elsewhere
the obvious connexions existing between the problem of
Rhodesia, that of Namibia and the apartheid regime in
South Africa. The political and economic aspects of those
problems derive from the same anxiety of the white
minorities in those areas to preserve their power in order to
maintain their economic privileges. It is not surprising,
therefore, that an analysis of each of those problems will
ultimately reveal the same actors, the same interests and the
same difficulties. It might appear sensible to try to resolve
them separately by concentrating efforts on a more limited
range of issues. We wish to express our scepticism about the
effectiveness of such a method, which could not eliminate
the reciprocal effects exerted on each other by these
problems which ultimately call for a more global approach.

35. I should also like to take this occasion to express the
honour felt by my delegation at the presence here in this
chamber of the Vice-President of FRELIMO and Minister
for Development and Economic Planning of the People’s
Republic of Mozambique, as well as that of the Ministers
mandated by the Council of Ministers of the Organization
of African Unity to assist in this important Council debate.
36. Since the collapse of Portuguese colonialism in Africa
a few years ago and the attainment of independence by the
people of Mozambique, the eventual fate and downfall of
the illegal and racist rCgime at Salisbury has been clear to
all. The illegal Ian Smith rCgime depends on the support
and assistance of colonialist and imperialist forces for its
very survival, and has become frantic in its efforts to
maintain itself in power against the force of history and the
wiIl of the people of Zimbabwe and of Africa as a whole.
The racist Ian Smith rBgime is finally coming to the
realization that its own collapse and the termination of its
oppression of the indigenous African people of Zimbabwe
is more imminent than it had expected.

31. The aggression of Rhodesia against Mozambique is a
direct result of the deteriorating situation throughout
southern Africa, not only in Zimbabwe-which
has now
been drawn into the vicious cycle of violence and repression-but also in Namibia, where prospects appear to be
more and more disquieting, and, finally, in South Africa
itself, where the Soweto massacres are the harbingers of a
tragedy of all too easily foreseeable scope. The concern
evinced by the OAU Council ,of Ministers is therefore
entirely justified. The delegations of Algeria, Gabon,
Lesotho, Nigeria and the United Republic of Tanzania have
been instructed to make that concern known to the
Security Council in view of the deterioration in a situation
which may at any moment get completely out of control
and plunge the African continent into an era of violence
and chaos from which it is desperately trying to protect
itself:

37. These acts of aggression against sovereign States and
the increase in the oppression of the indigenous Zimbabwe
people are the desperate acts of a rCgime that has seen its
fate and eventual collapse. The steadfast opposition of all
African countries and of other peace-loving countries to the
continued existence of that illegal racist regime will soon
triumph over the forces of racism and imperialism. The
international community must confront and put an end to
these desperate acts of oppression and aggression perpetrated by the Ian Smith rCgime in its final throes against not
only the Zimbabwe people but also sovereign African
States.

32. We are here to proclaim our solidarity and that of all
African countries with the People’s Republic of Mozambique, to assure that country of our total and unflagging

38. It is an undeniable fact that the inalienable rights of
peoples, including the right to self-determination and
independence, have been achieved mostly through armed
4

struggle and at tremendous sacrifice. The people of Mozambique themselves struggled for many years and sacrificed
countless lives and resources in the cause of achieving
liberation and independence. No sooner had the people of
Mozambique achieved their independence from one imperialist rCgiml:, than they found themselves the victims of
serious acts of aggression perpetrated by the illegal Smith
rCgime at Salisbury. In this context, 1 should like to draw
the attention of the Council to the statement made by His
Excellency Mr. Samora Machel, President of the People’s
Republic of Mozambique, on 3 March 1976. In that
statement, President Machel said:

illegal Smith rCgime. The sovereignty, dignity and territorial
integrity of that peace-loving Member State, as well as the
peace and security of Africa, are being jeopardized by the
aggressive racist acts of an outlaw criminal rkgime.
41. Over the past 11 years, the Council has adopted
numerous resolutions in regard to the situation in Southern
Rhodesia. From the very beginning, since the so-called
unilateral declaration of independence, the Council has
condemned the illegal racist r&me at Salisbury and
deplored the deterioration of the peace and security of
Africa as a result of the establishment and continued
existence of that illegal rCgime. The Council has, moreover,
called upon the United Kingdom to quell the rebellion of
the racist minority in Southern Rhodesia and to take all
other effective measures to eliminate that usurper rbgime.
Despite those resolutions, the illegal regime at Salisbury
continues to defy the will of the international community.
In fact, the Smith rCgime is well aware that those
resolutions will not affect its continued existence and its
exploitation of the Zimbabwe people so long as certain
States continue to have a vested interest in not fully
implementing those mandatory sanctions.

“The criminal and irresponsible rtgime of Ian Smith has
launched a war of aggression against the People’s Republic of Mozambique. Less than 18 months after signing
the Peace Agreement with Portugal, the Mozambican
people are once again forced to confront the desperate
acts of aggression of a colonial Fascist.” [See S/12005,
aiimx./

39. On 3 March 1976, the People’s Republic of Mozambique took the important and courageous decision to
comply with and fully implement the United Nations
sanctions against the illegal minority rCgime. The courageous decision of the Government of Mozambique to close
its borders with Southern Rhodesia in lillfilment of its
international obligations deserves the commendation and
support of the Council. It should moreover be noted that
the courageous decision of the People’s Republic of
Mozambique to implement fully the resolutions of both the
Council and the General Assembly in regard to the
application of sanctions against the illegal Smith regime has
not only exposed Mozambique to repeated murderous acts
of aggression at the hands of the illegal Smith rCgime but
also subjected it to continued economic and other sacrifices. This aggressive threat is evident from the statentent
President Machel made as recently as 18 June 1977, when
he declared:

42. At this stage in the deterioration of the situation in
Southern Rhodesia and in southern Africa as a whole and in
view of the atrocious acts of violence, murder and
aggression perpetrated by the racist minority regime in its
death throes, the Council can no longer delay the adoption
and implementation of those concrete measures that will
put an end to the domination and exploitation of the
Zimbabwe people by a racist illegal rkgime.
43. The people of Zimbabwe have waited more than 11
years for justice and for the attainment of freedom and
self-determination.
In those long years, the Zimbabwe
people have endured racism and numerous acts of murder,
violence and oppression. The time has come when only a
fundamental solution can meet the just demands of the
people of Zimbabwe, Only such a solution and such
concrete measures can deal with the deterioration of the
situation resulting from the acts of aggression, murder and
violence committed by the Smith r6gime against African
States Members of the United Nations. In this context, it
should be noted that the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity, at its current session being
held at Libreville, Gabon, has passed a resolution which in
its paragraph I strongly condemns Rhodesia’s naked war of
aggression against Mozambique backed by artillery and
aircraft and the subsequent massacre of hundreds of
innocent civilianslsee S/12352/.

“Between May 1976 and 15 June 197’7, 1,431 civilians
were murdered, of whom 875 were refugees from
Zimbabwe in Nyazonia, and 527 were wounded. Dozens
of small towns and villages where peaceful populations
lived and were endeavouring diligently and enthusiastically to rebuild their country, were completely destroyed.
Today Massangena, Mapai, Mavonde and Chioco are the
mere charred remains of what were dwellings, schools.
hospitals, people’s shops, utilities and factories. This
damage has constituted a loss to our people amounting to
ntore than 400 million escudos.”

44. Stepsmust be taken to extend support and economic
and material assistanceto the People’sRepublic of Mozambique to enable it to strengthen its defencecapabilities, to
safeguard its sovereignty and territorial integrity, and to
protect its people againstthe frequent and wanton acts of
murder, pillage and violence that they have suffered at the
hands of the racist rkgime at Salisbury. The People’s
Republic of Mozambique must alsobe assistedto enableits
people to overcome the tremendousmaterial lossincurred
as a result of the aggressionand devastation committed by
the illegal racist minority rkgimc.

In the same speech, President Machel stated that the
Mozambican people were in urgent need of material aid if
they were to bc able to endure the heavy consequences of
those acts of aggression, murder and pillage, and hc
appealed to the whole international community to contribute to increasing Mozambique’s defence capacity and to
the reconstruction of the areas devastated by the racists.
40. The issues before the Council are clear and straightforward: a sovereign State Member of the United Nations
and member of the Organization of African Unity has been
subjected to flagrant acts of aggression at the hands of the

45: Furthermore, the Council cannot continue to remain
indifferent to the continued defiance of the regime at
5

53. The head of that delegation, Comrade Marcelino dos
Santos, Vice-President of FRELIMO and Minister for
Development and Economic Planning, gave an impressive
and convincing description of the situation in southern
Africa [201&h meeting/. The People’s Republic of Mozambique, which is busy peacefully building its State, is
constantly forced to protect itself against the aggressive
actions of the illegal Smith rigime. Racists and mercenaries
are threatening its independence and sovereignty.

Pretoria, not only in its non-implementation of mandatory
sanctions but also because of its extensive military and
economic aid to the illegal Smith rkgime, thereby allowing
it to commit such acts of aggression and violence. My
delegation would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
its conviction that the mandatory sanctions imposed against
the illegal Smith rCgime must be extended to cover the
racist Pretoria rCgime, because of its continued non-implementation of those sanctions and its granting of such means
and facilities as enable the Smith rigime to evade them.

54. The people and Government of the German Democratic Republic firmly condemn the crimes of the racist
rigime at Salisbury, this official colony of the United
Kingdom, against the people of Mozambique, and demand
that an immediate and unconditional halt be put to all acts
of aggression directed against the People’s Republic of
Mozambique and other neighbouring States.

46. The Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya considers that the racist rggimes that dominate and exploit the
African peoples of South Africa, Southern Rhodesia and
Namibia are the enemies of all Africa. Those who aid and
support those racist rCgimes must realize that they thereby
share the responsibility for the threat to the peace, security
and progress of all Africa; they must be made aware and
accept the consequences of taking that hostile and unfriendly attitude towards Africa.

55. Under the guidance of FRELIMO, the People’s Republic of Mozambique has fully complied with United
Nations decisions concerning support for the freedom
struggle of the people of Zimbabwe, despite the economic
Iosses that may be incurred thereby. It has thus provided an
example of consistent anti-colonialist and anti-racist action.
For that reason, the people and Government of the People’s
Republic of Mozambique have won the deep gratitude of
world public opinion.

47. My delegation takes this occasion to express the
support and solidarity of the Socialist People’s Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya with the People’s Republic of Mozambique in
their just and heroic struggle against the racist and
aggressive forces in Southern Rhodesia.
48. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the German Democratic Republic. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

56. On behalf of the Government of the German Democratic Republic, I should like once again to assure the
representatives of the friendly P.eople’s Republic of Mozambique of our profound solidarity with Mozambique’s
decisive struggle.

49. Mr. FLORIN (German Democratic Republic) (ilzter’
pretation from Russian): First of all, I should like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the office of
President of the Security Council for the month of June. In
you, I welcome the representative of a State with which the
German Democratic Republic recently established diplomatic relations which we hope will promote the development of comprehensive relationships between our two
countries to our mutual advantage. I should also like to
express the hope that the discussion of the serious question
on our agenda will, under your presidency, culminate in
success.

57. The United Nations is aware of the danger which the
present overlords of the colony of Southern Rhodesia pose
to peace and security in southern Africa, Evidence of that is
to be found in the large number of resolutions on the
subject which have been adopted by the competent bodies
of the Organization. These resolutions condemn the white
minority rigime and confirm the right of the oppressed
Zimbabwe people to struggle by all means in their power
for their freedom and for the enjoyment of their right to
self-determination. In conformity with the decisions taken
by the Security Council, all States are called upon to apply
sanctions against Southern Rhodesia and give assistance to
the militant people of Zimbabwe in their just struggle.

50. On behalf of the delegation of the German Democratic
Republic, I should like to thank you and the members of
the Council for giving us the opportunity to speak here
today.

58. The Smith rCgime, however, has been reluctant to
fulfil the just demands of the international Organization.
On the contrary, the present leaders at Salisbury reply to
the growing struggle and resistance of the people of
Zimbabwe-which
sees in the free young African States a
magnificent example to follow-with
terror within the
country and aggression against other countries. The underhanded attacks by the hirelings of the illegal racist rdgime
on the territories of independent African States only
increase the threat which that regime poses to peace and
security. The continuing acts of aggression-which,
indeed,
are not denied by those responsible For them but, rather,
are declared by them publicly to be an integral part of their
policy-are fraught with the danger of the outbreak of a
general war in southern Africa.

51. The principles underlying the foreign policy of the
German Democratic Republic, a socialist State which has
always been in favour of peace and security and which has
always shown unlimited solidarity with those who are
victims of aggression, prompt my delegation to address the
Council in connexion with the complaint of the People’s
Republic of Mozambique.
52. It is a particular honour for me to have this opportunity warmly to welcome the delegation of the People’s
Republic of Mozambique, whose people, after many years
of struggle, have won their right to self-determination and
are now building their future as a sovereign and independent State.
6

59. The responsibility for this serious state of affairs lies
with the racist regimes at Salisbury and Pretoria. So long as
those racist regimes continue to exist, there can be no end
to the bloodshed in southern Africa; the peace and security
of neighbouring States-and not only those States-will
continue to be threatened. Thus, everything must be done
to bring about a radical change.

64. The delegation of the People’s Republic of Mozambique and the representatives of other African States have
given the members of the Security Council detailed
clarification as to what decisions they expect in order to
bring about peace and security in southern Africa. In view
of the continuing acts of aggression of the racist regimes
and the multifarious manoeuvres that have been undertaken
by imperialist circles, a socialist State can only act in such a
way as to offer complete support for those just demands.

60. Unfortunately,
however, powerful forces, those of
international monopolistic capital, are operating in an
attempt to prevent any suc11 radical change from taking
place. Their concern is with raw materials, profits, the
exploitation of a cheap labour force. That is one of the
explanations for the Security Council’s inability so far to
take the necessary effective and energetic steps. Indeed,
even the unsatisfactory steps that have been taken have not
been implemented by a number of States. Instead of the
general isolation of the racist regimes, instead of efforts to
weaken those regimes and give all assistance to the national
liberation movements, what we see are diplomatic manoeuvres which only help to maintain the spheres of
influence of international monopolies and their accomplices
in southern Africa.

65. The delegation of the German Democratic Republic
has frequently also favoured the adoption of the steps
provided for in Chapter VI1 of the Charter against those
guilty of breaches of the peace. Today, my delegation again
favours this approach, A decision should be taken to
impose a general embargo on the supply of weapons to the
Republic of South Africa in order to prevent the racist
r6gimes from increasing their military strength. On the
other hand, the People’s Republic of Mozambique and
other threatened African States should be provided with
every opportunity to enhance their defence potential so
that tbcy can effectively exercise their right to self-defence,
as provided for in the Charter,
66. The delegation of the German Democratic Republic
would venture to hope that, by its decisions, the Security
Council will contribute to the extension of every sort of
assistance to the threatened States in southern Africa, to a
removal of the threat to peace and security and to the
achievement of a radical change in the situation in that area
by forcing the racist regimes to implement the resolutions
adopted by the international Organization. Undoubtedly,
for the achievement of those ends, unflagging assistance will
be necessary for those militant peoples still struggling and
forced to live under the yoke of racist regimes.

61. The frenzied activity of diplomats of certain States
goes to show that the movement of the peoples in that
region of the world cannot be halted. Those States wish to
set this movement on a certain course. At the same time,
they are trying to exert pressure on certain bodies of the
United Nations.
62. If the African peoples are extremely mistrustful of the
diplomatic d&marches which overlook the decisions of the
General Assembly or even conflict with those decisions,
that is quite understandable. As is known, the colonial
Powers at one time used every means in their power to take
action against the national liberation movements, in order
to maintain their colonial domination. But, in the case of
the rebel regime of Ian Smith, they have been extremely
delicate in their actions.

67. I conclude this statement by quoting the words of
Mr. Erich Honecker, General Secretary of the Central
Committee of the Socialist Unity Party of Germany and
Chairman of the Council of State of the German Democratic Republic, pronounced at the World Conference
against Apartheid, Racism and Colonialism in Southern
Africa, held recently at Lisbon. He said:

63. I would remind the members of a resolution adopted
in 1968 by the Security Council. I refer to resolution
253 (1968). In paragraph 2, the Security Council

“The German Democratic Republic has always actively
supported the struggle of peoples against racist regimes,
against the odious system of apartheid and neocolonialist
conspiracies. It has always favoured implementation of
Unite’d Nations decisions on the abolition of racism and
colonialism, and will continue to give those peoples active
solidarity.”

“CalZs upon the United Kingdom as the administering
Power in the discharge of its responsibility to take
urgently all effective measures to bring to an end the
rebellion in Southern Rhodesia, and enable the people to
secure the enjoyment of their rights as set forth in the
Charter of the United Nations and in conformity with the
objectives of General Assembly resolution 15 14 (XV)“.
What has been done-or, rather, what has not been done-in
implementation of that paragraph is only too well known.

The meeting rose at 12.05 p. m.

7

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
or write
to: United

DES

NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sent en vents dans les librairies
depositaires
du mondc entier. Informez-vous
aupr&s de votre libraire
a : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou GenBve.
KAK

HOJIYUHTb

HBAAHIIR

OPI’AHH

3A~HH

and distributors
Nations,
Sales

UNIES
et les agences
ou adresses-vous

OB’bEAUHEHHbIX

HALUSH

H3~nHtiB
Opraauoamiw
Ob’beAwweriabrx
HaunR
MO~~KHO xyna~h
a xaanoi~tx
mara3WHBX H areHTCTBS,X
Bo Bcex pai?OHaX Mapa. HaBOAHTe
cnpaBKH
06
HSA&HHHX
B
Bsmet.4 KHWXHOM M*T-B~UH~ HOW nmuwe
no a~pecy:
Opranxsanria
06’be~mieanbrx
Hat@,
Cexqaa
no IIPOAGWS
no~atiaR,
HLKI-F~OPK
HJIU Xerieaa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en to&s
partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en venta en librerfas
y casas distria su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones

in other

currencies)

77-700ol-April

1978-2,288
