S/PV.8402

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8402nd meeting

Thursday, 15 November 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Adom
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Amde
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (S/2018/1006)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-38138 (E)
*1838138*

S/PV.8402

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(S/2018/1006)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
Mr. Maman Sidikou, Permanent Secretary of the Group
of Five for the Sahel; Mr. Pierre Buyoya, African
Union High Representative for Mali and the Sahel;
and Mr. Pedro Serrano, Deputy Secretary-General
for Common Security and Defence Policy and Crisis
Response at the European External Action Service.
Mr. Buyoya and Mr. Serrano are joining today’s
meeting via video-teleconference from Bamako and
Brussels, respectively.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/1006, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel.
Before I give the floor to the briefers, I wish to
remind them of the time limits.
I now give the floor to Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix (spoke in French): I am grateful for the
opportunity to address the Council today, together with
His Excellency President Buyoya, Permanent Secretary
Sidikou and Deputy Secretary-General Serrano, with
whom we enjoy a strong and fruitful partnership.
It is a pleasure for me to update the Council on the
operationalization of the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and the international
support provided to it, including by the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). I shall also identify the challenges
encountered to date and list the measures that we
believe are necessary for the success of the Force, in
accordance with resolution 2391 (2017).
2/25

15/11/2018

The security situation in the Sahel remains
extremely concerning and the recent trends detailed
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/1006) are
worrying. The increase in terrorist attacks against
civilians, Government officials and security and
defence forces, particularly in north-eastern Burkina
Faso and the Niger, shows that the terrorist threat in the
Sahel is spreading. As always, civilians are paying the
highest price. Schools are closed, basic social services
are no longer delivered, potential investments are being
abandoned due to the climate of terror and fear that
is taking hold there. This situation robs young people
who are without prospects for a better future and real
opportunities of hope, thereby creating a fertile ground
for terrorism to thrive. If we do not take forceful and
coordinated measures forthwith to prevent terrorism,
that scourge will spread even faster and further, and it
will become even more difficult to address.
In this hostile environment, the operationalization
of the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel has not been easy.
Over the past six months, it has faced serious obstacles,
but has also overcome significant challenges. The
attack on its headquarters in Sévaré on 29 June was
a striking reminder of how well informed, prepared
and determined terrorist groups operating in the Sahel
region are. The attack destroyed critical infrastructure
and communications equipment, resulting in the
temporary suspension of Joint Force operations.
However, G-5 Sahel member States and Joint Force
leaders have persevered in the face of what could have
been a fatal blow to this important initiative.
I take this opportunity to thank the outgoing
Commander of the Joint Force, Brigadier General
Dacko, for his service and to congratulate the new
Force Commander, Brigadier General Hanena, on
his appointment. I commend his leadership and the
swift actions he has taken to ensure that efforts to
operationalize the Joint Force are actively pursued. The
decision taken by the G-5 Sahel Defence and Security
Committee on 25 October in Niamey to relocate the
Joint Force headquarters to Bamako should help to
restore the momentum of the Joint Force.
It is now essential that the Joint Force resume its
operations without delay. I therefore urge the leaders
of the Joint Force to spare no effort to finalize the
planning efforts and launch its next operations as
soon as possible. That will send a strong signal to
terrorist groups seeking to undermine State authority
and destabilize the region, and will strengthen the
18-38138

15/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

confidence of the G-5’s international partners. We also
call on the G-5 Sahel to step up its efforts to coordinate
the forces sent under G-5 framework and to further
clarify the concept of operations of the Joint Force. The
cross-border operations of the Joint Force, as part of the
first phase of the concept of operations, are important
and should be continued. But in the long term, only an
operation with a regional mandate and more clearly
defined roles and responsibilities among the Joint
Force, national armies and international forces will
be effective in combating terrorism and transnational
organized crime in the Sahel. We therefore encourage
G-5 Sahel member States to agree on a common vision
of the final status of the Joint Force.
(spoke in English)
Now more than ever, the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
depends on the support of the international community.
Remarkable progress has been in made in the area of
force generation. The G-5 Sahel member States have
deployed more than 80 per cent of their troops, manned
all sector headquarters and completed the transfer
of authority for all command posts. That is no small
feat just over 12 months after the Joint Force reached
initial operational capacity. However, much remains
to be done. The Joint Force has still not attained full
operational capacity. Major equipment shortfalls,
capability gaps, insufficient infrastructure and a lack
of secured operational bases continue to delay its
full operationalization.
We extend our deepest gratitude to the European
Union, which has done an outstanding job in matching
the Joint Force’s needs with corresponding donor
pledges and has also been an important donor to the
Joint Force since its inception. Contributions by
all the donors, which came swiftly forward, were
instrumental in the start-up phase of the Joint Force.
However, to date almost 50 per cent of pledges made
have not been earmarked, let alone disbursed. We
therefore urge donors to deliver on their commitments
and to provide the financial support the Joint Force so
urgently requires.
MINUSMA continues to face a funding gap of
almost $30 million to provide the support it was mandated
to provide to the Joint Force pursuant to resolution
2391 (2017). While the Mission responded immediately
and favourably to all of the Joint Force’s requests for
life-support consumables and transportation, it has
lacked the funding to provide engineering support

S/PV. 8402

for the enhancement and fortification of the Joint
Force’s camp, which remains the biggest obstacle to its
operationalization. Indeed, the Mission has undertaken
all required assessments, presented scopes of work
for four camps on Malian territory, and stands ready
to begin engineering support as soon as the required
resources become available. However, in the absence of
funding there is not much the Mission can do.
That points to the shortcomings of the current
support model for the Joint Force, despite the best
intentions of all actors involved. The Secretary-General
has stated repeatedly that the Joint Force requires a
different support mechanism, namely, a dedicated
support office funded through assessed contributions.
That would allow for more predictable and sustainable
planning of support measures to permit the extension
of support to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force beyond Malian
territory and enable MINUSMA to focus exclusively
on mandate implementation. I also echo the calls of the
Secretary-General and the Heads of States of the G-5
Sahel a mandate under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations for the Joint Force.
We are encouraged by progress made by the Joint
Force in the operationalization of the police component
and the establishment of its compliance framework.
Investigations into the two incidents in Boulékéssi, and
the transparency and cooperation demonstrated by both
Malian authorities and the Joint Force’s leadership are
commendable. Respect for human rights is integral to
achieving the operational aims of the Joint Force and a
prerequisite for the overall success of that initiative. In
fact, it will stand a chance only if the people of the Sahel
are confident in the actions of their defence and security
forces. We therefore call on the Force leadership to take
advantage of the technical support provided by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and to consolidate the achievements that
have already been made on important dimensions of its
compliance framework.
Finally, any security initiative in the Sahel can be
successful only if it is part of a larger, more holistic
strategy for the region that addresses the underlying
causes of instability while seeking political solutions
to prioritize inclusive socioeconomic development.
The United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel,
in conjunction with the G-5 Sahel’s priority investment
plan, provide the framework in which the Joint Force
must be embedded. We welcome the signature of a
partnership agreement between the G-5 Sahel secretariat

18-381383/25

S/PV.8402

Peace and security in Africa

and the Sahel Alliance in Niamey on 30 October, which
was an important step to enhance coordination and
cooperation in the Sahel.
Furthermore, we echo the Secretary-General’s
calls on the G-5 Sahel member States to urgently create
the Joint Force’s support group to provide a forum for
member States, donors and partners of the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force. The African Union has a key role to play
in that regard. Under its chairmanship, the support
group could ensure linkages with other regional and
political initiatives. We call on G-5 Sahel countries to
continue to address the critical governance shortfalls
in the region that provide a fertile breeding ground for
terrorism. The Malian peace process remains critical
in that regard as a cornerstone of political efforts to
address long-standing grievances.
It is our shared and collective responsibility
to ensure that the Joint Force succeeds. As such, I
call on each and every one of us to do our part. The
United Nations remains deeply committed to this
important initiative.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Sidikou.
Mr. Sidikou (spoke in French): On behalf of the
States members of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel), I thank the Security Council for convening this
briefing dedicated to the Joint Force of our regional
organization. I also offer my profound thanks to
Secretary-General Guterres for his biannual report
(S/2018/1006) to the Security Council.
Six months ago, I provided the members of Security
Council with an overview of the situation in the Sahel
(see S/PV.8266). Since then, we have seen an increased
level of insecurity in certain G-5 Sahel countries that is
cause for alarm. On 29 June, a terrorist attack destroyed
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force’s headquarters in Sévaré,
Mali. That event marked a halt to the operationalizing
of the Joint Force, which enjoys the logistical support
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
The Joint Force is clearly facing new challenges,
including a lack of equipment, shortcomings at the
logistical level and a lack of financing. Nevertheless,
progress has been seen in the establishment of the
compliance framework through the implementation
of mechanisms aimed at ensuring respect for human
4/25

15/11/2018

rights and international humanitarian law. That work is
being carried out with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and MINUSMA
and is focused primarily on the police component of
the Joint Force and on monitoring operations and
investigations to identify those responsible whenever
an incident occurs.
A regional conference on impunity, access to justice
and human rights in the context of emerging threats
to peace and security in West Africa and the Sahel
was held in Niamey on 10 September, which further
demonstrated the critical importance accorded to
respect for human rights in the comprehensive approach
put in place to respond to the crisis in the Sahel.
Concerning the financing of the Joint Force, I must
speak frankly about the gravity of the situation. On
23 February, the international high-level conference on
the Sahel held in Brussels concluded with pledges. To
date, we are far from the €414 million that were pledged.
We have received the equivalent of €17.9 million in
equipment, services and valuable technical assistance
from partners, such as the African Union and the
European Union. However, the G-5 Sahel trust fund
received pledged money only from and Rwanda and
the West African Economic and Monetary Union. I am
pleased and grateful to announce that yesterday the
United Arab Emirates disbursed €10 million to our trust
fund. On behalf of the people of the Sahel, in particular
the G-5 Sahel, I thank that country.
At the initiative of the President of the Niger, His
Excellency Mr. Mahamadou Issoufou, no effort has
been spared to ensure the efficient management of the
funds that have been received. The G-5 Sahel Council of
Ministers has adopted the statutes guiding the support
committee for the trust fund. Based in Nouakchott,
that structure will facilitate the disbursement of the
trust fund’s resources and will be operational in the
coming weeks.
With regard to the command of the Joint Force,
a new duo — Brigadier General Hanena Ould Sidi
of Mauritania and General Oumar Bikimo of Chad,
appointed by the Heads of State — has taken office.
They are at the helm of an arrangement consisting of
the Headquarters, now in Bamako, and three forward
command posts located in the west, the centre and the
east. Upon assuming office, the new leadership began
work on improving stewardship of the Joint Force and
preparing for new operations. The Force has already
18-38138

15/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8402

conducted six operations. However, our brave troops,
who stand ready to sacrifice themselves, will not be
able to achieve results without the timely provision of
the necessary means.

“We are unable to rally international solidarity
to achieve sustainable multilateral support for
the Joint Force, which was established to fight
terrorism and organized crime”.

As you have emphasized the important role of
multilateralism in conflict resolution, Mr. President,
the Sahel is experiencing a multidimensional crisis
that illustrates the relevance of such an approach.
Environmental and socioeconomic challenges make up
the backdrop to which many factors undermining our
stability have been added. Some G-5 Sahel countries
are facing high levels of tension leading, inter alia,
to the closure of schools, health-care facilities, police
stations and courts. A large segment of young people,
who make up the majority of the population, finds
itself totally helpless, and unfortunately sees only two
obvious options for the foreseeable future — either to
flee through illegal immigration, with all the horrors it
entails, or to embrace the hollow causes championed by
terrorist groups that are only too happy to profit from
the surrounding misery, while promising remuneration
gleaned from the many forms of trafficking in which they
engage. Given such a situation, it must be acknowledged
that its development will lead to a further deterioration
on the ground if we do not begin to take the appropriate
measures and provide the necessary resources. That
should be a cause of great concern that we might meet
again in this Chamber in a few months’ time to discuss
a response to a security and humanitarian crisis of a
much greater and tragic scale.

In keeping with Secretary-General António Guterres’s
call, I therefore add my voice to those of many Heads
of State and representatives of our peoples to request
that the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel be mandated under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. Such a
decision would consolidate the legitimacy of our efforts
and give meaning to the shared responsibility in the fight
against the hydra-headed terrorist threat. My presence
here attests to the importance of the Sahel in preserving
the geopolitical balance of the world. Let us therefore
formalize the international community’s attention.

How can we initiate multilateral action to effectively
support regional efforts? The G-5 Sahel has seen many
disparate interventions in the areas of migration,
security, humanitarian assistance and development.
Given the magnitude of crises, let us go beyond calls
and other warnings. Let us ensure that the funding
of multilateral institutions is commensurate with our
security and development needs. Let us skilfully use
our resources to avoid a vicious circle the harmful
consequences of which will represent an even greater
future challenge.
You have called for a return to the fundamental
principles of the United Nations, Mr. President.
Accordingly, courageous decisions must be made
to support some Member States. As the Chairman
of the G-5 Sahel stressed a few days ago at the Paris
Peace Forum,

As you so rightly pointed out recently, Mr President,
while the world finds itself confronted with multiple
new and extreme crises, causing regions that have
long been stable to totter, on the African continent,
including in the great Sahel region, a nexus of five
devoted countries has courageously united in the face
of adversity to prevent the ship from sinking. Those five
countries are struggling to hold on despite everything
and to work within their limited means to meet all
those immense security and development challenges.
Those countries require a greater level of tangible
solidarity on the part of the international community
in confronting challenges, the successful outcome or
failure of which — no one in this Chamber should be in
doubt — will have significant repercussions far beyond
the borders of Africa. There is still time to take all the
necessary measures and to finally act accordingly.
Lastly, I should like to highlight the recent work
of the G-5 Sahel in the area of development — the
only solution that can ensure long-term stability in
the region. We are currently organizing the first G-5
Sahel donor and partner coordination conference to
be held on Thursday, 6 December, in Nouakchott. A
portfolio of 40 structure-related projects constitutes the
first phase of the priority investment plan planned for
the period 2019-2021. We welcome the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, the implementation of
which we discussed with key stakeholders of the United
Nations system at a retreat held in Dakar last week.
Our discussions with the Sahel Alliance are under
way, and we signed a memorandum of understanding
on 30 October in Niamey to implement an emergency
development programme, in particular concerning
water issues. All of that, however, is inadequate for

18-381385/25

S/PV.8402

Peace and security in Africa

meeting the €1.9 billion needed for development,
especially given that the sum of €414 million euros for
security enhancement has failed to materialize.
I therefore solemnly call for increased investment
in the Sahel. All forms of financing to promote
prosperity are an investment in preventing insecurity.
For that reason, less than a month before the crucial
conference that is take place, I left Nouakchott to be
speak before the Security Council. Let us act quickly
and effectively in the conviction that doing so is in our
common interest.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Sidikou, for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Buyoya.
Mr. Buyoya (spoke in French): I would like to
begin by warmly congratulating China on its accession
to the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of November, and I particularly welcome the Council’s
topical choice of agenda items, which demonstrate its
indisputable interest in Africa.
On behalf of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, I thank
Secretary-General António Guterres for his detailed
and comprehensive report (S/2018/1006), which paints
a clear picture of the efforts that have been undertaken
in the operationalization of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel) Joint Force and proposes possible
solutions to the challenges that have been identified.
I should also like to pay tribute to the G-5 Sahel
and its member States for their sacrifices and steadfast
commitment to achieving the operationalization of
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force in all its components. That
reflects the political will of member States as they
strive to surmount the multifaceted crises plaguing the
region. I especially commend the Permanent Secretary,
Mr. Maman Sidikou, who has skilfully and decisively
put his heart and soul into ensuring that the G-5 Sahel
becomes an institution that matters, and I reiterate
my deepest gratitude to the bilateral partners and
subregional, regional and international organizations
that are working together for the operationalization
of the Joint Force by providing training in various
areas, strengthening capacity-building, restructuring
the Permanent Secretariat and delivering logistical
support. We are convinced that such support is vital
if the G-5 Sahel Joint Force is to achieve the goals that
have been assigned to it.
6/25

15/11/2018

I also laud the opening of the Sahel Defence
College and the Sahel Security College, which are
institutions that will enable member States to harness
high-quality human capacities over the short, medium
and long terms. I take this opportunity to reiterate my
deepest sympathies to the victims of the heinous attack
targeting the Sévaré headquarters of the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force that took place on 29 June, as well as to
their families.
The security situation in the Sahel continues to
deteriorate. There are increasing asymmetrical attacks
against defence and security forces and civilians in the
area of operations of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. It is
imperative that the Force be operationalized as soon as
possible and integrated into a comprehensive approach
that encompasses security, development, improved
governance — specifically vis-à-vis the presence
of State institutions throughout the territory — and
respect for human rights.
I now turn to the African Union’s contribution. The
Commission is pursuing its efforts to support the G-5
Sahel on the political, technical and material levels, to
the extent that it is able to do so. The African Union
Peace and Security Council, at its 679th meeting, on
13 April 2017, adopted a concept of operations for the
Force and authorized its deployment for an initial,
renewable period of 12 months. The Peace and Security
Council reiterated its support for the Joint Force at its
of 759th meeting, on 23 March this year. The African
Union supports the idea embodied in the report that the
concept of operations should continue to be tailored to
reflect the realities on the ground.
I also welcome the Secretary-General’s emphasis in
his report on the overriding need to establish a support
group for the G-5 Sahel Force. The African Union
remains convinced of the importance of strengthening
ties between the African Union and the G-5 Sahel
Force and making them an integral component of the
African peace and security architecture. In the light of
the growing deterioration of security conditions, the
African Union reiterates its support for the call issued
by the Heads of State of the G-5 Sahel, at their meeting
held on the margins of the African Union Summit in
Nouakchott, to endow the Force with a mandate under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations and
to enable it to enjoy direct United Nations financing.
We find ourselves at a critical juncture and the Force
deserves the support of the international community.
18-38138

15/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

To conclude, I commend the members of the G-5
Sahel for the sacrifices that they have made in their
struggle against terrorism. I thank all partners for their
support, call for greater commitment, and reiterate the
full support of the African Union at all levels — political,
technical and material.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Buyoya for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Serrano.
Mr. Serrano (spoke in French): Allow me to
thank you, Mr. President, for the invitation to brief the
Council on the European Union’s action in support of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).
The stability of the Sahel region is key not only
for the countries that comprise it but also for the
neighbouring regions and certainly for Europe’s
security. The European Union therefore remains
committed, alongside other international partners, in
particular the United Nations and the African Union,
as well as bilateral partners, whose contribution
is essential.
However, if certain actors deserve special mention
today, it is the Sahel countries themselves, and in
particular those of the G-5. Those countries, based
on a common understanding not only of threats and
challenges, but also opportunities, have taken their
destiny into their own hands through a regional
cooperation initiative. Since the creation of the G-5
Sahel in 2014, the European Union (EU) has actively
supported its growth, including by helping to mobilize
the international community, as it did, for example, at
the international high-level conference on the Sahel,
held in Brussels in February. This is in fact a priority
of the foreign policy of the European Union and its
member States.
I should like to cite some examples of the concrete
support that the European Union is providing to
our partners in the Sahel in the framework of an
integrated approach in the political, development and
security areas.
In regard to our political and diplomatic engagement,
the partnership between the European Union and the
G-5 Sahel is an almost daily reality, with frequent visits
among European and Sahelian leaders, including at
the summit in Brussels that I mentioned and regular
ministerial meetings, the latest of which was held in
June. The partnership is also reflected on the EU side

S/PV. 8402

in the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel and the key role played by the
European Union Special Representative for the Sahel,
Mr. Angel Losada.
In that context, support for the Malian peace
process through the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali is crucial to the
stability of Mali and the entire region. The European
Union, which remains the largest donor in Mali, is
actively involved in the international mediation in
support of the process. Moreover, through the provision
of targeted expertise, the European Union supports the
efforts of the Malian authorities to consolidate their
governance in central Mali.
With regard to development and humanitarian
action, the aid given by the European Union and its
member States to the region amounts to €8 billion for
the period 2014-2020, including €3.9 billion from the
European Development Fund and the European Union
Emergency Trust Fund for Africa and €1.7 billion in
budget support. That support is consistent with the G-5
Sahel priority investment plan. We look forward to the
next donors’ conference to be held in Nouakchott on
6 December. Moreover, in 2017, the European Union
allocated €240 million in humanitarian assistance to
the Sahel.
Lastly, allow me to talk about European cooperation
in terms of security and defence in the Sahel. The security
situation in the region is deteriorating, particularly in
central Mali and in northern and eastern Burkina Faso.
That was described by the Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. Lacroix, and I refer to his briefing. In that context,
the initiative of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force is therefore
being developed and increased international support in
the areas of security and defence is becoming essential.
The European Union has been present in the region
since 2012 with three missions and nearly 800 European
experts on the ground.
The European Union capacity-building mission
(EUCAP) Sahel Niger and EUCAP Sahel Mali are
civilian missions aimed at supporting the internal
security forces in Mali and in Niger to strengthen their
capacities to fight against terrorism and organized
crime. They also work to contribute to security sector
reform through advice, training and the provision
of equipment. Since their roll-out in 2012 and 2014,
respectively, EUCAP Sahel Niger and EUCAP Sahel

18-381387/25

S/PV.8402

Peace and security in Africa

Mali have provided training to nearly 16,000 members
of the security forces in Niger and Mali.
In coordination with the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and other partners, those two civilian
missions closely support the Sahelian authorities in
developing the police component of the Joint Force,
a key element in ensuring the judicial follow-up of
military actions and in strengthening the link between
the Force and the local populations.
The European Union military mission to contribute
to the training of the Malian Armed Forces (EUTM
Mali), with 570 soldiers, is a military training mission
that provides advice to the Malian authorities on
restructuring the armed forces by training battalions.
Eight battalions were trained between 2013 and 2017.
EUTM Mali is also a key partner of the Joint Force.
To date, it has organized four training courses for
military staff officers of the five Sahel countries and a
leadership seminar for the Force headquarters and the
three sectors. In addition, EUTM provides advice to the
Commander of the Joint Force and his command post on
developing organizational and operational procedures
and on infrastructure and equipment requests.
Together with our Sahelian partners, the European
Union has now embarked on a process of adapting
those missions to provide advice, training — through
assistance to the G-5 Defence College and the Sahel
Security College, among others — and support to the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force, as well as bilaterally to each of
its members in terms of their cross-border cooperation.
To that end, first, with the agreement of the G-5
Sahel members, the area of operations of the missions
will be extended to all the G-5 Sahel countries and the
mandates of the missions adapted to the needs jointly
identified. In addition, a regional coordination unit for
those missions will be deployed to Nouakchott to better
support the governance structures of the G-5 Sahel, as
we have agreed with its Permanent Secretary, whom I
warmly welcome.
Secondly, the EU strongly supports the development
and the operational implementation of the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force with a total amount of €100 million.
The support is structured as follows: equipment,
services and infrastructure — €75 million; support
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) for
operational and logistical support to the Joint Force in
Mali — €10 million; support to the Office of the United
8/25

15/11/2018

Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
establish a compliance framework on respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law for the Joint
Force operations — €10 million; and support for G-5
Sahel governance, in particular the operationalization
of the G-5 Sahel trust fund — €5 million.
Although sometimes slower than desired, the
delivery of EU-funded equipment, such as protection
teams, armoured vehicles or anti-explosive devices,
to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force units is under way. The
equipment and services that have already been delivered
to the field or are available to the Joint Force amount
to the sum of €17.9 million. Procurement processes
to the tune of €70 million are under way. Discussions
continue with the Commander of the Force for the use
of the €11.5 million still available
In that context, I also warmly welcome President
Kaboré’s announcement during his visit to Brussels
last week that the G-5 Sahel would be ready to bear
the recurrent costs of the Force, namely, €115 million
a year.
Thirdly, the European Union has established
the coordination hub, which is made available to the
G-5 Sahel and international donors to facilitate the
identification of needs and to coordinate the financial
support of donors to the Joint Force. Moreover, I would
like to thank the Security Council for the support
expressed through resolution 2391 (2017) to the
coordination hub, a platform that makes it possible to
share and update the list of needs and lists of offers.
In the context of regionalization, we aim to work
even more closely with the G-5 Sahel trust fund and
support committee.
I would also like to reaffirm that the cooperation
between the United Nations and the European Union in
Mali is excellent, particularly between our civilian and
military missions and MINUSMA on the ground. The
EU fully supports the work of MINUSMA and of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
condemns all attacks against the Mission.
The European Union is determined to continue to
build on its partnership with the G-5 Sahel countries,
which is vital to the security and development of the
region. We welcome the support of the Security Council
for such efforts.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Serrano for his briefing.
18-38138

15/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
President Buyoya, Mr. Maman Sidikou, Permanent
Secretary of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel), Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix
and Deputy-Secretary-General Pedro Serrano for their
very enlightening briefings. I particularly welcome
the presence around this table of Permanent Secretary
Maman Sidikou, whose constant engagement we
appreciate.
The fragility of the security situation in the Sahel
and the recent extension of the terrorist threat to eastern
Burkina Faso must alarm us all. The G-5 Sahel States
have shouldered their responsibilities by establishing
the Joint Force and by developing of common priority
investment programme, which demonstrate their
commitment to security and development on the
ground. In that context, it is the responsibility of
the international community to support the States
concerned in their efforts to respond to a threat to
international peace and security that concerns us all.
The establishment of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force,
at the initiative of the States concerned, represents
a historic initiative without any true precedent or
equivalent. Given the magnitude of the task and the
related challenges, we must duly assess and take stock
of the significant progress made in barely more than
a year.
Of course, since it is precisely a key tool in the
fight against terrorism in the Sahel, everyone would
have liked the process to have moved forward more
quickly and for the G-5 Joint Force already to be fully
operational. We all are aware of the considerable
progress that remains to be made.
However, the achievements demonstrate that the
process is well under way. It must be pursued with unity
and determination.
I am thinking first of the fact that the Joint
Force is now an operational reality, with 4,000 men
deployed, functional command structures and several
operations across the sectors. I am also thinking of the
establishment of a human rights compliance framework
unparalleled on the continent and the progress made in
setting up a police component, which makes it a noble
model of an African operation. The steps taken by the
Malian Government following the abuses committed in

S/PV. 8402

Boulékéssi last May are part of that positive dynamic.
Lastly, I think of the fact that the Joint Force is intended
as an essential link in the security architecture deployed
in the Sahel alongside the national armies, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, Operation Barkhane and the European
missions. The enemies of peace understood that when
targeting its headquarters in Sévaré during the tragic
attack last June.
For all those reasons, it is absolutely crucial that the
G-5 Sahel States continue their mobilization in order to
ensure that the Joint Force becomes fully operational as
soon as possible. That is the priority. And the biggest
priority of all is that new operations be conducted in the
next few weeks. The decision of the Heads of State of
the G-5 Sahel to relocate the headquarters of the Joint
Force to Bamako must also be implemented as soon as
possible.
Given this unprecedented mobilization by the
G-5 Sahel States, it is now the responsibility of the
international community and the Council to provide
them with effective support that corresponds to the level
of their challenges. That includes, first and foremost,
ensuring that the pledged financial contributions
materialize without delay. Many have already disbursed
their pledged funds or are drawing up contracts to do
so, thanks to the central role played by the European
Union in that regard. It is essential that countries that
have not yet made their contributions do so as soon
as possible. It is also critical that additional resources
be provided to finance the technical support that will
enable the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali to provide logistical and
operational support on the ground, which is not the job
of bilateral contributions.
The difficulties of generating and extracting
international support, however, demonstrate that the
mechanisms in place are not fully effective or capable
of generating predictable, sustainable resources, which
is crucial to scaling up the Joint Force in the short
and medium term. We therefore fully support the
Secretary-General’s recommendations for enhancing
multilateral support for the Joint Force by providing a
robust mandate and implementing a logistics package.
We are ready to bring them to the Security Council
as soon as the Joint Force is fully operational and we
see the first results on the ground on the basis of the
support that has already been provided. We will do it
in the spirit of the quest for consensus that has always

18-381389/25

S/PV.8402

Peace and security in Africa

driven our efforts on this issue, but also because it is
crucial that we provide the Joint Force with all of the
support it needs.
France firmly believes that this exceptional
security commitment to stabilizing the Sahel should
be accompanied by an equivalent level of mobilization
on the political and development fronts. First, on
the political front the priority is the eagerly awaited
full implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali. The Council has put in
place a robust framework in support of the Malian
stakeholders. The international community must make
use all of these mechanisms from now until the March
deadline established in resolution 2423 (2018). We are
also counting on the G-5 Sahel States to participate in
the work of persuading all the Malian parties to come
on board.
On the development front, the priority is creating
sustainable prospects for the people of the Sahel,
especially its young people. With 500 projects
identified and totalling more than €7.5 billion by
2020, the Alliance for the Sahel is aiming to mobilize
donors and promote good practices to ensure that the
assistance reaches the most vulnerable populations
quickly, particularly in cross-border areas. The United
Nations Development Programme in particular has a
key role to play in terms of governance. The signing of
a partnership agreement between the Alliance and the
G-5 Sahel is also an important step that should make
it possible to implement rapid-impact projects by the
end of the year in vulnerable areas identified by the
G-5 Sahel, in order to prevent them from plunging
into instability. We also fully support the G-5 Sahel
priority investment plan and call on donors to be
ready for the donor coordination conference to be held
in Nouakchott on 6 December. All of those projects
should be based on the broader framework established
by the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel,
which is intended to serve as a guidepost for avoiding
any diffusion or duplication of effort. Lastly, we
encourage the Peacebuilding Commission to maintain
its strong commitment to the Sahel issue. It represents
an important setting conducive to encouraging balance
and coordination between the political, security and
development efforts.
The situation in the Sahel today demands our
full attention and effort. All the parties must do their
part — the G-5 Sahel, by conducting the Joint Force’s
new operations in the next few weeks; donors, by
10/25

15/11/2018

ensuring that they make their financial contributions
without delay; and the Council, by committing to
revisiting its multilateral support for the Joint Force
once it is fully operational. France will issue a press
statement to that effect at the end of this meeting.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General JeanPierre Lacroix for his informative briefing. The African
vision for resolving the issues in the region, as outlined
by Mr. Maman Sidikou, the Permanent Secretary of
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, and
Mr. Pierre Buyoya, High Representative of the African
Union for Mali and the Sahel, deserves the most serious
attention we can give it. We are also grateful to the rest
of today’s briefers.
We agree with the alarming opinions on the
situation in the Sahel that have been expressed today.
The level of the threats to security and stability in that
part of Africa is unprecedentedly high. The terrorist
underground that has established itself in the region
is scaling up its operations and seeking to expand its
geographical territory. The number of new radical
groups is growing, as is organized crime, which is
actively exploiting the absence of any authority across
vast areas of the region. The roots of these problems are
well known. In the Sahel we are reaping the whirlwind
sown by the collapse of statehood in Libya, the legacy
of a crude foreign intervention. Practically speaking,
we believe it will be impossible to stabilize the situation
in the region without normalizing the situation in that
country.
We welcome the initiative of the Group of Five for
the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to create a Joint Force to combat
terrorism and organized crime. In the 18 months of the
Joint Force’s existence, undeniable progress has been
made. Several military operations have been carried
out, the staffing of military personnel is at 80 per cent,
the establishment of a headquarters and secretariat is
nearing completion and mechanisms have been created
for financing them. We expect that concrete plans for
the continuation of joint operations will be announced
in the near future. In our opinion the Joint Force has
already demonstrated that it represents a key factor in
ensuring the stability of the region. Of course, much
remains to be done. The 29 June terrorist attack on the
headquarters of the Joint Force in Sévaré was naturally
a heavy blow that has slowed the training process. At
the same time, it served to reveal the Joint Force’s weak
spots. As we understand it, the relevant conclusions
18-38138

15/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

have been drawn and work has begun to address the
errors. It will also be important to speed up the process
of building military camps for the Joint Force, solve the
problems of providing them with enough weapons and
improve the training of combat personnel.
Those issues cannot be resolved without ensuring
stable and predictable funding for the Sahel States’
joint military structures. We have seen that the funds
are slowly reaching the region. Unfortunately, many
of those who made financial pledges in this regard
have not been in a hurry to fulfil them. And owing
to a lack of funding, neither can the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali fully implement its mandate to support the Joint
Force.
We are convinced of the importance of further
coordinated efforts, on the part of both the Africans
and the international community, aimed at combating
extremism in the Sahel-Sahara region. Military
methods alone clearly cannot root out that evil. It
is also essential to effectively counter the spread of
extremist ideology, work constructively to tackle the
acute socioeconomic problems plaguing the countries
of the region and strengthen their State institutions, and
we want to highlight the key role of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel in addressing those
challenges.
Russia is studying the possibility of adjusting its
effective cooperation with the G-5 Sahel States in
order to deal with the region’s pressing problems. We
are already giving military and technical assistance to
a number of the countries in the region and providing
training for military and police personnel. We will
continue to facilitate capacity-building for the armed
forces of the G-5 Sahel with the aim of enabling
their Joint Force to become an effective tool for the
restoration and maintenance of peace in West Africa.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We commend the
presidency of China for this opportunity to discuss
the activities of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). We would like to express
our appreciation to Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Maman Sidikou, Permanent Secretary of the
G-5 Sahel, Mr. Pierre Buyoya, African Union High
Representative for Mali and the Sahel, and Mr. Pedro
Serrano, Deputy Secretary-General for Common
Security and Defence Policy and Crisis Response

S/PV. 8402

at the European External Action Service, for their
comprehensive briefings.
Kazakhstan remains concerned about the
deterioration of the security situation in the Sahel’s
tri-border area and the further expansion of terrorist
and extremist groups into central Mali and eastern
Burkina Faso. It is worrying that this insecurity is
further aggravated by the alliances that terrorist and
extremist groups have formed with groups involved
in transnational organized crime, drug and human
trafficking and arms proliferation. Our delegation
welcomes the commitments and determination of the
G-5 Sahel countries to operationalize the Joint Force,
which is critical to effective counter-terrorism in the
region. We believe that making the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force fully operational will positively reinforce the
joint efforts of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
the Malian national security forces and other
mechanisms to bring peace and stability to the Sahel.
However, to succeed, the G-5 Sahel countries need
predictable and long-term sustainable funding from
the donor community, as well as technical assistance
from Member States. We therefore support the
recommendations contained in the semi-annual report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1006) regarding
the need to revise support measures and the funding
mechanism. In turn, the G5-Sahel States will have
to speed up the process of making the Joint Force
fully functional, improve its operational readiness
and sustainably implement the human rights and
international humanitarian law compliance framework.
We welcome the opening of the security and defence
colleges established by the G-5 Sahel, which is an
important step towards enhancing the Joint Force’s
capacity.
Another important task is ensuring the
complementarity and strengthening the coordination
between the G-5 Sahel Joint Force with all security
forces in the region, including MINUSMA, Operation
Barkhane and regional frameworks, in particular the
African Union-led Nouakchott process. The Joint Force
should find its place within the larger political and
institutional framework and strategy that is planned
for the subregion, and which also calls for improving
coherence among the Sahel countries themselves. We
therefore support the call from the G-5 Sahel summit
held in Nouakchott in July for harmonizing the G-5

18-3813811/25

S/PV.8402

Peace and security in Africa

Sahel priority investment plan and the United Nations
Support Plan for the Sahel.
To genuinely address instability in the region,
counter-terrorism measures must be accompanied
by development efforts and by tackling the root
causes of conflict and instability. To some extent,
those issues can be resolved or at least reduced by
strengthening local governance, reducing poverty and
tribal rivalries, providing basic services and creating
more jobs. Mitigating the effects of climate change
should be another priority. My country has proposed a
three-pronged strategy for resolving regional conflicts,
consisting in strengthening the security-development
nexus, adopting a regional approach and streamlining
the United Nations system to enable it to deliver as one.
A comprehensive overall strategy of this kind could
prove to be a highly effective and sustainable tool for
addressing the common threats facing the Sahel and the
countries of the region. The recalibrated United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the recently
launched Support Plan represent a good basis for such
a comprehensive and integrated approach. We are also
looking forward to the alignment of the Integrated
Strategy with the African Union’s strategy for the
Sahel. We hope that concrete results will be achieved in
that regard at the upcoming African Union ministerial
meeting on Mali and the Sahel. In conclusion, I would
like to reiterate Kazakhstan’s commitment to helping
the Sahel countries to fulfil their vision for peace,
progress and prosperity.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me also thank
today’s briefers.
The challenges facing the Sahel region are complex
and becoming increasingly so. The United Kingdom is
concerned about the increasing incidence of terrorism,
criminality and intercommunity violence in central
Mali. We share the Secretary-General’s concerns about
the spread of insecurity and terrorism to other parts
of the region, including eastern Burkina Faso. Many
speakers today have talked about the importance not
only of security — although that is key — but also about
development, and the wider economic development and
provision of services that are required. We can see our
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in action in
this region. There is not one single element that can
ensure success alone. All of them are needed. There
are economic and social issues that go back decades
and that underpin the instability in the Sahel. Our
12/25

15/11/2018

development work must address those long-standing
causes of the instability we see while also emphasizing
individual rights.
The Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) needs to tackle terrorism and create the
space for Governments and international organizations
to safely deliver services. The United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), of course, is a crucial component
of assisting Governments in that space. In Mali in
particular, we need to focus on the peace process and
recommit to it. All those components are therefore not
only individually but collectively vital, and it is the
core task of all in leadership roles, whether in New
York, Nouakchott or on the ground, to ensure that those
efforts are connected, sequenced and effective. And it
would help the Council if we could hear more about
those joint activities in practice as well as in theory.
As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/1006)
sets out, there is clear progress to applaud. We recognize
the leaders and the personnel of the G-5 Sahel States
for continuing their efforts to unite and work together
despite difficult and adverse circumstances. The
United Kingdom is particularly encouraged by the
successful deployments of troops and the conduct of
six Joint Force operations on the boundary zones; the
full operationalization of the three sector headquarters
and the launch of the Sahel security and defence
colleges. We recognize the bravery and dedication of
the G-5 Joint Force in what Mr. Lacroix described as an
alarming security situation.
We were also pleased to see the update on the human
rights and international humanitarian law compliance
framework. The United Kingdom emphasizes the
importance of ensuring that the operations of the Joint
Force are conducted in full compliance with international
law, including international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. We welcome the steps
already taken to advance the compliance framework
and encourage continued efforts to embed and make
it operational throughout the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
The protection of civilians and the operationalization
of the framework are vital to maintaining the support
and consent of the populations that the Joint Force was
created to protect.
Moving forward, we want to encourage the G-5
Sahel secretariat to finalize the Joint Force’s strategic
concept of operations, which will both demonstrate
18-38138

15/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

unity of purpose within the Joint Force and boost
donor confidence. We call on the G-5 Sahel countries
to expedite their efforts to deploy all their outstanding
troops and fully establish the police component in
order to address the growing transborder threat that
the region is facing. I welcomed Mr.Sidikou’s bluntness
this morning. We also strongly urge all partners to
make good on the financial commitments they have
made to the Joint Force as soon as possible in order
to ensure that it becomes even more of a reality as
quickly as it can. The United Kingdom reiterates its
support for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. To that end we
have contributed 15.5 per cent of the package of support
of the European Union (EU) to the Joint Force as well
as pledging £2 million in bilateral support, and we
have deployed three Chinook helicopters to the Sahel
to support Operation Barkhane. That is on top of the
approximately $200 million that we have provided to
the Sahel in development and humanitarian assistance
between 2018 and 2019.
The United Kingdom recognizes the contribution
of the regional actors working for stability in the Sahel,
including MINUSMA, Operation Barkhane and the
EU missions, and we support the technical assistance
and training they are providing. Enhance coordination
is key to ensuring that the various stabilization efforts
have maximum impact and avoid duplication. We
commend the EU’s role in managing the coordination
hub so far, and recognize its intention to transfer the
hub to the G-5 Sahel once it has the capacity to receive
and host it. To that end, we strongly urge the G-5 Sahel
to accelerate the establishment of the support group that
will serve as a platform for exchanges and coordination
with national, regional and international partners.
I made it clear earlier that military action alone is
not the solution to this issue, and I outlined some of
what the United Kingdom has done to that end. With
that in mind, we welcome the recalibration of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the launch
of the United Nations Support Plan, which provides
an important framework for addressing the structural
impediments to development, peace and security in the
region in a more integrated manner, and the issues in
the Sahel more generally, which, as I said before, go
back decades. We also welcome the continuing role
taken by the Peacebuilding Commission in mobilizing
commitments and partnerships between the United
Nations system, the countries of the Sahel and other

S/PV. 8402

international and regional partners with a view to
advancing implementation of the Integrated Strategy.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes this briefing on the progress of the
operationalization of the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). I thank Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Maman Sidikou, Permanent Secretary
of the Group of Five for the Sahel, Mr. Pierre Buyoya,
African Union High Representative for Mali and the
Sahel, and Mr. Pedro Serrano, Deputy SecretaryGeneral for Common Security and Defence Policy
and Crisis Response at the European External Action
Service, for their excellent presentations.
The briefings informed us about the progress that
has been made and the challenges to be tackled in order
to ensure the full operationalization of the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force. The challenges are related in particular
to a lack of adequate, predictable resources, sufficient
personnel, and appropriate training and equipment
adequate to the scale of the security threats. Despite
those difficulties, the Council’s unity of action and the
continued commitment of State and institutional actors
have enabled the concerted and generally satisfactory
implementation of the recommendations of resolution
2391 (2017), on the logistical and operational support
to the Joint Force provided by the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA). In that regard, Côte d’Ivoire
would like to encourage all the relevant stakeholders,
particularly the G-5 Sahel States, to continue their
efforts to bring the Joint Force up to speed.
According to the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/1006), while the progress in building up the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force is encouraging, it is still below
expectations. Côte d’Ivoire therefore urges the G-5 Sahel
States to continue their dialogue with international
partners with a view to strengthening and improving
the coordination of the multifaceted support for the
Joint Force’s operationalization. We continue to believe
that its rapid deployment capabilities and familiarity
with the social and cultural environment constitute
the Joint Force’s comparative advantages in the fight
against the spread of terrorism and cross-border crime
in the Sahel.
The complexity of the current security challenges
in the Sahel and the West African subregion demand
that States pool their resources to fight terrorist groups.

18-3813813/25

S/PV.8402

Peace and security in Africa

My country therefore welcomes MINUSMA’s logistical
and operational support to the Joint Force, as mandated
by resolution 2391 (2017), which is a good example
of cooperation between United Nations and African
peace operations.
We emphasize how pleased we were with the signing
on 23 February of the technical agreement between the
United Nations, the European Union and the G-5 Sahel
countries. We therefore urge all partners to follow up on
their financing pledges in order to complete the process
of operationalizing the Joint Force. We welcome the
adoption by the G-5 Sahel States of the compliance
framework aimed at ensuring scrupulous respect for
human rights by the Joint Force. Its implementation will
require raising awareness of respect for fundamental
human rights among the military components of the
Joint Force, as well as effective punishment for those
who commit violations of human rights.
Even if the Joint Force reaches its full operational
capacity, it is undeniable that its effectiveness will
continue to depend on current efforts to stabilize the
political environment in the region. The Joint Force
must therefore be one piece of a political effort that goes
beyond security policy to form part of a comprehensive
process for the lasting settlement of the current crises
in the Sahel region. In that regard, and in the context of
the quest for a political solution to the Malian crisis, my
delegation calls on all the signatories to the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali to implement it
immediately. The fact is that ensuring the Agreement’s
success would be a first step towards restoring lasting
peace and stability in the Sahel. In addition, the Joint
Force’s security responses must also be supported
by strategies aimed at eradicating the factors behind
regional vulnerabilities and improving the resilience of
States and local populations to crises. We believe that
to that end we must ensure that the ongoing security
and development policies are aligned so as to provide
sustainable responses to the multidimensional crises
facing the Sahel. In that regard, we appreciate the
recalibration of the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel and the development of the United Nations
Support Plan in the wake of the review of the security
and development challenges in the region.
Côte d’Ivoire appreciates the financial support of
bilateral and multilateral partners to the Joint Force,
but we remain concerned about its long-term financial
viability, given the scale of its needs and the delays
in making the promised funds available. We believe
14/25

15/11/2018

that considering the regional dimension and scale of
the current threats, it is the international community’s
responsibility to come up with rapid responses to the
need for predictable and sustainable funding.
The consequences of insecurity and instability,
exacerbated by the actions of numerous jihadist groups
and cross-border criminal networks, extend well beyond
the Sahel region. Today they constitute an important
challenge to the maintenance of international peace and
security, demanding that we act urgently to formulate
coordinated and sustainable responses in order to bring
stability and development to the people of the Sahel.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my country’s
full appreciation to the States members of the G-5 Sahel
for the enormous sacrifices that they have undertaken
despite difficult regional circumstances. Their steadfast
commitment in a context where Africa aspires to take
ownership of its collective security is an example that
we should support. Côte d’Ivoire will continue to stand
by their side as part of the collective efforts undertaken
by the international community.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): We wish to thank UnderSecretary-General Lacroix, Permanent Secretary
Maman Sidikou of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel), African Union High Representative for
Mali and the Sahel Pierre Buyoya, and the Deputy
Secretary-General for Common Security and Defence
Policy and Crisis response at the European External
Action Service, Pedro Serrano, for their respective
briefings and updates concerning the situation in the
Sahel region and the activities of the G-5 Sahel.
We fully recognize that the restoration and
expansion of State authority in northern Mali and G-5
Sahel countries still remains a serious challenge. In the
absence of viable State structures, the promotion of
peace and reconciliation across the region and carrying
out critical institutional reforms, including security
sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration in Mali, have been very difficult.
The threats and frequent attacks in recent months
against security forces and other personnel serving in
State institutions, as well as the destruction of public
facilities, must be taken very seriously. We agree with
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/1006) that the
numerous recent terrorist attacks are clear indications
of the growing presence of terrorist groups in the region,
including those along the Libyan-Chadian border, which
are taking advantage of the security vacuum not covered
18-38138

15/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

by the operations of the international forces or the G-5
Sahel member States armed forces. This situation calls
for stronger coordination and deterrence work by the
G5-Sahel Joint Force and the national militaries and
security agents of each State of the region.
The joint efforts of the G-5 Sahel member States
and their commitment, which was renewed during the
high-level week of the General Assembly through the
pledge of Member States to fully operationalize the
Joint Force, deserve appreciation. If countries of the
region are assured of predictable financing and supplied
with adequate equipment capabilities, we believe that
there is no reason why this should not materialize.
At the aforementioned high-level event on Mali and
the Sahel, representatives of donor countries expressed
their willingness to support the Joint Force and urged the
G-5 Sahel member States to accelerate force generation
efforts. It is, however, important that the international
community, including the Council, take concrete action,
as requested by President Ibrahim Keita of Mali and
other representatives from the region, to place the G-5
Sahel Joint Force under a Chapter VII mandate so as to
ensure continuous support and funding. The geographic
challenge of military operations in the Sahel desert and
the vastness of the terrain make it imperative that the
capacity of the Joint Force be strengthened through
robust international support.
We support the African Union’s work in reporting on
the activities of the Joint Force, focusing on progress in
its operationalization, international support to the Joint
Force, the implementation of the technical agreement,
challenges encountered, and adherence by the G-5
Sahel to human rights and international humanitarian
law. In this context, we very much support efforts of
the G-5 Sahel in restructuring its secretariat to meet its
operational demands.
While the operationalization of the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force and presence of other international
forces are contributing to resolving the security
problem in the Sahel, partnerships in the social and
economic development aspects, and principally in
the implementation of the priority investment plan,
should be a major preoccupation in order to ensure
sustainable development in the region. In that regard,
the cooperation of the United Nations agencies — such
as the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization,
the World Food Programme, the United Nations

S/PV. 8402

Development Programme, the European Union and
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali — is indeed vital. We
hope that the outcome of the annual discussion of the
Peacebuilding Commission on 12 November will help
mobilize support for the G-5 Sahel and the wider region.
Although the Governments of the region do not
stint in exerting efforts, the humanitarian situation in
the Sahel remains very precarious and may continue to
be worsened by increasing conflict and climate-related
challenges. We wish to extend our support to the
emergency programme for the rehabilitation of local
infrastructure in border areas of the countries of the Sahel
region. In that connection, it is important that access to
basic services and job opportunities in the border areas
be scaled up in the context of implementation of the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and
the United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I too thank all our briefers
this morning
I want to start by commending the countries of
the region for their very valuable efforts for peace and
security in the Sahel. We understand how those efforts
are carried out under very difficult circumstances, and
I take the opportunity to express our condolences for
the loss of lives among security forces and civilians.
We share the grave concern about the deteriorating
security situation in the region. We are especially
worried about the situation in central Mali and the
spill-over of violence to Burkina Faso and the Niger.
The high number of civilian casualties and allegations
of violations of human rights and of international
humanitarian law are alarming. I think our briefers
rightly underlined the effect that all this has on the
people, not least the youth, of the region.
We therefore welcome the determination of the
G-5 Sahel countries to make a united effort to meet the
security challenges. We are encouraged by the steps
taken so far in the operationalization of the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force, as well as the extensive support provided
by partners, including not least the European Union.
We know from our experience in the Security Council
how regional efforts and cooperation provide such a
huge and important boost to any United Nations efforts
for peace.
It is now crucial to swiftly implement the remaining
elements of resolution 2391 (2017). Creating the
conditions for outstanding troops to be deployed and the

18-3813815/25

S/PV.8402

Peace and security in Africa

police component of the Joint Force to be established
without delay should be a priority. To ensure the full
functioning and credibility of the Force, authority over
battalions must be transferred to the Force Commander.
A new timeline for reaching full operational capacity
should be defined soon, as others have said this
morning. The further development and clarification
of the Joint Force’s strategic concept of operations are
equally important. Clarity on the desired end state
would demonstrate unity of purpose and bolster donor
confidence.
As stated in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/1006), respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law will be a key determining factor for
the success of the Joint Force. It is imperative that
alleged human rights violations, including those related
to the operations of the Joint Force, be prevented and
investigated. Perpetrators must be held to account.
We appreciate initiatives aimed at increasing
confidence between populations and the G-5 Sahel
countries’ security forces. We are encouraged by the
continued work on the establishment of a robust human
rights and international humanitarian law compliance
framework. The operational and logistical support
provided by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
to the Joint Force is important. At the same time, we
continue to emphasize that this support should not
affect MINUSMA’s capacity to implement its own
mandate and strategic priorities in Mali.

15/11/2018

Durable peace and stability requires a combination
of security and development measures. In that regard,
we appreciate the joint efforts by regional actors, the
African Union and the European Union with the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the
United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel. That Plan
now provides a unique opportunity for more coherent
and coordinated international support. The upcoming
donor coordination conference in December, which
will discuss the priority investment plan, will be
important. We note Secretary Sidikou’s very good point
that pledges must be translated into real support.
Earlier this week the annual session of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) also focused on
the Sahel and the joint PBC-Economic and Social
Council meeting on climate change. There was strong
support for the priorities identified in the United
Nations Integrated Strategy, including focusing on
economic growth, governance and climate change.
The importance of youth and increasing women’s
participation was also highlighted. It is important
that the PBC continue to engage in order to mobilize
support, sustain international attention and coordinate
efforts. The Peacebuilding Commission remains a
unique platform for convening actors, bringing about
a holistic understanding of security and development
and politically accompanying countries and regions
in transition.

As we move forward, options for further United
Nations support must be seriously considered.
Predictable and reliable funding is vital if the Joint
Force is to be able to carry out planning and operations
in an effective and sustainable manner. To achieve that,
it is imperative in turn that the Force live up to existing
standards and expectations.

The Deputy Secretary-General and Sweden’s
Minister for Foreign Affairs visited countries in the
Sahel region last July. We then organized a high-level
Council meeting on women and peace and security
(see S/PV.8306). The conclusions from that visit and
the meeting, as reflected in the presidential statement
on the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel (S/PRST/2018/16), emphasize the importance
of enhancing the role of women in preventing and
resolving conflict and building peace.

The full implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali remains key.
Achieving long-term stability and sustaining peace in
the region also require taking a holistic and inclusive
approach. The Joint Force needs to be embedded within
a larger political and institutional framework, as also
emphasized by the Secretary-General. We welcome
the establishment of the support group for the Joint
Force, but note that further efforts to enhance strategic
direction are needed. That must be carried out in close
coordination with regional structures and organizations.

Sweden remains committed to supporting Mali
and the Sahel in their efforts to enhance security and
development and build sustainable peace. In addition to
our substantial troop contribution to MINUSMA, our
broad commitment includes support through the EU as
well as bilateral and regional development cooperation
and humanitarian assistance. Strong international
support, a united Security Council and effective
regional cooperation through the G-5 Sahel will be key
for the Sahel region’s forward progress towards peace
and stability.

16/25

18-38138

15/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; Mr. Sidikou, Permanent Secretary of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel); Mr. Buyoya,
High Representative of the African Union for Mali and
the Sahel; and Mr. Serrano, Deputy Secretary-General
for Common Security and Defence Policy, for their
briefings today.
There is no denying the many challenges faced
today by the people and countries of the Sahel. We are
concerned by the increase in intercommunal violence
and insecurity along the borders of Burkina Faso,
Mali and the Niger and by the continued prevalence of
terrorist and criminal activity throughout the region. As
many have said here today, only through a combination
of good governance focused on addressing the root
causes of instability and creating opportunity, respect
for human rights and security can the region resolve the
challenges and defeat the threats that it faces.
The United States commends the initiative of the
G-5 Sahel member States to create and operationalize
its Joint Force to combat threats of terrorism and
transnational organized crime. We take this opportunity
to recognize the sacrifices of the soldiers of G-5
member States and their families and to also honour the
civilians killed as a result of the violence and insecurity
in the region.
The United States strongly supports the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force and its efforts to establish lasting security.
We believe that bilateral support remains the most
effective option. We continue to work closely with
all partners to coordinate our contributions of muchneeded equipment, training and technical advice. Over
the past year the United States has nearly doubled
its assistance to G-5 Sahel member States, from
$60 million to approximately $111 million, specifically
to fill prioritized capability gaps of the Joint Force.
That amount constitutes just one piece of broader and
long-standing United States security assistance to
the G-5 member States, with over $1 billion in total
United States support to their institutions and combat
capabilities since 2012.
We laud the continued support of the international
community and the Joint Force’s development and
successful operationalization, in particular the support
of the European Union (EU) for the implementation
of the human rights compliance framework for the
Joint Force and its continuing training missions. We

S/PV. 8402

commend the G-5’s collaboration with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
towards the continued establishment of a compliance
framework. The Joint Force’s professionalism and
respect for international human rights law and
international humanitarian law will be critical to
its long-term success. We also salute France’s longstanding and integral role as a security partner to the
Sahel countries through its Operation Barkhane and the
many sacrifices made by that mission’s men and women
to defeat continuing violent extremist threats. We also
applaud the role of the United Nations, including the
personnel of MINUSMA, the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel and others, who are working
diligently to solve political insecurity challenges across
the region.
The United States hopes to see the effective
implementation of the technical agreement among the
G-5 Sahel, the United Nations and the EU called for
in resolution 2391 (2017), which allows for MINUSMA
to be reimbursed for logistical support provided to the
Force within Mali’s territory. As Ambassador Haley
stated a year ago (see S/PV.8080), we believe that
is the full extent of any support role that the United
Nations should play outside of continued coordination
and technical assistance on a voluntary basis. But the
technical agreement remains a way for MINUSMA
to help at a critical stage. We encourage donors to
support the trust fund for MINUSMA reimbursement
in order to facilitate urgent engineering needs like the
Mission-proposed camp designs, which still await the
G-5 Sahel’s approval.
On a related but separate note, we also do not believe
Chapter VII authorization is needed to accomplish
the Joint Force’s mission, as the G-5 Sahel countries
already has existing agreements in place for military
operations in their respective territories.
As others have recognized, security responses
alone will not solve every problem. Therefore, the
United States continues its multisector partnerships
with the Governments and societies of the G-5 Sahel
countries to bolster stability and security through
United States humanitarian, health, agriculture,
governance and development assistance. The United
States provided more than $460 million during its 2017
fiscal year in development and humanitarian assistance
to programmes in those countries. As we have stated

18-3813817/25

S/PV.8402

Peace and security in Africa

before, our support seeks to complement the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the
creative partnership envisioned in its Support Plan.
At the centre of the region, with its own unique
political and security challenges, is Mali and its
peace agreement. We call again on the parties to that
agreement and to those of the new Pact for Peace in Mali
to make significant progress over the next few months in
recognition of how critical their success on the road map
will be. Going forward, we cannot and should not accept
the lack of coordination and communication among
the parties that we have seen in the past, including,
for example, the disagreements that led to the failure
of the opening ceremony for accelerated disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration last week in Gao.
Parties must expeditiously resolve outstanding issues
and rapidly implement the key provisions outlined in
resolution 2423 (2018). The stakes are too high, both
for the people of Mali and of the region. The Security
Council should reserve the right to use all its available
tools, including sanctions, on spoilers who obstruct the
agreement’s implementation.
The United States will continue to work together
with the G-5 Sahel and its partners to ensure our
bilateral support is appropriate and effective. We also
encourage all donors to disburse the resources pledged
to the Joint Force last February in Brussels. Through
our effective coordination with the security and
development actors in the region, the leadership of the
African Union and that of the Economic Community
of West African States in solving regional and local
disputes, significant improvements in security can
be made. The sustainability of those improvements
will depend on the progress of the G-5 member States
towards effective governance, the creation of access to
opportunity and respect for human rights, accountability
and inclusiveness. Also critical will be an expansion
of the roles of women, young people and marginalized
groups in decision-making. Together, those steps can
contribute to achieving durable peace and stability and
unleash the potential of this vital region and its people.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to express our thanks for the convening of
this meeting and for the important briefings by Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, Mr. Maman Sidikou, Mr. Pierre Buyoya
and Mr. Pedro Serrano.
Peru is following with concern the delicate
humanitarian situation and the continuing deterioration
18/25

15/11/2018

of security in the Sahel subregion, despite the valuable
action of the countries that make up the Joint Force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). We regret
the spread of violent extremism and condemn the
persistence of terrorist attacks. We wish to emphasize
the need to redouble our efforts in three areas that we
consider fundamental to stabilize the subregion and
build sustainable peace.
First, with regard to security, the Joint Force is
called on to play an essential role in the fight against
terrorism and transnational organized crime, which
are mutually reinforcing phenomena. To do that it must
have appropriate equipment and enhance its operational
capacity through the full deployment of its military
and police components. That, in turn, presupposes the
availability of predictable and sustainable financing, as
well as the technical cooperation of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). To that end, we stress the need
for the G-5 Sahel countries to continue to implement
the Joint Force’s strategic concept of operations and
the human rights compliance framework, with a
view to bolstering the confidence and support of the
international community.
Secondly, in the political sphere, we believe that the
peaceful holding of elections in Mali and Mauritania
should make it possible to strengthen institutions and
governance in those countries, which, in turn, should
be reflected through more legitimate and effective
action for the stability and progress of the subregion.
In that connection, we hope that the recent signing of
the Pact for Peace in Mali, in line with the provisions
of resolution 2423 (2018), will enable the revitalization
and accelerated implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation.
Thirdly, on the issue of sustainable development,
as several speakers have pointed out this morning,
achieving sustainable peace in the Sahel goes beyond
military considerations. We need a multidimensional
approach that addresses the root causes of the conflict.
That means, among other measures, building and
strengthening the necessary capacities and institutions
to promote and protect human rights, countering
the negative effects of climate change, providing
basic services and fostering sustained economic
growth in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. We stress the importance of promoting
gender equality and the empowerment of women and
of increasing employment opportunities, particularly
18-38138

15/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

for young people. Women and young people are called
upon to play a central role in building a better future for
their societies.
Finally, the various efforts, initiatives and
mechanisms deployed in the field to maintain political
and operational coherence must reflect and address
the needs and priorities of the member countries of
the G-5 Sahel, as well as the provisions of the relevant
Council resolutions. The G-5 Sahel is a clear example
of the potential and commitment of African countries
to promote peace and security on their continent.
They deserve the strong support of the international
community and, in particular, of the Council. In that
connection, we stress that the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel, together with its Support Plan,
provide a comprehensive framework for working to
strengthen governance, security and development in
the region. Consequently, all initiatives should operate
within that framework.
Peru will continue to support the efforts of the
G-5 Sahel countries, MINUSMA, the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel, the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States, the European Union and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, among other agencies of
the United Nations system, as well as actors committed
to achieving sustainable peace in the Sahel.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands) (spoke in
French): First and foremost, allow me to thank the
briefers for their excellent statements, which give a
clear picture of the cooperation of the United Nations,
the African Union and the European Union with the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). Given the
current situation, such cooperation is critical.
Today I would like to address three points.
First, I will highlight concerns about the changing
security environment. Secondly, I will mention the
operationalization of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
Thirdly, I will focus on the link between security and
development in the Sahel.
First, with regard to the security situation, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands is concerned about reports
of increased cooperation among terrorist networks in
the Sahel. As a result, new regions are under threat,
particularly the north and east of Burkina Faso — and
even beyond the Sahel. In addition, the increase in
intercommunal violence has complicated the situation.
That is evident in central Mali, as the Council has

S/PV. 8402

been informed several times this year. The evolving
threats calls for evolving responses. The emergence of
violent local conflicts requires deeper knowledge of
local dynamics, while the regional challenges require a
regional approach and regional cooperation. Therefore,
it is critical that the Council discuss today its support
for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
That brings me to my second point — the
operationalization of the Joint Force. The results obtained
in recent months by the members of the G-5 Sahel are
admirable, especially since they had to overcome serious
problems, such as the attack on their headquarters in
Sévaré. We commend the leadership of the Nigerian
presidency in that regard. The time has come to
intensify efforts towards the standing up of the Joint
Force. In particular, we advocate the operationalization
of its police component and its cooperation with
national anti-criminal networks. We welcome recent
progress in the implementation of the human rights
compliance framework. The prevention of human rights
violations requires constant attention and commitment,
and the members of the G-5 Sahel must fully take on
that responsibility. Bilateral and regional partners are
considering increasing their support for the Joint Force.
We reaffirm that it is not only resources that are needed.
Force-absorption capacity and the coordination of
support and requests are also factors to be considered.
It therefore remains critical to strengthen the capacity
of national armed forces.
On my third point, the link between security and
development, this week we held a discussion with
Mr. Sidikou, the Ambassadors of the G-5 countries
and interested Council members on preventing violent
extremism in the Sahel. I am pleased to see the
Ambassadors of the G-5 countries here today. It became
very clear during that meeting that all partners in the
Sahel are pursuing the same objective, namely, regional
peace and stability. The security efforts of the Joint
Force, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and other actors, including
European Union missions, will be insufficient. We
must invest more in conflict prevention. To prevent
violent extremism, we must attack the root causes of
the conflict, including climate change, which leads
to water scarcity and desertification and, as a result,
food insecurity and competition between farmers
and herders.
Persistent inequalities and discrimination against
particular regions or communities are also sources of

18-3813819/25

S/PV.8402

Peace and security in Africa

conflict. In addition, we must keep in mind the enabling
factors and triggers identified by the United Nations
Development Programme in its report entitled Journey
to Extremism in Africa, on the disproportionate use of
State violence.
Therefore, the success of initiatives in the Sahel will
depend on key elements, such as boosting the confidence
of local populations and ensuring accountability,
respect for human rights, close cooperation between the
Joint Force and strong national judicial systems, and the
complementarity of development and security efforts.
In conclusion, I would like to stress the importance
of the role of the G-5 Joint Force in making the Sahel
a more stable and secure region. That is precisely the
model of regional ownership that is needed for the
maintenance of international security and peace. The
G-5 donors conference for development initiatives
scheduled for 16 December will be an important
milestone. In particular, investment is needed in fragile
border areas.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands remains a
committed partner of the countries of the Sahel in the
areas of security, diplomacy and development. As our
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Stef Blok, said during
his recent visit to the Niger, we intend to increase our
diplomatic presence and support for the region. As
international partners, we must adopt a firm and modest
attitude that respects the leadership and ownership of
the G-5 Sahel countries.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea)
(spoke in Spanish): I express my appreciation to your
delegation, Sir, for the convening of this meeting,
which allows us once again to emphasize the need to
act against extremism and its impact in the SaheloSaharan region. We welcome and thank Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; Mr. Maman Sidikou, Permanent Secretary
of the Group of Five for Sahel (G-5 Sahel); Mr. Pierre
Buyoya, African Union High Representative for
Mali and the Sahel; and Mr. Pedro Serrano, DeputySecretary-General for Common Security and Defence
Policy and Crisis Response at the European External
Action Service.
We are at a crucial and critical juncture in our
fight against terrorism, criminality and — I would
add — mercenaries in the Sahel region. The increasing
mobility and sophistication of terrorist armed groups
operating in the region have become a real threat to
20/25

15/11/2018

international peace and security. The Republic of
Equatorial Guinea is following very closely and is
concerned about the increase in extremism in the Sahel.
Recent asymmetrical and cross-border attacks on local
defence and security forces, on the one hand, and
against the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel,
its personnel and facilities, on the other, underscore
the need to act swiftly to halt increasing levels of
terrorism. To that end, the response of the international
community must consist in the constant promotion
and implementation of joint initiatives, as High
Representative Buyoya underscored, by prioritizing
multi-sectoral and multi-stakeholder approaches. In
that regard, a joint military partnership for transborder
cooperation is the appropriate means for responding to
the multiple threats to the region’s security.
In parallel with those joint efforts, it is necessary
to ensure joint funding and support to achieve the
full operational capability of the Joint Force. We
firmly believe that the needs of the Joint Force would
be largely met if pledges made to support it were
fulfilled. Funding is needed to train soldiers, achieve
standardization among the five States’ armies, acquire
optimal security facilities and equipment, build and
fortify operational bases and to meet any other need
to counter terrorists and prevent attacks. We also
commend the commitment of contributors and donors
and urgently call for hastening the establishment of
a trust fund in accordance with the provisions of the
extraordinary summit of Heads of State of the G-5
countries held on the margins of the thirty-first Summit
of the African Union, held on 2 July in Nouakchott.
As the Permanent Secretary of the G-5 Sahel just
announced, the five States have decided to finance the
Joint Force beginning next year and provide it with
an annual budget of $13 million, which we commend.
However, we must be aware of the complex problems
facing the Sahel countries and the possibility that that
decision may affect other development priorities, such
as in the health and education sectors, which largely
justifies the need to combine synergies to achieve
sustained financing.
The close collaboration of the G-5 Sahel with
partners, such as the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) and INTERPOL, should be
underlined. The joint assessment missions held from
July to October by the Permanent Secretariat and
UNODC will undoubtedly create a legal framework for
the standing up of the police component so as to ensure
18-38138

15/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

that the Joint Force can adequately fulfil its mission
to combat terrorism and organized crime by ensuring
transparent judicial follow-up. Moreover, we commend
the strategic partnership with INTERPOL, which
is critical to information-sharing and ensuring that
relevant criminal information generated by Joint Force
operations and investigations can be cross-checked and
recorded in INTERPOL global databases.
As highlighted by the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel and the United Nations Support
Plan for the Sahel, we must not forget that political
and security considerations are inextricably linked
to humanitarian and development issues, if we are to
succeed in consolidating and sustaining peace in the
Sahel. Regional development initiatives — such as the
signing, on 30 October in Niamey, of a partnership
protocol between the Permanent Secretariat of the
G-5 Sahel and the Alliance for the Sahel to establish
a framework for cooperation and operational
modalities for implementing joint projects in a rapid
and flexible manner; the emergency plan for the Sahel
of the Government of Burkina Faso, which foresees
investments in infrastructure, energy and public
services; the official launching of the disarmament,
demobilization and socioeconomic reintegration
process for former combatants in State structures
in Mali; and electrification projects in Malian cities,
such as in Ménaka — are all measures heading in the
right direction.
Extremism in the Sahel is spreading. It is a fact.
That spread, which threatens not only the West African
region but also Central Africa, in which Equatorial
Guinea is located, is the result of the current situation
in Libya. We must not forget that. The main problem
is not the emergence here and there of local armed
groups that are remotely controlled by recent jihadist
movements in North Africa, the Middle East, the Gulf
countries, Afghanistan or elsewhere. The problem
involves the extraordinary ease with which terrorist
groups are able to penetrate new territories, while
provoking conflicts among ethnocultural communities
over access to resources. It should be noted that, as
a result of that situation, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea was the victim in December 2017 of an
attempt at its destabilization, which was orchestrated
by mercenaries from countries of the subregion. That
incident undoubtedly underscores the need for even
the Central African States to join international efforts
by providing specific and meaningful support to our

S/PV. 8402

brothers in the Sahel. At the bipartite summit held in
Lomé on 30 July, the Heads of State and Government
of the member States of the Economic Community of
West African States and of the Economic Community
of Central African States expressed their desire for
intercommunity solidarity. It should therefore be
implemented without further delay, by means of
logistical and financial support, or through the use of
the intelligence services of the various States, in the
fight against terrorism and mercenaries in all its forms
and manifestations.
Furthermore, we hope that the forthcoming G-5
Sahel donors and partners coordination conference
will make it possible to adopt concrete mechanisms
for financing the priority investment programme in
order to translate into action the efforts of the relevant
Member States to guarantee the security of the people
and assets needed for sustainable development.
In conclusion, I recall the what the Senegalese
President said in Paris on the sidelines of the celebration
of the centenary of the 1918 armistice:
“The Sahel issue requires a concerted effort equal
in strength and scope to that in Syria to combat
terrorism in the Sahelo-Saharan region.”
Lastly, Equatorial Guinea supports the French
delegation’s proposed statement to the press on the
proceedings of this meeting.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I thank Mr. Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations; Mr. Sidikou, Permanent
Secretary of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel);
Mr. Buyoya, African Union High Representative for
Mali and the Sahel; and Mr. Serrano, Deputy SecretaryGeneral for Common Security and Defence Policy
and Crisis Response at the European External Action
Service, for their valuable briefings.
I would like to address two main issues as
part of our discussion today: first, security, and
secondly, development.
First, concerning security, the deteriorating security
situation in the Sahel and the proliferation of terrorist
attacks throughout the region, including the attack on
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force headquarters in June, are
very worrisome and constitute serious challenges. The
increase in the number of attacks against military forces
in Mali and neighbouring countries has contributed to
the deterioration of the security situation and insecurity

18-3813821/25

S/PV.8402

Peace and security in Africa

among civilians, which must be addressed as soon as
possible. We look forward to the Malian Government’s
investigations into the killing of a number of civilians
in May.
We call on the Joint Force to use the United Nations
expertise in order to build up its human rights capacity.
I would like to seize this opportunity to commend
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, United Nations agencies,
the European Union and the African Union for their
efforts in that regard.
Pertaining to the Joint Force, we value the
commitment made by the five countries to advance
and promote the work of the Joint Force, especially at
the organizational, logistical and operational levels,
to enable it to fight terrorist groups in the Sahel. We
look forward to the full operationalization of the Force.
The financial, security and logistical challenges facing
the five countries impede them from carrying out their
responsibilities. It is only through sustainable funding,
as requested by the Force at the high-level meeting held
on the margins of the General Assembly in September
and as stressed by the Secretary-General in his latest
report (S/2018/1006), that the Force will be able to
confront the serious challenges as it should that threaten
the security and stability in the region.
We cannot discuss the challenges in the Sahel
without addressing the political situation in Mali. As
the Council heard last month (see S/PV.8376), strides
have been made to that end. We have seen positive signs
of a renewed commitment by all the relevant parties in
the country to implementing the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali. The Malian Government
has stepped up its efforts to extend its authority over
areas under the control of terrorist groups, after those
groups were able to expand their areas of operation
to neighbouring countries. The Government has also
sought to provide order and justice to citizens in those
areas. The Joint Force has an important role in building
trust with the communities that had been under the
control of terrorist groups.
Secondly, regarding development, stability in the
region requires sustainable development. Undoubtedly,
the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel leads to that end. We welcome
the decision by the Peacebuilding Commission during
its annual session to focus on development in the Sahel.
As stated by the Deputy Secretary-General during
22/25

15/11/2018

that session, the region has huge potential and natural
resources. However, it suffers from a lack of financial
and human resources. We believe that development has
a pivotal role in the prevention of conflicts. Kuwait
has therefore supported the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel, and we have cooperated closely
with all countries of the Sahel to support various
development projects. Kuwait has also provided nearly
$150 million over the past three years through the
Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development.
We welcome the continuing cooperation among the
countries of the region, the United Nations, the African
Union and all international stakeholders in the region
to strengthen capacities in the areas of governance,
building police capacities and the participation of
women and youth. Those have a direct effect on
development and stability, which would contribute to
building trust between the Joint Force and the people
and creating the necessary environment to support the
Force in fighting terrorism. My country commends the
G-5 Sahel in efforts to that end through the Priority
Investment Programme.
In conclusion, I reiterate our support for the Joint
Force, which will be unable to achieve its goals without
the support of the United Nations and the international
community to curb the spread of threats across the
region. The Force can also play an important role in
ensuring the development of the Sahel. We stand ready
to cooperate with all members of the Security Council
to address the future steps to be taken by the Joint
Force. In that regard, we support the press statement
proposed by the French delegation.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank today’s briefers for their very informative and
valuable statements on the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) Joint Force and recent developments in
the region.
Poland welcomes the commitment and determination
of the G-5 Sahel countries to overcome the many
challenges they face in operationalizing the Joint Force.
Reports that the Joint Force’s operations will resume in
December are encouraging and will send an important
message to adversaries that they are not giving up.
The cross-border character of threats in the Sahel
region requires transnational responses. We commend
the even greater role of the regional organizations in
improving effective cooperation among Sahel countries.
We welcome the adoption of the regional strategy and
18-38138

15/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8402

pursued work on subregional strategies. However,
much remains to be done and the obstacles that need
to be overcome are diverse and complex. Therefore,
we urge the G-5 Sahel countries to accelerate efforts
to deploy all remaining troops and fully establish the
police component.

efforts in the region. Moreover, scaling up access to
basic services and job opportunities in Mali, as well
as other countries in the region, is necessary to reduce
the dependence on humanitarian assistance, as outlined
in the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel
and the United Nations Support Plan.

It is also urgent that the operationalization of the
Force goes along with the adequate implementation
of the comprehensive prosecution, rehabilitation
and reintegration strategies at the national level.
Furthermore, members of the G-5 Sahel need to step
up their efforts to finalize the Joint Force’s strategic
concept of operations.

Finally, let me express our full support for the
Special Representative for West Africa and the
Special Adviser for the Sahel for their efforts aimed
at spearheading the implementation of United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and its Support Plan
to ensure continuity of United Nations support to the
Sahel region.

We remain deeply concerned by the multifaceted
challenges in the Sahel. The spread of insecurity
and terrorism to other parts of the region, including
into eastern Burkina Faso, is particularly worrying.
Terrorism continues to have devastating effects on
lives and livelihoods, depriving entire communities
of access to basic social services, as well as long-term
opportunities and perspectives.

Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Sidikou, Permanent Secretary of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), Mr. Buyoya, African
Union High Representative for Mali and the Sahel, and
Mr. Serrano, Deputy Secretary-General for Common
Security and Defence Policy and Crisis Response at the
European External Action Service, for their briefings.

Winning the hearts and minds of the populations
is crucial in the struggle against terrorism. Addressing
violent extremism and terrorism through security
measures is essential, but must be supported by a
broader political and institutional framework that can
guide its operations, ensure alignment with regional
strategies and help translate strategic decisions into
operational and tactical measures.
In that context, the United Nations Support Plan
for the Sahel should promote the completeness and
adequacy of regional and subregional initiatives. That
opportunity must also be seized to create a platform
for cooperation aimed at assuring wider respect for
international law and standards, including human
rights law and humanitarian law.
Weak governance and neglect by the State,
unemployment,
socioeconomic
exclusion
and
inequality, worsened by climate change and a growing
population ,remain at the core of instability in the
region. It goes without saying that a military solution
alone is not enough to create durable peace and stability.
We must strengthen the nexus between security and
development actions to ensure long-term stability in
the Sahel region.
In that regard, a successful outcome for the Malian
peace process remains the cornerstone of stabilization

The Security Council meets again to consider the
situation in the Sahel region, which continues to be very
volatile, as shown by the attacks against the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force, the international forces and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali. That has a profound impact on the
local populations and civilians.
Likewise, challenges in the areas of security,
governance and development have increased. The
complex security environment persists, including
asymmetric threats from armed and terrorist groups,
as well as transnational crime, trafficking in drugs and
arms and human smuggling and trafficking, among
other things. The aforementioned elements not only
jeopardize the stability of the countries of the region but
also represent a threat to the political peace processes.
All the elements that I have mentioned, added to the
lack of adequate sustainable and predictable funding
for the Joint Force, have delayed its full and effective
operationalization, in addition to it still lacking, among
other things, communications equipment, air assets
and, above all, training for its members.
In that regard, we commend the significant amount
of financial contributions to the Force. However, we
underline the urgent need for the support to continue

18-3813823/25

S/PV.8402

Peace and security in Africa

materializing through the rapid and prompt disbursement
of all pledges announced by donors that have not yet
been honoured. We emphasize that it is crucial to
accelerate the full and effective operationalization of
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
At the same time, Bolivia has repeatedly reiterated
the urgent need to analyse but, above all, identify the
structural causes of conflicts. In the specific case of
the Sahel, such causes have had a profound impact
on the current context of the region. The bloody
consequences of interventionism and regime-change
policies triggered, in the aftermath of the 2011 conflict
in Libya, the collateral destabilization of the Sahel,
bringing chaos with disastrous results that continue
until today.
Regrettably, in addition to the precarious security
situation, the Sahel presents other great challenges. The
threat of a large-scale humanitarian crisis and the risk
of food insecurity affecting nearly 5 million people,
including refugees and displaced persons, not to
mention the adverse effects of climate change, further
exacerbate the crisis in the region.
Despite the bleak outlook in the Sahel, we would
like to emphasize the significant efforts of the regional
and subregional organizations, led by the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union. We welcome
and commend the efforts and the considerable political
will of Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania and the
Niger in terms of cooperation and operationalization
of their forces on the ground. The G-5 Sahel Joint
Force is a great and exemplary demonstration of the
coordinated efforts of the African Union and the United
Nations.
An example of the great work and effort of the
G-5 Sahel is evident in the six joint operations
carried out in the border areas, including through the
increased deployment of troops. We encourage the
States members of the G-5 Sahel to take the necessary
measures to consolidate the new operations through the
prompt adoption of a timeline for operations and the
full deployment of troops.
In addition, we believe the full and complete
implementation of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel is vital in terms of a comprehensive
framework to strengthen governance, security and
development in the Sahel region. We also welcome
the launch of the United Nations Support Plan for the
24/25

15/11/2018

Sahel, fine-tuned on the margins of the African Union
summit held in Nouakchott in June of this year.
Last but not least, it should be highlighted that almost
a year after the adoption of resolution 2391 (2017), there
remains much to be done. The refusal of some members
of the Council to define the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
has made its deployment and operationalization even
more difficult. We believe it crucial that the Security
Council take urgent and relevant steps in that regard in
order to protect and safeguard the life and integrity of
millions of people in the Sahel.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
I would like to begin by thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix, Permanent Secretary Sidikou, High
Representative Buyoya and Deputy Secretary-General
Serrano for their briefings. I would like to make four
points.
First, we must continue to support the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), which
faces real difficulties, including the worsening regional
security and inadequate operational capabilities,
equipment and training, as well as funding shortages. As
an important mechanism for the countries in the region
to respond to the security challenges independently,
the Joint Force represents a significant contribution to
peace and security in Africa and the world in general.
It requires the continuing support of the international
community. We hope that the Joint Force will resume
operations as soon as possible.
Secondly, we must promote a political settlement
of the regional hotspot issues. The security situation
is closely linked to the peace process. On the basis of
respect for the sovereignty of the countries concerned,
the international community should actively support
the countries of the region in taking forward the peace
process and promoting national reconciliation so as to
continue to work towards the continued de-escalation of
the relevant hotspot issues and to resolve them, thereby
creating conditions conducive to lasting security and
stability in the Sahel region. Support should be given
to all the relevant parties in Mali in order to expedite
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali and seriously address the
spillover effect on the Sahel of issues outside the region,
18-38138

15/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

such as the Libyan crisis, in order to minimize their
negative impact.
Thirdly, we must adopt a comprehensive approach
to tackle the root causes of conflict. The international
community should support the Secretary-General in
implementing the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel and the United Nations Support Plan for
the Sahel. It should also support the priority investment
plan developed by the Sahel countries and, in the light
of the real needs of the countries and populations
in the region, help the Sahel to achieve sustainable
development and to enjoy the dividends of peace.
Fourthly, we must ensure that we leverage the role
of regional mechanisms. The international community
should support African countries in resolving African
problems through African solutions, encourage

S/PV. 8402

regional and subregional organizations in Africa, such
as the G-5 Sahel, the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States, to play a leading
role in dealing with the challenges in the Sahel and help
the G-5 Sahel Permanent Secretariat to build capacity.
China is ready to work with the international
community in continuing to play a constructive role in
order to achieve peace, stability and development in the
Sahel region and on the African continent.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

18-3813825/25
