74

35/155.

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

Conclusion of an international convention to
assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the
use or threat of use of nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the need to allay the legitimate concern of the States of the world with regard to ensuring
lasting security for their peoples,
Convinced that nuclear weapons pose the greatest
threat to mankind and to the survival of civilization,
Deeply concerned at the continuing escalation of the
arms race, in particular the nuclear arms race, and the
possibility of the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Convinced that nuclear disarmament and the complete
elimination of nuclear weapons are essential to remove
the danger of nuclear war,
Taking into account the principle of the non-use of
force or threat of force enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations,
Deeply concerned about any possibility of the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Recognizing that the independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of non-nuclear-weapon States
need to be safeguarded against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons,
Considering that, until nuclear disarmament is
achieved on a universal basis, it is imperative for the international community to develop effective measures to
ensure the security of non-nuclear-weapon States
against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons from
any quarter,
Recognizing that effective measures to assure the nonnuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons can constitute a positive contribution
to the prevention of the spread of nuclear weapons,
Recalling its resolution 3261 G (XXIX) of 9 December 1974,
Further recalling its resolution 31 / 189 C of 21 December 1976,
Bearing in mind paragraph 59 of the Final Document
of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,''
in which it urged the nuclear-weapon States to conclude, as appropriate, effective arrangements to assure
non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of
use of nuclear weapons,
Desirous of promoting the implementation of the relevant provisions of the Final Document,
Recalling its resolution 33 /72 of 14 December 1978,
Further recalling its resolution 34 /85 of 11 December
1979,

Welcoming the in-depth negotiations undertaken in
the Committee on Disarmament and its Ad Hoe Working Group with a view to reaching agreement on consideration of the item entitled "Effective international
arr~ngements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States
agamst the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons",
Noting the drafts of an international convention submitted under that item in the Committee on Disarmament in 1979,
Further noting the report of the Committee on Disarmament, including the report of the Ad Hoe Working
Group, 58
Noting the decision of the Sixth Conference of Heads
of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held

at Havana from 3 to 9 September 1979, as well as the relevant recommendations of the Eleventh Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers, held at Islamabad from 17
to 22 May 1980. calling on the Committee on Disarmament to elaborate and reach an agreement on an international basis to assure non-nuclear-weapon States
against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Further noting the general support expressed in the
Committee on Disarmament and in the General Assembly for the elaboration of an international convention to
assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons,
I. Reaffirms the urgent need to reach agreement on
effective international arrangements to assure nonnuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons;
2. Notes with satisfaction that in the Committee on
Disarmament there is no objection, in principle, to the
idea of an international convention to assure nonnuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons, although there has been lack of progress in the Committee towards evolving a common approach acceptable to all;
3. Appeals to all States, in particular the nuclearweapon States. to demonstrate the political will necessary to reach agreement on a common approach which
could be included in an international instrument of a
legally binding character;
4. Recommends that the Committee on Disarmament should actively continue negotiations with a view
to reaching agreement and concluding effective international arrangements during its next session to assure
non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of
use of nuclear weapons, taking into account the
widespread support for the conclusion of an international convention and giving consideration to any other
proposals designed to secure the same objective;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session an item entitled "Conclusion of
effective international arrangements to assure nonnuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons''.

94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980

35 / 156.

General and complete disarmament
A

STUDY ON CONVENTIONAL DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly.
Deeply concerned about the continuing arms race,
including the conventional arms race, and the alarming
increase in expenditures on armaments,
Recognizing the right of all States to protect their
security,
Reaffirming the relevant paragraphs of the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly.'' the first special session of the Assembly
devoted to disarmament, regarding priorities in the disarmament negotiations,
Recalling the recommendations in paragraphs 81 and
85 of the Final Document,
Noting that at the session of the Disarmament Commission held from I~ '.\1ay to 6 June 1980, there was wide

III.

75

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

support in favour of recommending to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fifth session that it should approve, in principle, a proposal for a study on all aspects
of the conventional arms race and on disarmament
relating to conventional weapons and armed forces. to
be undertaken after the general approach to the study,
its structure and scope had been fully discussed and
agreed upon, 59
. I. Approves, in principle, the carrying out of a study
on all aspects of the conventional arms race and on disarmament relating to conventional weapons and armed
forces, to be undertaken by the Secretary-General with
the assistance of a group of qualified experts appointed
by him on a balanced geographical basis;
2. Agrees that the Disarmament Commission, at its
forthcoming substantive session, should work out the
general approach to the study, its structure and scope;
3. Requests the Disarmament Commission to convey to the Secretary-General the conclusions of its
deliberations, which should constitute the guidelines for
the study;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
a progress report on the study on all aspects of the conventional arms race and on disarmament relating to
conventional weapons and armed forces to the General
Assembly at its second special session devoted to disarmament, and a final report at its thirty-eighth session.

94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980
B
CONFIDENCE-BUILDING MEASURES

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33 /91 8 of 16 December 1978
and 34/87 8 of 11 December 1979 on confidencebuilding measures,
I. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Secretary-General on a comprehensive study on confidence-building measures,"'' to which is annexed the
report of the Group of Governmental Experts on
Confidence-building Measures;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the
work in this regard and to submit the study to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entit!t:d "'Confidencebuilding measures".
94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980
C
NON-STATIONING OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS ON THE
TERRITORIES OF ST ATES WHERE THERE ARE NO SUCH
WEAPONS AT PRESENT

The General Assembly,
Conscious that a nuclear war would have devastating
consequences for the whole of mankind,
Recalling its resolution 33(91 F of I 6 December 1978,
in which it called upon al nuclear-weapon States to
refrain from stationing nuclear weapons on the territories of States where there are no such weapons at pres" Ibid.. Supplement No. 42 (A/35/42). para. 20.
0
'
A/35/422.

ent, and on all non-nuclear-weapon States which do
not have nuclear weapons on their territories to refrain
from any steps which would directly or indirectly result
in the stationing of such weapons on their territories,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General," 1
submitted in accordance with General Assembly resolution 34/87 C of 11 December 1979,
Bearing in mind the clearly expressed intention of
many States to prevent the stationing of nuclear weapons on their territories,
Considering that the non-stationing of nuclear
weapons on the territories of States where there are no
such weapons at present would constitute a step towards the larger objective of the subsequent complete
withdrawal of nuclear weapons from the territories of
other States, thus contributing to the prevention of the
spread of nuclear weapons and leading eventually to the
total elimination of nuclear weapons,
I. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to
proceed without delay to talks with a view to elaborating an international agreement on the non-stationing of
nuclear weapons on the territories of States where there
are no such weapons at present;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Committee on Disarmament all documents relating to
the discussion of this question by the General Assembly
at its thirty-fifth session;
3. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to submit a report on the question to the General Assembly at
its thirty-sixth session;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Non-stationing of
nuclear weapons on the territories of States where there
are no such weapons at present: report of the Committee on Disarmament".

94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980

D
STUDY ON All. THE ASPECTS OF REGIONAL
DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/91 E of 16 December 1978,
in which it decided to undertake a systematic study of all
the aspects of regional disarmament and requested the
Secretary-General to carry out the study with the assistance of a group of qualified governmental experts,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General 62
to which is annexed the study prepared by the Group of
Governmental Experts on Regional Disarmament,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General and the study annexed thereto;
2. Commends the study and its conclusions to the attention of all States;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to make the
necessary arrangements for the above-mentioned report to be issued as a United Nations publication and
widely distributed:
4. Invites all Member States to inform the SecretaryGeneral, at the latest by I June 1981, of their views
regarding the study and its conclusions;
'' A/35/145 and Add I.

' A/35/416

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

76

5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session, for its information, the replies of Member States;
6. Decides to transmit the study to the Disarmament
Commission;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
study to the Committee on Disarmament;
8. Expresses the hope that the study will encourage
Governments to take initiatives and to consult within
the different regions with a view to agreeing upon appropriate measures of regional disarmament.

94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980
E
STUDY ON THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
DISARMAMENT AND INTERNATIONAL SECURITY

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/87 C of 12 December 1977,
in which it requested the Secretary-General to initiate a
study on the interrelationship between disarmament and
international security,
Recalling also its resolutions S-10 /2 of 30 June I 978,
33/91 I of 16 December 1978 and 34/83 A of 11 December 1979,
1. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral63 to which is annexed a letter from the Chairman of the Group of Experts on the Relationship
between Disarmament and International Security, informing the Secretary-General that, owing to the vast
area to be covered and the complexity and sensitivity of
the issues involved, the Group would need more time to
complete its work;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the
study and to submit the final report to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session.
94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980
F
STUDY ON NUCLEAR WEAPONS

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, 64 in which it was
stated that nuclear weapons posed the greatest danger to
mankind and to the survival of civilization,
Recalling also its resolution 33/91 D of 16 December
1978, in which the Secretary-General was requested to
carry out a comprehensive study on nuclear weapons,
Noting that the report of the Secretary-General,"' to
which is annexed the report of the Group of Experts on
a Comprehensive Study on Nuclear Weapons, has been
completed and is available,
Considering that in its report the Disarmament Commission recommended that, in the course of the decade
of the 1980s, governmental and non-governmental information organs of Member States and those of the
United Nations and the specialized agencies, as well as
non-governmental organizations, should, as appropriate, undertake further programmes of information
1
'
A/35/486.
"Resolution S-10/2.
" A/35 /392.

relating to the danger of the armaments race as well as
to disarmament efforts and negotiations,""
Convinced that the wide dissemination of the report
would contribute to a better understanding of the threat
presented by nuclear weapons as well as of the need for
progress in the various negotiations aiming at the prevention of both horizontal and vertical proliferation of
nuclear weapons and the achievement of nuclear disarmament,
I. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Secretary-General as a highly significant statement on
present nuclear arsenals, the trends in their technological development and the effects of their use, as
well as on the various doctrines of deterrence and thesecurity implications of the continued quantitative and
qualitative development of nuclear-weapon systems and
also as a reminder of the need for efforts to increase the
political will necessary for effective disarmament
measures, inter alia, through the promotion of public
awareness of the need for disarmament;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral and to the experts who assisted him for the
prompt and effective manner in which the report was
prepared;
3. Notes the conclusions of the report and expresses
the hope that all States will consider them carefully;
4. Recommends that the Committee on Disarmament should take the report and its conclusions into
account in its efforts towards general and complete
disarmament under effective international control, in
particular in the field of nuclear disarmament:
5. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange for the
reproduction of the entire report as a United Nations
publication"' and, making full use of all the facilities of
the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat, to publicize the report in as many languages as is
considered desirable and practicable;
6. Recommends to all Governments the wide distribution of the report and its publication in their
respective languages, as appropriate, so as to acquaint
public opinion with its contents;
7. Invites regional intergovernmental organizations,
the specialized agencies and the International Atomic
Energy Agency, and national and international nongovernmental organizations, to use all the facilities
available to them to make the report widely known.

94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980
G
CONCLUSION OI Al',; INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION
PROHIBITING THE DEVELOPMENT. PRODUCTION,
STOCKPILING AND US!' OF RADIOLOGICAL WEAPONS

The General Assembly,
Recalling the resolution of the Commission for Conventional Armaments of 12 August 1948, which defined
weapons of mass destruction to include atomic explosive
weapons, radioactive material weapons, lethal chemical and biological weapons and any weapons developed
in the future which have characteristics comparable in
destructive effect to those of the atomic bomb or the
other weapons mentioned above.
''' See Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifth Session,
Supplement No. 42 (A/35/42). para. 19.
' ' The report v.as later issued with the title Comprehensive S1udy on
Nuclear Weapons ( United Nat inns publication, Sales No. E.81.1.11 ).

III.

77

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recalling its resolution 2602 C (XXIV) of 16 December 1969,
Recalling paragraph 76 of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,6 4 in
which it is stated that a convention should be concluded
prohibiting the development, production, stockpiling
and use of radiological weapons,
Reaffirming its resolution _34/87 A of 11 December
1979 on the conclusion of such a convention,
Convinced that such a convention would serve to spare
mankind the potential dangers of the use of radiological weapons and thereby contribute to strengthening
peace and averting the threat of war,
Expressing its satisfaction that negotiations on the
conclusion of an international convention prohibiting
the development, production, stockpiling and use of
radiological weapons have begun in the Committee on
Disarmament,
Taking note of that part of the report of the Committee on Disarmament which deals with those negotiations, 68 including the report of the Ad Hoe Working
Group,
Noting with satisfaction the wide recognition of the
need to reach agreement on the text of a treaty prohibiting radiological weapons,
I. Calls upon the Committee on Disarmament to
conti_n1;1~ negotiations with a view to elaborating a treaty
proh1b1tmg the development, production, stockpiling
and use of radiological weapons and to report on the results to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session;
2. Notes, in this connexion, the recommendation of
the Ad Hoe Working Group, in the report adopted by
the Committee on Disarmament, to set up at the beginning of its session to be held in 1981 a further ad hoe
working group, under an appropriate mandate to be
determined at that time, to continue negotiations on the
elaboration of a treaty prohibiting radiological weapons;"9
3. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Com~itte~ on Disarmament all documents relating to
the d1scuss1on by the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth
session of the prohibition of the development, production, stockpiling and use of radiological weapons;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Prohibition of the
development, production, stockpiling and use of radiological weapons".
94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980

H
PROHIBITION OF THE PRODUCTION OF FISSIONABLE
MATERIAL FOR WEAPONS PURPOSES

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/91 H of 16 December
I978 and 34/87 D of 11 December I979, in which it requ_ested the Committee on Disarmament, at an appropna_te stage of th_e impl_ementation of the Programme of
Action set forth m section III of the Final Document of
th~ Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly 64 and
of its work on the item entitled "Nuclear weapons in all
aspects", to consider urgently the question of ade"Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty~fifth Session.
Supplement No. 27 (A/35/27), paras. 57-62.
" Ibid., para. 61.

quately verified cessation and prohibition of the production of fissionable material for nuclear weapons and
other nuclear explosive devices and to keep the Assembly informed of the progress of that consideration,
Noting that the agenda for 1980 of the Committee on
Disarmament included the item entitled "Nuclear weapons in all aspects" and that its programme of work for
both parts of its session held in 1980 contained the item
entitled "Cessation of the nuclear arms race and nuclear disarmament",
Recalling the proposals and statements made in the
Committee on Disarmament on these items,
Noting further that the report of the Committee on
Disarmament contains a summary of the work of the
Committee during 1980 70 on this subject and refers to
the submission of the document entitled "The prohibition of the production of fissionable material for weapons purposes", 11
Considering that the cessation of production of
fissionable material for weapons purposes and the progressive conversion and transfer of stocks to peaceful
uses would be a significant step towards halting and
reversing the nuclear arms race,
Considering that the prohibition of the production of
fissionable material for nuclear weapons and other explosive devices would also be an important measure in
facilitating the prevention of the proliferation of nuclear weapons and explosive devices,
Requests the Committee on Disarmament, at an appropriate stage of its work on the item entitled "Nuclear
weapons in all aspects", to pursue its consideration of
the question of adequately verified cessation and prohibition of the production of fissionable material for nuclear weapons and other nuclear explosive devices and
to keep the General Assembly informed of the progress
of that consideration.

94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that all the peoples of the world have a
v_ital interest in the success of disarmament negotiations,
Recognizing also that all States have the duty to contribute to and the right to participate in disarmament
n~gotiations, as acknowledged in paragraph 28 of the
Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the
General Assembly, 64
Recalling, to that effect, its resolution 33 /91 G of
16 December 1978,
Noting section IX of the rules of procedure of the
<:;ommittee on Disarmament, relating to the participat10n of non-member States in the work of the Committee,
Recalling also that the membership of the Committee
on Disarmament is to be reviewed at regular intervals in
accordance with paragraph 120 of the Final Document,
1. Takes note of the relevant part of the report of the
Committee on Disarmament on its session held in 1980
in which it is stated that the Committee will, at an ap"' Ibid., paras. 37-44.
71
See CD/139/Appendix 11/Yol.l, document CD/90.

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

78

propriate time, conduct a review of its membership and
report on the results to the General Assembly; 12
2. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to continue to consider the modalities of the review of the
membership of the Committee and to report on this subject to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session;
3. Recommends that the first review of the membership of the Committee on Disarmament should be
completed, following appropriate consultations among
Member States, during the next special session of the
General Assembly devoted to disarmament;
4. Reaffirms that States not members of the Committee, upon their request, should be invited by it to participate in the work of the Committee when the particular concerns of those States are under discussion;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session an item relating to a review of the
membership of the Committee on Disarmament.

94th plenary meeting
12 December /980
J
DISARMAMENT AND INTERNATIONAL SECURITY

The General Assembly,
Noting with concern that the arms race, particularly
the nuclear arms race, continues unabated while efforts
towards arms reduction or limitation have not yet produced concrete results,
Conscious of the grave danger of a nuclear conflagration resulting from the continued escalation of the arms
race, particularly the nuclear arms race, and from recent ominous developments,
Considering that the lack of effective international
security is a generating factor in the escalating arms
race,
Recalling that, according to Article I, paragraph I, of
the Charter of the United Nations, the primary purpose
of the Un~ted Nations is to maintain international peace
a11d secunty and, to that end, to take effective collective
measures for the prevention and removal of threats to
peace and for the suppression of acts of aggression or
other breaches of peace,
Recognizing that compliance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter would promote world order
and security, so necessary in these demanding times,
Convinced that confidence in the effectiveness of the
United Nations and the resulting climate of trust will
facilitate co-operation between Member States on matters of common interest for peace and survival, irrespective of any differences in political or social systems,
Recalling that in the Final Document of the Tenth
Special Session of the General Assembly, it is stated that
the arms race, particularly in its nuclear aspect, runs
counter to efforts to achieve further relaxation of international tension, to establish international relations
based on peaceful coexistence and trust between all
States, and to develop broad international co-operation
and understanding, 73
Recalling further that in the Final Document it is also
stated that genuine and lasting peace can only be created
through the effective implementation of the security
system provided for in the Charter and the speedy and
72
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fifth Session.
Supplement No. 27 (A/35/27), para. 73.
" Resolution S-10/2, para. 12.

~ubstan~ial reduction of arms and armed forces, by
mternat10nal agreement and mutual example, leading
ultimately to general and complete disarmament under
effective international control, 7 '
Considering that the objective of halting the arms
race, particularly the nuclear arms race, and proceeding
to effective disarmament measures, compatible with national security, could be effectively served through applying the collective security system provided for in the
Charter, parallel to disarmament efforts,
I. Reaffirms its resolution 34/83 A of 11 December
1979 on disarmament and international security;
2. Calls upon all States to proceed in a positive spirit
towards measures under the Charter of the United
Nations for a system of international security and order
concurrently with efforts at effective disarmament
measures;
3. Recommends that the main organs of the United
Nations responsible for the maintenance of international peace and security should give early considerat\on to the requirements for halting the arms race, particularly the nuclear arms race, and developing the
modalities for the effective application of the system of
international security provided for in the Charter;
4. Requests the permanent members of the Security
Council to facilitate the work of the Council towards
carrying out this essential responsibility under the Charter;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a
progress report to the General Assembly at its thirtysixth session.

94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980
K
STRATEGIC ARMS LIMITATION TALKS

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2602 A (XXIV) of 16 December I 969, 2932 B (XXVII) of 29 November 1972, 3184 A
and C (XXVIII) of 18 December 1973, 3261 C (XXIX)
of 9 December 1974. 3484 C (XXX) of 12 December
1975, 31/189 A of 21 December 1976 and 32/87 G of
12 December 1977.
Reaffirming once again its resolution 33/91 C of
16 December 1978, in which it, inter alia:
(a) Reiterated its satisfaction at the solemn declarations made in 1977 by the heads of State of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America, in which they stated that they were ready to
ende~vour to reach agreements which would permit
starting the gradual reduction of existing stockpiles of
nuclear weapons and moving towards their complete,
total destruction. with a view to a world truly free of nuclear weapons,
(b) Recalled that one of the disarmament measures
deserving the highest priority, included in the Programme of Action set forth in section III of the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly, 64 was the conclusion of the bilateral agreement known as SALT II, which should be followed
promptly by further strategic arms limitation negotiations betwee~ the two parties, leading to agreed significant reduct10ns of and qualitative limitations on
strategic arms,
'' Ibid .. para. 13.

III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

(c) Stressed that in the Programme of Action it was
established that, in the task of achieving the goals of nuclear disarmament, all nuclear-weapon States, in particular those among them which possess the most important nuclear arsenals, bear a special responsibility,7'
Recalling that the SALT II agreement-which bears
the official title of "Treaty between the United States of
America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on
the Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms"-was finally signed on 18 June 1979, after six years of bilateral negotiations, and that its text, together with the texts of the
Protocol to the Treaty and of the joint statement of principles and basic guidelines for subsequent negotiations
on the limitation of strategic arms, both signed on the
same date as the Treaty, and that of a joint communique, also issued on 18 June 1979, were reproduced
as a document of the Committee on Disarmament, 76
Reaffirming that, as stated in its resolution 34/87 F of
11 December 1979, it shares the conviction expressed by
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United
States of America in the joint statement that early agreement on the further limitation and further reduction of
strategic arms would serve to strengthen international
peace and security and to reduce the risk of outbreak of
nuclear war,
Bearing in mind that in the same resolution it expressed its trust that the SALT II Treaty would enter
into force at an early date, inasmuch as it constituted a
vital element for the continuation and progress of the
negotiations between the two States possessing the most
important arsenals of nuclear weapons,
Recalling that, at its first special session devoted to
disarmament, it proclaimed that existing arsenals of nuclear weapons alone were more than sufficient to
destroy all life on earth, that the increase in weapons, especially nuclear weapons, far from helping to strengthen
international security, on the contrary weakened it, and
that the existence of nuclear weapons and the continuing arms race posed a threat to the very survival of
mankind, for which reasons the General Assembly
declared that all the peoples of the world had a vital interest in the sphere of disarmament,
Noting that the Disarmament Commission, at its session held in 1980, agreed, while examining the "Elements of the Declaration of the 1980s as the Second Disarmament Decade", to include, among the concrete
measures which should be given the highest priority, the
ratification of the strategic arms limitation agreement
(SALT II) and the commencement of negotiations for a
SALT Ill agreement, 77
Noting also that in the debates of the Committee on
Disarmament during its session held in 1980 the need for
prompt ratification of the Treaty was constantly
stressed,
Convinced that the signature in good faith of a treaty,
especially if it is the culmination of prolonged and conscientious negotiations, carries with it the presumption
that its ratification will not be unduly delayed,
1. Deplores that the Treaty between the United
States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics on the Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms
(SALT II) has not yet been ratified, notwithstanding
that it was signed on 18 June 1979 and in spite of the
many other reasons existing for such ratification as ii" Ibid., pafa. 48.
"See CD/53/Appendix 111/Vol.l, document CD<'X
77
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirti-fifth Session.
Supplement No. 42 (A/35/42), para. 19_
·

79

lustrated by those summarized in the preamble of the
present resolution;
2. Urges the two signatory States not to delay any
further the implementation of the procedure provided
for in article XIX of the Treaty for its entry into force,
taking particularly into account that not only their
national interests but also the vital interests of all the
peoples are at stake in this question;
3. Trusts that, pending the entry into force of the
Treaty, the signatory States, in conformity with the provisions of the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties, 78 will refrain from any act which would defeat
the object and purpose of the Treaty;
4. Reiterates its satisfaction, already expressed in its
resolution 34/87 F, at the agreement reached by both
parties in the joint statement of principles and basic
guidelines for subsequent negotiations on the limitation
of strategic arms, signed the same day as the Treaty, to
the effect of continuing to pursue negotiations, in accordance with the principle of equality and equal security, on measures for the further limitation and reduction in the number of strategic arms, as well as for their
further qualitative limitation which should culminate in
the SALT III treaty, and to the effect also of endeavouring in such negotiations to achieve, inter alia, the following objectives:
(a) Significant and substantial reductions in the
numbers of strategic arms;
(b) Qualitative limitations on strategic offensive
arms, including restrictions on the development, testing
and deployment of new types of strategic offensive arms
and on the modernization of existing strategic offensive
arms;
5. Invites the Governments of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the United States of America to
keep the General Assembly appropriately informed of
the results of their negotiations, in conformity with the
provisions of paragraphs 27 and 114 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Strategic arms
limitation talks".
94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980
35/157.

Israeli nuclear armament

The General Assembly,
Recalling its relevant resolutions on the establishment
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East,
Reaffirming its resolution 33/71 A of 14 December
1978 on military and nuclear collaboration with Israel,
and its resolution 34/89 of 11 December 1979 on Israeli
nuclear armament,
I. Takes note of the progress report of the SecretaryGeneral on the work of the Group of Experts to Prepare a Study on Israeli Nuclear Armament;?'
2. Requests the Secretary-General to pursue his efforts in this regard and to submit his report to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session;
'' See Official Records of the United Nations Conference on the law
of Treaties. Documents of the Conference (United Nat ions publication,
Sales No. E.70.V.5), document A/CONF.19/27.
,, t\, 35/458
