S/2021/298*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 March 2021
Original: English

United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
Report of the Secretary-General
Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2545
(2020), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, and Council resolution 2366 (2017), in which it requested the
Secretary-General to report on the implementation of the mandate of the Mission
every 90 days. The report covers the period from 29 December 2020 to 26 March
2021.
2.
In his previous report on the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
(S/2020/1301), the Secretary-General proposed five priorities for the comprehensive
implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable
and Lasting Peace in 2021, taking into account their mutually reinforcing nature:
ensuring protection and security for former combatants, conflict -affected
communities and social leaders; ensuring the sustainability of the reintegration
process; consolidating the integrated presence of the State in conflict -affected areas;
reinforcing constructive dialogue between the parties; and strengthening conditions
for reconciliation. With the Final Agreement well into its fifth year of implementation,
steady progress in these priority areas in 2021 would contribute to the long -term
consolidation of peace.
Major developments
3.
One of the most significant peace process developments that took place during
the reporting period was the meeting between the President of Colombia, Iván Duque,
and the president of the Comunes party (formerly the Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Común (FARC) party), Rodrigo Londoño, which took place on
10 March, to discuss the status of implementation of the Final Agreement. During this
constructive dialogue facilitated by the Special Representative of the Secretary General for Colombia and Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, both parties reiterated their commitment to the Final Agreement, and
agreed to work jointly to design a road map for the remainder of the time frame
envisioned for its comprehensive implementation, as well as to redouble efforts to
strengthen the reintegration of, and security guarantees for, former combatants. Also
present at the meeting were the Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and
Consolidation, the High Commissioner for Peace, and the representative of Comunes

* Reissued for technical reasons on 6 April 2021.

21-03819* (E)

060421

*2103819*

S/2021/298

to the National Reintegration Council, all of whom e xpressed a willingness to make
concerted efforts to improve the implementation of the Final Agreement.
4.
The Second Extraordinary National Assembly of FARC, the highest decision making body of the political party, took place from 22 to 24 January, with th e
participation of dozens of delegates from across the country. In addition to reviewing
the programme and electoral strategy for the elections to be held in 2022, members
voted to rename the party “Comunes”.
5.
On 26 January, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace issued its first indictment for
Case 01, on hostage-taking and other severe deprivations of liberty, against eight
former members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia – Ejército del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) secretariat (one of whom is deceased), including the president and
two senators of the Comunes party. This is the first time that former FARC-EP leaders
have been indicted for war crimes and crimes against humanity, including torture,
sexual violence, forced displacement, and assassination. The Special Jurisdiction for
Peace identified 21,396 victims of kidnapping (21 per cent women, and 5 per cent
children) including civilians and members of the public security forces. The
indictment alleges the criminal responsibility of those indicted either as indirect
perpetrators, for the orders they gave to their subordinates, or under command
responsibility. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace gave those indicted until 30 April
2021 to acknowledge their responsibility and provide observations and evidence and
ordered them to present a detailed plan to help locate missing persons. During that
same time frame, victims and the Office of the Inspector-General can also submit
observations. In February, six of the indicted former FARC-EP leaders issued a
statement asking for forgiveness and acknowledging their responsibilities for the
crimes committed.
6.
In February, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace issued its prioritization strategy
for investigations within Case 03, on extrajudicial killings committed by the public
security forces and illegitimately presented as combat casualties. The Special
Jurisdiction for Peace indicated that it will apply a “bottoms-up” approach, starting
by investigating local low-ranking perpetrators and then working up to those
responsible at higher levels. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace also indicated that it
has identified 6,402 victims killed between 2002 and 2008, a figure higher than the
2,248 victims previously reported by the Office of the Attorney-General, and reported
that it had reached that number following an exhaustive process of cross -checking
information from State entities and civil society organizations.
7.
The announcements by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace prompted diverse
reactions reflecting a polarized environment, which remains a challenge to the
transitional justice process. National actors supporting the peace process and the
international community praised the actions of the Special Jur isdiction for Peace as
major steps toward truth and justice for victims, while renewing calls for all
concerned to respect the autonomy and independence of the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace to conduct its crucial work.
8.
In March, reports of a bombing by the armed forces of a FARC-EP dissident
group’s camp in Guaviare Department, which resulted in several deaths, sparked
concern and controversy over the reported presence of recruited children among the
casualties. Investigations by forensic and judicial authorities are ongoing.
9.
The Government began implementing its coronavirus disease (COVID -19)
vaccination strategy and is taking steps to ensure that populations targeted by peace related programming, including former combatants, have access to vaccines.

2/19

21-03819

S/2021/298

Protection and security for former combatants, conflict-affected communities,
social leaders and human rights defenders
Attacks against former combatants
10. Despite efforts by relevant authorities, killings of former FARC -EP combatants
have continued. During the reporting period, 14 former combatants were killed
(13 men, 1 woman), bringing the number of former combatants killed to 262
(including seven women) since the signing of the Final Agreement, as well as 59
attempted homicides (56 men, 3 women) and 21 disappearances (all men).
11. Former combatants continue having to relocate to preserve their safety. Three
of the former combatants killed recently had been forced to leave the places where
they were conducting their reintegration process owing to threats, including one
person killed after fleeing Cauca Department following two assassination attempts
and the killing of two of his brothers. In Antioquia Department, dozens of former
combatants recently fled El Bagre and Ituango municipalities due to security issues.
12. National and regional authorities have provided support for some of these cases
through evacuations, however, the evacuation road map announced last year by the
Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and Consolidation has ye t to be
implemented. Relatives of former combatants are also facing threats, especially
partners and children, for whom no specific support mechanisms exist.
Precautionary measures issued by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
13. In January, as part of the precautionary measures issued in July 2020 for the
protection of former FARC-EP combatants, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
reiterated its orders to the Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and Consolidation,
as chair of the Technical Committee on Security and Protection, to present the
Strategic Plan for Security and Protection for former combatants. It also ordered the
National Protection Unit to speed up the recruitment of new bodyguards, for which it
received an additional $3.8 million in September.
14. In February, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace issued a statement expressing its
concern that the measures taken by Government and State entities to protect former
combatants were insufficient and showed limited coordination. It gave a new 1 5-day
deadline to the High Commissioner for Peace, as technical secretary of the National
Commission on Security Guarantees, to present the guidelines for the public policy
for the dismantling of illegal armed groups, criminal organizations and their suppo rt
networks. It also issued new orders to other entities, including the Office of the
Ombudsman, the Ministry of Interior, the Office of the Attorney -General and the
Ministry of Defence to take appropriate action to prevent and respond to this violence.
15. In March, the Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and Consolidation
presented the proposal of the Strategic Plan for Security and Protection to the
Subdirectorate of the National Protection Unit for comments by Comunes. The
Government also presented the aforementioned guidelines for the policy on
dismantling illegal armed groups, as requested by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace.
16. Of the 686 vacancies at the National Protection Unit, 256 bodyguards (including
47 women) have been recruited since the additional funds were provided; all 36 risk
analysts have been recruited, and a workplan has been adopted to respond to the more
than 1,000 pending protection requests by October 2021. To date, 302 close protection
schemes have been implemented, including 59 women former combatants, and 49
collective protection measures.
17. Although women former FARC-EP combatants and female members of the
Comunes party continue to face security challenges, the creation of committees to
21-03819

3/19

S/2021/298

provide gender-related recommendations within the security guarantee mechanisms
created by the Final Agreement is a positive step, including in the Technical
Committee on Security and Protection and in the Comprehensive Security System for
the Exercise of Politics. Those committees are crucial to address the risks that women
face and to strengthen institutional capacity on gender. However, the approval and
implementation of a specific protection strategy for women former combatants,
provided for in the national reintegration policy, remain essential to address their
specific security risks.
Special Investigations Unit of the Office of the Attorney-General
18. The Special Investigations Unit continues investigating attacks against former
FARC-EP members, and has reported 35 convictions, 25 cases in trial phase, 42 cases
under investigation and 47 cases with arrest warrants issued. The Unit has issued 275
arrest warrants against persons allegedly linked to those attacks, including 56 against
intellectual authors, 17 of whom have been arrested. There are 125 warrants still
pending execution. One conviction was reported in the killing of a former FARC -EP
leader, Alexander Parra, who was a leader in the reintegration process and whose
killing in October 2019 was documented in a previous report by the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia ( S/2019/988); one individual
allegedly linked to the same case was captured on 10 March.
19. The mission of the Special Investigations Unit to dismantle criminal
organizations is instrumental to fighting impunity and ensuring non -repetition and
can only be fulfilled with support from other relevant entities, especially public
security forces and the judicial system. Given the limited resources and high numbers
of cases in Departments such as Antioquia, Cauca and Nariño, strengthening local
judicial capacity is paramount.
Deployment of public security forces
20. The preventive security deployment of army and police units around former
territorial areas for training and reintegration continues, guaranteeing security and
protection for some 2,600 former combatants and their families. However, security
outside the former territorial areas remains a challenge. The Mission is l iaising with
the Ministry of Defence and the police to follow up on and respond to security risks
of former combatants, with a focus on those living outside former territorial areas for
training and reintegration. Enhanced dialogue between former combatant s and public
security forces, including in the context of the Tripartite Mechanism for Security and
Protection, could help provide timely and more effective responses.
Attacks against social leaders, human rights defenders and
conflict-affected communities
21. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) received information about 24 killings of human rights defenders
and social leaders (one documented and 23 under verification), including four women.
Seven were indigenous leaders. The Departments with the highest numbers of cases
are Cesar, Nariño and Valle del Cauca. Ten large-scale killings were documented, and
12 are in the process of being verified.
22. The Mission has documented violence against members of political parties from
across the political spectrum. In Argelia, Cauca Department, a recognized leader and
a member of the municipal council, Fermiliano Meneses, was kidnapped and later
killed in January. His killing caused the displacement of another 11 members of the
council who also received death threats. This incident highlights the importance of
making increased use of the Comprehensive Security System for the Exercise of
4/19

21-03819

S/2021/298

Politics to strengthen prevention and protection measures for all political parties,
especially in the light of the upcoming elections to be held in 2022.
23. Progress in the Comprehensive Programme for Safeguards for Women Leaders
and Human Rights Defenders remains limited. Some meetings have been held to raise
awareness and generate ownership of the programme among local authorities; the pilot
in Putumayo continues to face challenges owing to limited institutional capacities.
24. On 3 February, through the creation of an intersectoral working group that
included the Government and the Offices of the Attorney -General, the Ombudsman
and the Inspector-General, the President announced a new strategy to consolidate
disparate figures of killings of social leaders and human rights defenders. Civil
society organizations have raised concerns that the initiative may hamper the
independence and autonomy of State entities that are crucial for preventing and
responding to these crimes.
Regional dynamics of the violence in Colombia
25. The concentration of violence in some regions is the result of a limited State
presence, high levels of poverty and the proliferation of illegal armed groups and
criminal organizations fighting over illicit economies. Since the signing of the Final
Agreement, violence against former combatants, social leaders, human rights
defenders and communities has been mostly concentrated in 25 municipalities of
Antioquia, Cauca, Caquetá, Guaviare, Meta, Nariño, Norte de Santander, Putumayo
and Valle del Cauca Departments. Additionally, security conditions in areas that had
seen improvements over the past few years, such as the border between Caquetá,
Guaviare and Meta Departments and the south of Bolivar Department, have
deteriorated. Three-fourths of the killings of former combatants registered by the
Mission since the signing of the Final Agreement have occurred in rural areas and just
over half have occurred in these 25 municipalities, which host 10 of the 24 former
territorial areas for training and reintegration, as well as new reintegration areas.
26. Violence against communities persists in Departments such as Antioquia,
Cauca, Chocó, Cordoba, Nariño, Norte de Santander and Valle del Cauca. The
situation in the Pacific region is particularly worrying, as thousands of civili ans are
caught in the crossfire between illegal armed actors, and between them and the public
security forces. The effects on civilians are reflected in massive displacements and
confinements, affecting 13,422 people (including 5,574 children) nationwide i n
January and February, and disproportionately affecting indigenous communities,
according to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
27. In Buenaventura, security has deteriorated sharply, and clashes have severely
affected thousands of civilians subject to confinement and displacement. In March,
the Episcopal Conference of Colombia issued a statement condemning violence
against civilians, rejecting the threats received by the Bishop of Buenaventura, and
calling for durable solutions to the situation.
28. The Office of the Ombudsman issued four early warnings for municipalities in
the Departments of Amazonas, Cauca, Caquetá, Norte de Santander, Putumayo and
Valle del Cauca. The Ministry of Interior is strengthening the Inters ectoral
Commission for Rapid Response to Early Warnings at the national and regional levels,
through dedicated personnel to follow up on recommendations of the Office of the
Ombudsman. High-level State representatives, including the Minister, are now
participating in sessions of the Intersectoral Commission at the regional level to better
coordinate appropriate responses to the risks identified in the early warnings.

21-03819

5/19

S/2021/298

National Commission on Security Guarantees
29. In January, during a territorial meeting of the National Commission on Security
Guarantees in Argelia, Cauca Department, the High Commissioner for Peace stated
that he was committed to monitoring the situation of the members of the municipal
council who had been forcibly displaced.
30. In March, during a meeting of the National Commission on Security Guarantees
chaired by the President, the Government presented the proposed guidelines for the
policy to dismantle illegal armed groups, criminal organizations and their support
networks. According to civil society representatives, the proposal includes some
elements discussed with members of the Commission, but it still requires a specific
action plan and regional prioritization for implementation.
Sustainability of the reintegration process
31. As part of commitments made by the President and former combatants after the
Pilgrimage for Life and Peace that took place in November 2020, the first of seven
regional sessions of the National Reintegration Council was held on 10 March. The
parties approved a reintegration workplan for the Departments of Arauca, Guaviare
and Meta. Former combatants and local authorities underscored the importance of the
permanent engagement of actors at all levels and raised concerns about their security
and the sustainability of the reintegration process, including the timely access to land
and housing.
Access to land and housing
32. Some progress has been made by the Agency for Reintegration and
Normalization and the National Land Agency in the consolidation of fo rmer territorial
areas for training and reintegration, with the purchase of land for two additional
former territorial areas in Mutatá, Antioquia Department, and Patía, Cauca
Department. So far, the Government has purchased land for five former territorial
areas for training and reintegration. Land titling for these plots is still pending. Only
one of the 24 former territorial areas for training and reintegration has been included
in the planning arrangements of its municipality.
33. In the former territorial areas for training and reintegration of Caldono, Cauca
Department, located in indigenous territory, former combatants reached an agreement
with ethnic authorities to remain in the area, including allowing for the construction
of housing for 55 former combatants and their families.
34. Only 4 of the 80 collective projects that have received financial support have
purchased land through State-sponsored solutions. The Working Group on Land has
resumed meetings to discuss mechanisms to access land for the co nsolidation of
former territorial areas for training and reintegration and for productive projects.
35. In January, the President enacted legislation that includes a specific provision
to facilitate housing projects in former territorial areas for training and reintegration.
According to the Government, around 580 houses for former combatants will be built
in 2021.
Former combatants outside former territorial areas for training and reintegration,
including in new reintegration areas.
36. Over 9,600 former combatants (including approximately 2,200 women) reside
outside former TATRs, including in about 70 new reintegration areas, 20 of which
require urgent attention, as they are located in municipalities with high levels of
poverty, face major security challenges and have limited access to reintegration

6/19

21-03819

S/2021/298

benefits. In January, the Office of the Inspector-General issued a directive on
reintegration, noting, among other issues, that former combatants outside former
territorial areas for training and reintegration required tailored solutions.
37. So far, the National Reintegration Council has approved 40 collective
productive projects located outside former territorial areas for training and
reintegration (two approved during the reporting period) benefiting 1,06 6 former
combatants (including 309 women), which represent about a third of the total
beneficiaries from collective productive projects.
38. The Working Group on Health has prioritized Cauca and Meta Departments for
engagement with local and regional authorities to address challenges facing former
combatants living outside former territorial areas for training and reintegration in
municipalities with limited health facilities.
Relocation of former combatants due to security challenges
39. The former territorial areas for training and reintegration of Puerto Asís,
Putumayo Department, and Buenos Aires and Miranda, Cauca Department, require
urgent relocation. The situation in Miranda has deteriorated in recent months, as
reflected by the killing of the leader of the former territorial area for training and
reintegration in late December. Despite efforts from the Government and former
combatants, the purchase of a plot for the transfer of the former territorial area for
training and reintegration of La Macarena, Meta Department, to Caquetá Department,
remains pending.
40. Of the 63 temporary houses for former combatants relocated from Ituango to
Mutatá, Antioquia Department, in July 2020, 50 have been built. The Agency for
Reintegration and Normalization has identified a plot in Ituango to relocate the 11
former combatants who remained in the area, and which could also be used to
implement a productive project that would benefit 47 former combatants.
41. The productive project implemented in El Diamante, Meta Department, has
been forced to temporarily relocate following renewed threats. The Agency for
Reintegration and Normalization and the cooperative of former combatants are
working to find a plot for the long-term relocation of the project.
Productive projects
42. Approximately 47 per cent of the 13,589 accredited former combatants are
participating in collective and individual productive projects, and 44 per cent (5,984)
of them have received the economic support stipulated in the Final Agreement for this
purpose. These include 88 collective projects approved by the National Reintegration
Council, benefiting 3,383 former combatants (including 939 women), 80 of which
have already received funding. Two new collective productive projects were approved
during this period. A total of 2,449 individual projects have been approved by the
Agency for Reintegration and Normalization (584 during the reporting period),
benefiting 2,960 former combatants (including 666 women).
43. Some 4,575 former combatants (including 1,555 women) are part of collective
efforts undertaken by 135 cooperatives (20 of which are led by women) and other
forms of productive associations. Efforts to strengthen their admini strative and
managerial capacities, together with technical assistance, are pivotal to consolidate
collective reintegration.
44. Approximately half of accredited women former combatants (1,605) have
benefitted from productive projects. In 34 of the 88 collective projects approved,
women represent at least half of the members of the committees leading their

21-03819

7/19

S/2021/298

implementation. However, women former combatants still require support to
overcome obstacles to their participation, such as childcare duties.
Health
45. The Working Group on Health has continued monitoring COVID -19 cases
among former combatants. According to the Agency for Reintegration and
Normalization, 169 former combatants (112 men, 57 women) have tested positive,
three of whom died (all men).
46. The working groups on Health and Gender of the National Reintegration
Council are collaborating to provide guidance to regional authorities on sexual and
reproductive health in accordance with the national reintegration policy.
Reintegration policies and institutions
47. In January, the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization issued a resolution
extending flexible conditions for former combatants to access their monthly
allowance, owing to the pandemic, as well as for the development of individual a nd
collective reintegration road maps, until 31 July 2021.
48. In February, the Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and Consolidation
announced the creation of the National Reintegration System and released guidelines
for national and local entities to ensure coordinated action in the implementation of
the reintegration road map. In response, Comunes issued a statement recalling that
the national reintegration policy provides for a legally binding system designed within
the National Reintegration Council and reiterated that the implementation of the
reintegration road maps is contingent upon the system being established under such
terms. The Office of the Inspector-General issued a directive on social and economic
reintegration in January, calling for the establishment of the National Reintegration
System as envisioned in the national reintegration policy and urging State institutions
to ensure access to reintegration benefits for all former combatants, regardless of their
location, including a gender and ethnic approach.
49. The Working Group on Gender of the National Reintegration Council is
promoting the implementation of the 18 gender actions of the national reintegration
policy, including through field visits to build capacities on gender among loca l
reintegration councils, local authorities and former combatants, and to ensure that
productive initiatives are implemented with a gender-sensitive approach.
Role of municipal and departmental authorities
50. The Office of the Mayor of Bogotá has moved forward with the implementation
of initiatives inspired by the development programmes with a territorial focus in two
vulnerable areas of the city, and with the identification of former combatants living
in the city to ensuring tailored responses to their needs. Reintegration working groups
in Cauca, Bolivar, Meta, Nariño, Sucre and Tolima met to review progress and
challenges facing the process. These mechanisms are key to follow -up on the
implementation of commitments made in local development plans.
Political reintegration
51. In February, 72 of the 111 members of the National Council of the Comunes
party discussed the electoral strategy for the elections to be held in 2022 and voted to
appoint 15 new members of the party’s board.
52. In March, a female member of the local administrative board of one of Bogot á’s
largest districts, Luceris Segura, who was elected in 2019 as part of a coalition
including Comunes, became the president of the board.
8/19

21-03819

S/2021/298

Consolidation of the integrated presence of the State in conflict-affected areas
53. Among the most regrettable consequences of the decades-long conflict in
Colombia is how it perpetuated a limited State presence in some regions of the
country, along with a reduced trust between communities and i nstitutions, both of
which contribute to the persisting violence. Through its different programmes, the
Final Agreement has started to bring together communities and institutions to advance
peace, development and the rule of law, especially in areas histor ically affected by
the conflict.
Comprehensive rural reform
54. With the participation of communities in many of the construction efforts, to
date 1,274 development programmes with a territorial focus works have been
completed and 151 are under implementation. Using approximately $470 million
from royalties from mineral and hydrocarbon exploitation, 7 projects have been
completed, 162 are under execution and 56 are pending contracting. The Government
has supported the creation of offices for the develop ment programmes with a
territorial focus by local authorities in 124 of the 170 municipalities involved in the
programmes’ implementation to ensure better coordination and planning. So far, 3
stabilization road maps required for the implementation of the programmes have been
concluded, including 2 during this reporting period, and 13 remain pending.
55. Several actors, including Comunes, continue to question the Government’s view
of the development programmes with a territorial focus, claiming that its appr oach is
not in line with the Comprehensive Rural Reform as envisioned in the Final
Agreement. In a report on the implementation of the Final Agreement, issued in
February, a group of members of Congress from independent and opposition parties
raised concerns about insufficient resources allocated to the development
programmes with a territorial focus compared to the goals set in the Framework Plan
for Implementation of the Agreement, and about limited citizen participation in the
design of the stabilization road maps.
56. The Government reported that, of the 3 million hectares envisioned in the Final
Agreement, so far approximately 1.2 million have been added to the Land Fund, and
some 100,000 have been delivered to nearly 8,000 peasant families. In a report on
access to land released in January, the Office of the Inspector-General warned that, of
the hectares reported by the Government as added to the Fund, only 96,471 were
available for allocation.
Illicit crop substitution
57. According to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, as at 31 December
2020, of the 99,097 participating families (36.5 per cent headed by women and 6.7 per
cent from ethnic communities), over 67,000 are receiving technical assistance and
64,000 have received support for food security. These activities continue amidst
ongoing violence from illegal armed actors interested in hindering the National
Comprehensive Programme for Substitution of Illicit Crops in certain Departments,
such as Caquetá, Meta and Putumayo.
58. While 98 per cent of the families have complied with their commitments to
eradicate, the reseeding of coca crops in areas that had been previously eradicated has
grown from 0.2 to 0.8 per cent. So far, long-term productive projects benefit only
around seven per cent of families participating in the Programme.

21-03819

9/19

S/2021/298

Comprehensive security and protection programme for communities and
organizations in the territories
59. Progress regarding the 12 pilot projects of the comprehensive security and
protection programme for communities and organizations in the territories remains
limited. During a meeting with the Ministry of Interior, civil society representatives
called for the full implementation of the programme and requested that six additional
regional pilots and two national pilots for civil society platforms also be carried out.
Reinforce constructive dialogue between the parties
60. As the Final Agreement moves into its fifth year of implementation, dialogue
between the parties at the political and technical levels is essential to jointly overcome
challenges. Several issues have been addressed by the parties within the mechanisms
devised by the Final Agreement, as well as in other forums with the support of the
United Nations.
61. In December 2020, the parties agreed to extend the mandate of the Commission
for the Follow-Up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of the Final
Peace Agreement to January 2022. With the participation of all key Government
officials and accompanied by the guarantor countries, the parties have met regularly
and agreed on an agenda for technical sessions on the status of the implementation.
The first two meetings were held in February, focusing on security guarantees for
former combatants and on comprehensive rural reform. The Government and State
entities presented an update on measures taken. Comunes insisted that results on
security remain insufficient, and that the Administration has a limited view of rural
reform. The Commission also met with victims’ organizations and the Special Forum
on Gender and will continue to meet with the High -Level Forum of Ethnic Peoples.
These in-depth discussions underscore the Commission’s essential role in ensuring
mutual reflection and comprehensive follow-up on implementation, which should
translate into joint solutions and the adoption of more effective measures on all
sections of the Final Agreement.
62. The tripartite working group on transit to legality is addressing pending issues
regarding accreditation of former FARC-EP combatants. The number of accredited
former FARC-EP members stands at 13,589 (10,453 men and 3,136 women), with no
progress since the previous report. Efforts continue to locate the 198 former
combatants (156 men and 42 women) that remain to be located and a ccredited. The
status of accreditation of 139 individuals (including 6 women), most of whom are in
prison, remains pending. The working group is also following up on the situation of
accredited former FARC-EP members that are still deprived of their liberty and
Comunes has requested an update on their cases from the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace.
63. The project proposal to gather information on the location of mines, developed
within the tripartite working group on mines, has been approved. Two pilot
programmes are currently under discussion within the working group, and funding
still needs to be allocated to support the former FARC -EP combatants’ commitment
to humanitarian demining. Additionally, under the lead of a female former combatant,
Humanicemos DH – the humanitarian demining organization comprised of 94 former
FARC-EP combatants (including 25 women) trained by the United Nations Mine
Action Service – detected its first antipersonnel mine in Caquetá Department in
March. This significant step towards non-repetition is the result of the joint work of
the Government, former combatants and the United Nations.
64. Regarding the FARC-EP assets to be used for reparations for victims, the
deadline set by the Government for their handover expired on 31 Decemb er 2020. In

10/19

21-03819

S/2021/298

January, the Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and Consolidation submitted a
report to the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and the Office of the Attorney -General
informing on the status of the process. As both parties have expressed a wi llingness
to fulfil their obligations in the interest of victims, renewed work within the tripartite
mechanism on this matter could help overcome obstacles.
Strengthening conditions for reconciliation
Comprehensive System for Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition
65. The transitional justice system created by the Final Agreement continues to
make strides to provide truth, justice and reparations to victims of all parties to the
decades-long armed conflict in Colombia with a view to ensuring n on-repetition.
66. As anticipated in the previous report (S/2020/1301), President Duque sent a
letter to the President of the Security Council on 13 January 2021 conveying the
parties’ request for the expansion of the mandate of the Verification Mission to
support the verification of compliance with restorative sentences to be issued by the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace. In response to a request from the members of the
Security Council (S/2021/100), on 24 February the Secretary-General provided
detailed recommendations on how this additional task would be carried out and the
implications for the configuration of the Verification Mission ( S/2021/186).
67. A committee composed of the three entities of the Comprehensive System and
the Special Investigations Unit of the Office of the Attorney -General, which was
created to improve the prevention of killings of so cial leaders and former combatants
and the disappearance of persons, held its first meeting in January. The committee has
called for an integrated State presence and the comprehensive implementation of the
Final Agreement to overcome the conditions underpinning violence.
68. In addition to the major developments in Cases 01 and 03, the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace called seven former FARC-EP commanders to provide early
contributions to the truth on several killings, including high -profile assassinations,
acknowledged by former FARC-EP leaders in October 2020. In February, the President
of Comunes, Rodrigo Londoño, spoke and asked victims for their forgiveness. He
committed to responding to questions posed by victims during the hearing.
69. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace also made progress on the participation of
civilian third parties and non-combatant State agents in the conflict. This includes
identifying patterns of criminal behaviour related to their collaboration with
paramilitary groups and the involvement of civilians as recruiters of victims of
extrajudicial killings in Case 03. Ninety-four civilian third parties fitting these
patterns have asked for their cases to be under the Special Jurisdiction for Peace.
70. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace referred several complaints from members of
the public security forces under its jurisdiction to the Offices of the Attorney -General
and the Inspector-General, alleging undue pressure regarding their testimonies on
Case 03 regarding extrajudicial killings and Case 04 on the situation in the Urabá
region.
71. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace recently warned that the actions of illegal
armed actors in some regions represented an obstacle to the work of the
Comprehensive System, and a threat to victims’ rights. The Special Jurisdiction for
Peace further expressed concern that insecurity in Nariño was affecting its
investigations and limiting victims’ participation in Case 02, prioritizing the situation
in Ricaurte, Tumaco and Barbacoas, Nariño Department.
72. The Commission for the Clarification of Truth, Coexistence and Non-Repetition
continues to hold regional dialogues to receive recommendations on non -repetition
21-03819

11/19

S/2021/298

from civil society organizations, victims and State institutions. The President o f the
Commission, Francisco de Roux, stated that the final report, due in November 2021,
would focus on promoting reconciliation, and emphasized that Colombian society
should not fear the truth and should be prepared to listen to the multiple voices
incorporated in the report.
73. The Special Unit for the Search for Persons Deemed as Missing has received
approximately 9,000 search requests from relatives of victims, and more than 250
voluntary contributions of information from former FARC-EP members, members of
the public security forces and other actors. The Unit reported that, in coordination
with the Office of the Attorney-General and civil society organizations, it has handed
over the remains of 98 victims in the Departments of Antioquia, Caldas, Caquetá,
Chocó and Meta, as well as Bogotá. The Unit is also working on the identification of
some 25,000 bodies.
National Council for Peace, Reconciliation and Coexistence
74. The National Council for Peace, Reconciliation and Coexistence presented the
guidelines for the public policy on reconciliation, coexistence and non -stigmatization
to the President in October 2020, however, the policy has yet to be adopted, along
with an action plan and resources for its implementation. Over 500 local councils
have been established across the country with support of the Office of the High
Commissioner for Peace.
Cross-cutting considerations
Gender
75. Despite challenges to the implementation of the gender provisions of the Final
Agreement, in particular those related to security guarantees and the reintegration of
women former combatants, there have been positive developments by the Office of
the Presidential Counsellor for Women’s Affairs in engaging with several
Government entities and local authorities, in particular around security guarantees for
women leaders and human rights defenders. This includes work to identify economic
empowerment opportunities.
76. Women social leaders and women human rights defenders continue to face
security risks. In December, the Special Forum on Gender reported that 10 of its 16
members lacked the security and protection conditions to exercise their leadership.
Following the decision by the Government to increase their protection, risk analyses
were conducted and protection schemes were requested for the members of the
Special Forum who lacked security details.
77. Gender-based violence is a persistent scourge hindering the reintegration of
female former combatants, the valuable work of women social leaders and human
rights defenders, and the dignity of Colombian women in general. Despite
institutional efforts, conciliation between victims and perpetrators continues to be a
common practice among local authorities, hampering victims’ access to
comprehensive assistance, including access to justice, and normalizing violence in
their communities.
78. Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons continue facing
challenges to access services related to sexual and gender-based violence owing to
stigmatization and discrimination.
79. In commemoration of International Women’s Day, the Mission organized, in
collaboration with local authorities, women’s organizations and local Comunes
gender committees, 15 events on women’s leadership, including exchanges of
knowledge and experiences of women-led productive initiatives.
12/19

21-03819

S/2021/298

Ethnic affairs
80. It is encouraging that former combatants of ethnic origin are working alongside
indigenous authorities and communities. In February, a cooperative of 437 former
combatants (including 86 women) came to an agreement with the indigenous
reservation of Tacueyó, Cauca Department, to work jointly on a long-term local
development plan. Similarly, in the new reintegration area in the Cañamomo Loma
Prieta reservation, 12 former combatants and seven victims are working together on
a fish-farming project.
81. Regrettably, ethnic communities continue to face acute security issues in several
regions, including violence against indigenous and Afro-Colombian former
combatants and against ethnic authorities, especially guards who fulfil essential
security roles in their territories. In Chocó Department, threats from illegal armed
actors have also caused the confinement of 9,352 persons, and the forced
displacement of 486 additional civilians, according to the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. The Emberá indigenous people are
especially affected including due to the continuous use of antipersonnel mines in their
territories. In neighbouring Murindó, Antioquia Department, Emberá authorities
reported the confinement of 2,107 people and the displacement of 140 people.
Children
82. The Office of the High Commissioner for Peace and the Agency for
Reintegration and Normalization notified 188 individuals, who were recognized in
2020 as children at the moment of accreditation. There was marginal pr ogress in the
payment of administrative reparations for 38 members of the programme “A Different
Path of Life”. Only 22 participants out of 121 have received resources for productive
projects.
83. Programmes for children in most of the former territorial areas for training and
reintegration have been gradually resuming since January, but delays persist in the
establishment of child-friendly spaces in Carrizal, Miravalle and Pondores, and in the
new reintegration area in Uribe, Meta Department. Nutritional support and virtual
programmes, including training and recreational activities, continue. The Agency for
Reintegration and Normalization and other institutions carried out an assessment on
child protection needs in Uribe. Similar exercises would help identi fy attention
requirements for children in other areas.
84. The Mission verified the deaths of three members of the programme “A
Different Path of Life”, between November and December 2020 in Antioquia,
Córdoba and Nariño Departments. According to authorities, two of the cases are
considered killings in combat and one death was the result of a traffic accident. The
Mission is liaising with the Special Investigations Unit of the Office of the Attorney General regarding the circumstances of the alleged killing s in combat. The Working
Group on Children of the National Reintegration Council and the local committees to
follow up the implementation of the programme are still pending reactivation.
Youth
85. Young former combatants and young members of conflict-affected communities
continue to be plagued by violence. Since the signing of the Final Agreement, around
18 per cent (48) of former combatants killed have been under 29 years old. In
February, young leaders from Buenaventura and other regions affected by v iolence
met with members of the peace commissions of Congress to discuss the persisting
threats in their regions. Young leaders called for a reinvigorated and comprehensive
implementation of the Final Agreement.

21-03819

13/19

S/2021/298

Developments related to the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
86. Conflict dynamics involving the Ejército de Liberación Nacional (ELN),
including clashes with other illegal armed actors and with the public security forces,
continue in certain Departments, such as Cauca and Chocó. Communities and c ivil
society organizations in those and other Departments including Nariño and Norte de
Santander have asked the Government and ELN to resume peace talks on
humanitarian grounds. Similar calls have been made by political actors, including by
members of the Senate Peace Commission. The Government insists that the
possibility of resuming talks is contingent upon ELN ceasing violent actions,
including kidnapping, the recruitment of children and the laying of mines. ELN
maintains its position that any such request by the Government must be addressed at
the negotiating table.
Coordination with the United Nations country team
87. The United Nations country team continues lending its support to the
comprehensive implementation of the Final Agreement. During 2020, United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes delivered $175 million in support of reintegration,
development programmes with a territorial focus, illicit crop substitution, reparations
and transitional justice. Approximately $25 million were invested in reintegration
alone, including direct support to productive projects. Almost 4,000 former
combatants (40 per cent women) benefited from these initiatives in 2020.
88. The United Nations multi-partner trust fund for sustaining peace in Colombia
approved its priorities for the 2021–2022 period, focusing on economic recovery, crop
substitution and community infrastructure in five regions with development
programmes with a territorial focus; support to productive projects and housing for
former combatants; preparing the dissemination of the Truth Commission’s final
report; and continuing support to the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and reparations to
victims. Security of social leaders, human rights defenders and former combatants
has been established as a cross-cutting priority.
89. The trust fund recently approved various projects in support of advancing 2021
implementation priorities of different sections of the Final Agreement. These include
support to the development programmes with a territorial focus in Chocó Department;
a project for alternative livelihoods for women involved in coca-leaf processing; and
assistance to strengthen institutional and local capacities on prevention and
protection, and on investigations of violence against social leaders and human rights
defenders. The Fund will further reinforce the capacities of the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace for the implementation of restorative sentences including tasks, works or
activities with reparatory and restorative content, and will support 16 grass -roots civil
society projects to strengthen victims’ participation in the transitional justice system.
Mission support
90. Mission teams deployed in February to Yarumal, Antioquia Department, and
Colinas, Guaviare Department, after preparatory infrastructure and security works
were completed. Similar works to open the Mission’s new regional office in Cali were
completed.
91. As at 1 March 2021, women represented 43 per cent of Professional and Field
Service staff; 57 per cent of United Nations Volunteers; and 29 per cent of
international observers.

14/19

21-03819

S/2021/298

Safety and security
92. The reconfiguration of the multiple illegal armed actors in various Departments
and disputes over territorial control fuelled by the context of the COVID -19 pandemic
have had a negative impact in the operations of the United Nations system. The
Department of Safety and Security registered 19 security incidents affecting United
Nations personnel, ranging from robbery to threats and movement restrictions.
Conduct and discipline
93. The Mission received one allegation of sexual exploitation and abuse involving
Mission personnel. The United Nations Office of Internal Oversight Services is
following up. The Mission has implemented strong measures to ensure that personnel
is aware of prohibited conduct and to prevent misconduct, including messages from
the Special Representative on the United Nations zero -tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse.
Observations
94. The reporting period coincides with the onset of the fifth year of implementation
of Colombia’s landmark Peace Agreement. The developments described previously
attest to the significance of the results attained, as well as of the sizeable challenges
facing implementation. I welcome the constructive spirit of the recent me eting
between President Duque and former FARC-EP leaders. I call upon the parties to
continue to work jointly with great commitment in the months ahead so as to protect
and expand upon those gains over a crucial window for progress. The resilience
displayed by Colombians in conflict-affected areas who still await the promise of
peace is an inspiration and a call to action, and every effort in 2021 will be
determinant for the country to move forward.
95. The urgency of curbing violence against former combata nts, conflict-affected
communities, social leaders and human rights defenders cannot be overstated. I am
aware of the multiple measures undertaken by authorities, yet I remain gravely
concerned to see these heinous crimes continue to be perpetrated against Colombians
working to build a better future, including youth, indigenous and Afro -Colombian
communities. I once more urge all State entities to mobilize resolutely to enhance
prevention, protection and response to these threats.
96. After the presentation of the Government’s proposal within the National
Commission on Security Guarantees, the approval and implementation of the long awaited public policy to dismantle illegal armed groups is an opportunity for the State
and civil society to jointly devise actions to deactivate these threats. The deployment
of public security forces in the most critical areas, in tandem with efforts to accelerate
the presence of civilian institutions, should progressively translate into greater control
of the territories and better protection for communities. The increased engagement of
the Minister of Interior within the Intersectoral Commission for Rapid Response to
Early Warning is a positive step, which I hope will lead to effective responses to risks
identified in the early warnings.
97. I take note of the progress made by the National Protection Unit regarding the
recruitment of analysts and bodyguards to fulfil pending protection requests, and to
make protection schemes for former combatants fully operational. Ensuring the
appropriate resources for the Unit remains essential. The creation of subregional
offices of the Unit with specialized analysts could result in more context -relevant
protection measures. I encourage the Unit and civil society representatives to jointly
review the protocol for gender-sensitive risk analysis to address women leaders’
specific risks, and to enhance its capacity to respond to risks facing women former

21-03819

15/19

S/2021/298

combatants. It is also urgent to approve and implement the specific protection strategy
for women former combatants provided for in the national reintegration policy.
98. The role of the Special Investigations Unit of the Office of the Attorney -General
in prosecuting perpetrators and intellectual authors of crimes against former
combatants and social leaders is critical. I trust that the Government and the Office
of the Attorney-General will ensure the necessary support and resources for the Unit
to deliver on its mandate. Combating impunity also requires additional capacities at
the local level, underscoring the need for more prosecutors and specialized judges in
the regions with the highest numbers of crimes. Reinvigorating the tripartite work of
the Unit, former combatants’ representatives and the Mission could help improve
analysis and response to violence against former combatants.
99. Ensuring the sustainability of the reintegration process remains a priority and
guaranteeing former combatants’ access to livelihoods is essential. Access to land for
productive projects is key to sustainability, as most of them are related to agriculture
and livestock. I therefore urge the parties to accelerate the approval of productive
projects so that, by the end of this year, the great majority of former combatants are
involved in income-generating activities. Similarly, I welcome progress made by the
Government in facilitating former combatants’ access to land for productive projects,
as well as for the consolidation of former territorial areas for training and
reintegration. With the increased pace, we could see significantly more results in the
coming months. Additionally, efforts by local administrations to include these areas
into their municipalities, with support from national entities, would strengthen the
long-term sustainability of the reintegration process.
100. Despite progress in the construction of housing projects in former territorial
areas for training and reintegration, timelines and funding remain a challenge. These
and other issues regarding housing could be addressed by strengthening the dial ogue
between relevant stakeholders at the technical level, including by setting up a working
group within the National Reintegration Council.
101. Former combatants living outside former territorial areas for training and
reintegration face specific problems, ranging from insufficient access to services to
acute security issues. There is growing consensus on the need to devise tailored
solutions. I encourage the Government to act upon the calls from the Inspector General’s Office in this regard. The lack of specific measures on productive projects
and housing for former combatants of ethnic origin continues to hinder their
reintegration, affecting access to benefits of the Final Agreement. I once more call on
the National Reintegration Council to consider the recommendations of the HighLevel Forum of Ethnic Peoples to address the issues facing former combatants of
indigenous and Afro-Colombian origin.
102. The first of the seven territorial sessions of the National Reintegration Council
agreed by President Duque and former FARC-EP combatants last November and held
in Villavicencio is a positive development. I trust that upcoming meetings will also
be planned and conducted with the meaningful participation of all stakeholders,
including former combatants’ representatives from inside and outside former
territorial areas for training and reintegration, and that they will lead to the adoption
of workplans to accelerate the process, including clear timelines and resources for
implementation. As the process moves forward, the Verification Mission will continue
working alongside the diverse group of accredited former combatants, regardless of
their location, both within and outside the Comunes party.
103. Realizing the promise of lasting peace requires the consolidation of an
integrated State presence throughout the country. The Final Agreement created
interrelated mechanisms to allow State institutions to reach communities in regions
historically affected by violence and poverty, and opened spaces for these
16/19

21-03819

S/2021/298

communities to take ownership and participate in the design of tailored solutions to
their problems. To this end, finalizing the 13 remaining roadmaps for stabilization,
with due consideration to the priorities identified by communities, is instrumental to
build upon progress made in the implementation of the development programmes with
a territorial focus. Further progress in the allocation of land to peasants is also
necessary to fulfil the Final Agreement’s goal of transforming rural Colombia.
Similarly, all efforts to ensure that more families involved in the National
Comprehensive Programme for Substitution of Illicit Crops, which has shown itself
to be worth protecting and building upon, have access to sustainable productive
opportunities are essential to prevent reseeding and relapsing into the cycle of illegal
economies fuelling violence. Decisive steps in the implementation of the pilots of the
comprehensive security and protection programme for communities and
organizations in the territories are necessary to make full use of the capacities of the
State and communities to prevent and respond to insecurity. Finally, adequate
implementation of the Comprehensive Programme for the Safeguards of Women
Leaders and Human Rights Defenders is also of the essence to ensure that they can
continue to play their vital roles in peacebuilding efforts.
104. I welcome the joint decision by the parties to extend the mandate of the
Commission for the Follow-Up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of
the Final Agreement until next year. Substantive and constructive dialogue between
them within the Commission and other fora will strengthen implementation across the
Final Agreement in 2021, and help them to devise joint solutions to common
problems. In that spirit, I encourage the parties to reach consensus regarding the
National Reintegration System as the process moves forward.
105. Adding to the inherent difficulties of a transition from violent conflict to peace,
Colombia will be immersed in the coming months in a pol itical campaign that
coincides with a complex environment caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. These
unprecedented circumstances call for all political actors and Colombian society at
large to turn to dialogue and democratic means to resolve their differences, if the
country is to maintain the milestone achieved in 2018, when the most peaceful and
inclusive elections in decades took place. In this context, the adoption of the policy
on reconciliation, coexistence and non-stigmatization could prove essential, and the
regular convening and effective work of peace and reconciliation councils at the
national, regional and local levels can also be decisive in the implementation of
political pacts and fostering a climate of trust and tolerance amidst growing
polarization.
106. 2021 will be a decisive year for the work of Colombia’s transitional justice
system. I am encouraged by the progress in shedding light on painful chapters of the
armed conflict. For the system to be successful in upholding the rights of victims a nd
in setting the foundations of reconciliation, it is necessary for former combatants,
members of the public security forces and third parties to the conflict to provide
exhaustive and truthful accounts of the crimes committed, recognize their
responsibilities and contribute to reparations. It is also essential that all actors respect
the autonomy and independence of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace so it can carry
on its work; and that those who can provide information on the whereabouts of
missing persons collaborate with the Unit for the Search of Persons Deemed as
Missing. As the Truth Commission works tirelessly on its final report, it is also vital
for Colombian society to lend it its full backing. I reiterate the United Nations firm
support to the three components of the Comprehensive System, especially as they
face not only the challenges inherent to their complex mandates, but also the actions
of illegal armed actors that hinder their essential work and which I condemn in the
strongest terms.

21-03819

17/19

S/2021/298

107. In societies emerging from conflict, the prospects for sustainable and lasting
peace depend on the strength of the gains reached in the early stages of the transition.
By the end of this year, one-third of the time frame envisioned for the comprehensive
implementation of the Final Agreement will have passed. With the commitment of the
parties, the active engagement of Colombian society, and the firm support of the
international community, including the United Nations, I am confident that the
foundations of the Colombian peace process will be strong enough to withstand the
challenges.
108. In conclusion, I take this opportunity to acknowledge the steadfast dedication
of all the members of the Verification Mission, under the leadership of my Special
Representative, during an exceedingly challenging period.

18/19

21-03819

S/2021/298

21-03819

19/19
