SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

2463rd

MEETING:

NEW

11 AUGUST

1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2463)

. ... ... ... ... .. ... .... ... .. ... ... ...

1

.. .... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... .... . ... .... ...

1

Letter dated 2 August 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Chad to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15902) . .

1

Adoption of the agenda

WPV.2463

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Record of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of ,the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2463rd MEETING
Held

11 August 1983, at 3 p.m.

in New York on Thursday,

President: Mr. Luc de La BARRE

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Khalil (Egypt), Mr.
Rajaie-Khorassani
(Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Essy
(Ivory Coast), Mr. Kofa (Liberia) and Mr. Erfaki (Sudan)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

de NANTEUIL

(France).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
first speaker is Mr. Korom Ahmed, Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs and Co-operation of Chad. I welcome
him and invite him to make his statement.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2463)
1. Adoption

4. Mr. KOROM (Chad) (interpretation from French):
Since this is the first opportunity I have had to speak in the
Council, I should like to associate myself personally with
the sentiments of great satisfaction already expressed to
you, Sir, by the delegation of Chad on the occasion of your
assumption of the presidency for this month. I take pleasure at that fact, and we would reiterate our delegation’s
complete readiness to assist you in the performance of
your duties.

of the agenda

2. Letter dated 2 August 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Chad to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council

(S/15902)
The meeting was called to order at 3.45 p.m.

5. I should also like to associate myself with preceding
speakers in paying a respectful tribute to the members of
the Council, whose primary responsibility it is to maintain
international peace and security.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 2 August 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Chad to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15902)

6. At its meeting on 3 August [ibid.] the Council heard
the complaint of our Government against Libya for its
naked aggression against the Republic of Chad. That
aggression, which was at the time limited to the military
occupation by the Libyan army of the northern region of
Chad known as Tibesti, has increased considerably in
recent days and has taken the form of a virtual genocide
of the martyred people of Chad, with indiscriminate
bombing of sites in the north and east of the country by
the Libyan air force.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
conformity with the decision taken at the previous meeting on this item [2462nd meeting], I invite the Secretary of
State for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation of Chad and
the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to take
places at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Korom Ahmed
(Chad) and Mr. Burwin (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) took
places at the Council table.

7. We have asked the Council to live up to its responsibilities by unreservedly condemning Colonel Qaddafi’s
Libya for its criminal action and demanding that Libya
immediately withdraw its troops from Chad.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Egypt, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Ivory Coast, Liberia and the
Sudan in which they request to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

8. The Council heard the representative of Libya respond
to this legitimate complaint from Chad with his habitual
arrogance. He asserted that he would not respond to our
delegation, because he did not recognize our Government,
although, to his great misfortune, he was obliged to sit at the
same table as us. This is sufficient proof that the recognition
of the legitimacy of the Chad Government cannot be subject to any doubt within the United Nations, nor inside the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) or the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
1

9. But, while claiming that he would not respond to us,
the Libyan representative, to divert the attention of
members of the Council, painted a fantastic picture. of the
Chad tragedy, for which his country is primarily responsible, and uttered words whose insolence and insulting
nature towards the head of State of Chad have no equal
except in the scorn which Colonel Qaddafi has for his
African peers.

17. Libya’s shameless manoeuvres to obstruct the participation of the Chad delegation in international conferences were repeated in -January 1983 at the ministerial
meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries at Managua, which was essentially
devoted to questions of Central America, and at the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries held at New Delhi in March 1983.

10. As was only to be expected, the representative of
Libya denied the accusations against his country, claiming that Libya does not intervene in the affairs of Chad
and has sent neither aeroplanes nor troops to that
country.

18. Each of these attempts by Libya was thwarted, to the
great chagrin of the Libyan delegation. Each time, the
Libyan Government tried to justify its extraordinary
behaviour by suggesting that the OAU should deal with
the Chad question before it could recognize the Government of N’Djamena.

11. The task of the representative of Colonel Qaddafi in
this debate is not easy, so he chose the facile course of
categorically denying the allegations against his country,
because he was in no position to provide any proof of the
much-vaunted neutrality of Libya in this serious matter.

19. The opportunity so ardently awaited by Libya presented itself with the convening at Addis Ababa in June
1983 of the nineteenth session of the Assembly.of Heads
of State and Government of the OAU. In accordance
with both the spirit and the letter of the Charter of the
Organization of African Unity, the OAU’s President at
the time and the host country invited President Hissein
Habrt to take part in the work of the Assembly.

12. One has only to read the many letters which Libya
has addressed to the President of the Council in response
to our accusations, which were specific, and the statement
of the Libyan representative in the Council, to get a precise picture of the high degree of Libyan interference in
the internal affairs of Chad and to understand the nature
of the open warfare upon which it has .now embarked
against Chad.

20. Presented with this fait accompli, Colonel Qaddafi
then proposed some odious horse-trading, consisting of
his acceptance of the participation of the Chad delegation at the Assembly on condition that the POLISARIO
Frente Popular para la Liberacidn de Saguia el-Hamra y
de Rfo de Oro be admitted, although the two questions
had nothing whatsoever to do with each other.

13. Libya has always intervened flagrantly and openly
in the internal affairs-of Chad, and hasnever concealed its
intention to invade and occupy the whole of Chad and
thus forcibly to merge it with Libya. That would be a fine
way to resolve the problem of the “AOUZOU Strip”.

21. Everybody knows what happened next. The Chad
delegation was officially admitted to take part in the proceedings of the Assembly. -Colonel Qaddafi, unable to
contain his anger, decided to boycott totally that Assembly of the Heads of African States.

14. Therefore, during the conferences on national reconciliation in Chad, held successively at Kano in northern
Nigeria and at Lagos, the federal capital of that country,
Libya consistently tried to impose as head of State of
Chad a man who was in its pay. If one of the provisions of
the Lagos Accord of August 1979 [S/14378, annex I] forbade neighbouring countries to intervene in the internal
affairs of Chad, that provision was aimed first and foremost at Libya. That obviously did not prevent it from
trampling the provision scornfully underfoot.

22. The Chad Government’s achievement of victory all
along the line on the diplomatic level could only irritate
the Libyan rCgime even further, particularly because the
Chad Government made clearly known its intention to
recover its occupied territory. Since Chad’s title to this
part of its national territory cannot be denied, and since
there is no argument, of however little validity, for its
being overturned by any international juridical body, the
Libyan rbgime could only have recourse to force of arms.

15. The Lagos Accord was rendered invalid at the time
by the Transitional National Union Government of Chad
itself, which substituted for it the N’Djamena Agreements-just
a few days before the forces of President
Hissein Habre took power. Therefore, it is, to say the
least, absurd for Libya desperately to cling to that
Accord, asserting that it is valid.

23. The Chad delegation brought to your attention on
2 and 4 August [S/15902 and S/15907) the magnitude of
this war which, since then, has assumed profoundly disquieting proportions. From two military bases set up
right in the middle of Chad territory, one at Ogui, to the
north-west of Faya-Largeau, and the other at OuniangaKebir, to the north-east, Sukhoi, .Tupolev, MiG and
SF260 aircraft, in flights of six, come every day to drop
fragmentation and napalm bombs on the towns of FayaLargeau, Oum-Chalouba and Kalait, causing considerable loss of innocent life. From 8 to 9 August alone, we
counted more than 200 killed and more than 300,
wounded, some by phosphorus and napalm bombs.

16. Libya’s interference and intervention in the internal
affairs of Chad were exposed when in November 1982
Libya categorically opposed the participation of the offrcial Chad delegation in the second attempt to convene in
Tripoli the nineteenth session of the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of the OAU.
2

24. Furthermore, again from the same bases, which house
two motorized battalions equipped with %-mm and 75mm
recoilless cannons and 105 and K&calibre cannons as well
as BM-13, BM-16 and BM-21 so-called Stalin Organs and
AML 9Os, which were unloaded from large freight aircraft,
mostly Iliyushins, as well as four armoured divisions
equipped in particular with T-54, T-55, T-62 and T-72
tanks, Libya has since yesterday sent in against FayaLargeau three armoured columns comprising 350 tanks,
the models of which I have just mentioned, supported by
observation aircraft and MI-24 helicopter gunships,
which are the most sophisticated available today in the
Libyan army. This new form of warfare began, as has just
been said, on 9 August, with a heavy artillery pounding
of that locality. As I am addressing the Council that city
is being put to the tire and the sword. Women, children
and old persons are dying victims of-500-kilogram
and
l-ton bombs. The Council should know the suffering
that is taking place in Chad.

against soldiers. .It is a war of extermination, a war of
genocide suffered by the martyred people of Chad at the
very time we are addressing the Council. Unfortunately,
ill-informed or ill-intentioned people continue to describe
the events in Chad as civil war. That is not the view of
those who are living through it. We are faced with an
armed conflict between Chad and Libya. The time of
guerrilla warfare in Chad has long passed. It is now total
war.
29. For the benefit of those who are still talking about a
“Goukouni army” the Government of the Republic of
Chad would like to make it absolutely clear that one year
ago those proteges of Qaddafi-Goukouni,
Kamougue,
Mohamat Abba and others-left the national territory in
disastrous circumstances without even their luggage and
still less with their armed forces.
30. The army now to be found on the national territory
of Chad, face to face with the Chad armed forces, is in
fact an army that was scratched together by the Tripoli
regime using as a basis elements of the Libyan regular
army, which constitutes its nucleus. In addition to those
elements are Chadian and other African workers in Libya
who were press-ganged into action, and particularly the
Islamic Legion financed by petrodollars and composed of
agents of all nationalities, recruited primarily in the subSaharan countries and then sent from Benin towards Libya,
where they received training in military camps.

25. The people of Chad are offering courageous resistance. It is an affront not only to the people of Chad but to
international public opinion. This shows how valuable
and beyond price is the struggle for independence and
liberty.
26. Thanks to the modest defence capacity that has been
given to us by friendly countries, we have begun to call a
halt to the onward march of this armada of ultra-modern
weaponry being unleashed against us. Thus on Friday, 5
August, we shot down a Sukhoi-22 bomber that was
bombing Faya-Largeau. Its pilot, who was arrested, was
Commander Abdel Salam Mohamed Sharfadine, a colonel
in the Libyan air force, of whom we have here some photographs and documents. I would ask the Secretariat to make
them available to the Council. Indeed, Libya cannot deny
its intervention in Chad. He is a Libyan; he is a colonel who
was trained in Libya, Egypt, Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia
and the Soviet Union. He has confessed everything. He
speaks those languages perfectly well. He is now in N’Djamena. There are photographs of him and of some other
Libyan soldiers who have nothing whatsoever to do with
Chad. There are no white Chadians. These were the Libyan
soldiers captured at Faya-Largeau.

31. The nation of Chad is, then, facing in the field a
Libyan army of aggression that is over-equipped, well
trained, wholly motorized and tremendously mobile.
32. There is no need to go back over the Libyan motives
for this aggression. No one could possibly be fooled by
that, so frequent are Libya’s acts of interference in the
internal affairs of other States and so frequent also are its
subversive and destabilizing
actions against other
countries.
33. Chad ‘has an absolute right to peace and security;
Since 7 June 1982, the date on which the patriotic forces
threw off the shackles of slavery imposed by settlers and
mercenaries of all kinds recruited by Qaddafi and made
available to puppets, agents in the pay of the new Libyan
imperialism-ever
since those forces were catapulted out
of Chad, the President of the Republic, Mr. Hissein
Habre, has spared no effort to bring about national renewal. But against this fundamental will, Libya believes
that Chad has’ no’right to independence. Its aggression is
too grave for those States to which peace is dear, and in
particular the members of the Security Council, who bear
primary responsibility for the maintenance of peace and
security, to assume an attitude of indifference.

27. Commander Abdel Salam Mohamed Sharfadine is
the direct subordinate of Colonel Massoud Abdelaziz,
commander of operations in northern Chad-southern
Libya, as the Libyans so often tend to say. Colonel Massoud, who is conducting the Faya-Largeau operations
right now, has as his deputy this Commander Sharfadine?
who on 8 August was presented to the public and the
press. I think it is appropriate now to inform the members
of the Council that the Chad delegation has in its possession all necessary proof of the Libyan presence in the
national territory of Chad and -the participation of the
Libyan army in the in-depth operations inside Chad tenitory. This is material evidence, and we can make it available to the members.

34. .As everybody knows, Libya excels in the art of falsehood and diversionary tactics. Proof of that has just been
supplied by the complaint it has made in connection with
various events occurring between sovereign States, in
whose name Qaddati himself has acknowledged he has no
right to speak.

28. This is the war that has been inflicted upon us by
Libya. It is total war. It shrinks from no means and makes
no differentiation between victims. It is no longer a war
3

35. The fact is that that complaint, contained in document
S/15912 of 6 August 1983, is nothing but a fraud pieced
together by the Libyans to divert the attention of members
of the Council from the real debate on the question of
Libyan aggression against Chad.

guided the Council’s work in July with the proverbial
skill, competence, finesse and effectiveness which are the
heritage of his country’s diplomats. Furthermore, Zaire
and China have come to enjoy a co-operation and friendship which can be an example to the entire world.

36. The war of aggression now being waged by Libya
against Chad is without justification. It has been inflicted
in contravention of the norms of international law. It was
launched in flagrant violation of the provisions of Article
2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of the United Nations,
which states that “All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force”.

43. TO return to the question before the Council, it is
significant that certain speakers-and not the least important of them-felt
obliged to state that the question of
Chad had been discussed last April [2419th, 2429th and
2430th meetings] and that, since the Council deferred that
question to the OAU, it is for that latter organization to
debate it tirst.

37. That is why the Government and people of Chad
reiterate their request that the Council fully shoulder its
responsibilities and strongly condemn Libya for its armed
aggression against Chad, ordering it immediately to cease
its bombing and pounding, requiring it immediately to
withdraw all its troops from the territory of Chad, and
calling upon it to cease its interference in the internal and
external affairs of Chad so that the martyred people of
Chad can recover its dignity and independence and can
live in understanding with all its neighbours.

44. That position is clearly mistaken, for the question
before the Council last April concerned a border dispute
between Chad and Libya. The disputed area is known as
the “AOUZOU Strip”. The question now before the Council
is quite different and concerns armed attacks by the aforementioned country against Chad.
‘45. First of all, have there been acts of aggression or
armed attacks against Chad? In his statement of 3 August
[2462nd meeting], the Libyan representative told us that
this was actually a civil war in which Libya was not
involved and in connection with which it had maintained
strict neutrality.

38. Mr. NGUAYILA
MBELA
KALANDA
(Zaire)
(interpretation from French): The Permanent Representative would have liked to participate in this meeting himself, but unfortunately he is away from New York and has
asked me to make this statement.

46. Either the Libyan representative is not at all aware
of what is going on in his country, in which case he should
be better informed by his Government, or perhaps, on the
contrary, he is perfectly well aware of the actions of his
Government in Chad; in that case, he was taunting the
members of the Council, on whom he wished to foist his
lies.

39. I should like first of all to welcome the Secretary of
State for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation of the sister
Republic of Chad.
40. In our reply of 3 August to the allegations of the
representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya [2&2&
meeting], we outlined the basic position of Zaire on the
question of Chad at present before the Council. We
should like now, in this Substantive statement, to state
that position in greater detail.

47. In either case, this is a very serious matter. For who
on the Council does not know that Goukouni Weddey’s
troops were trained in Libya and that at this very moment
others are being recruited for training in Libya? Who does
not know that it is Libya which is arming Goukouni’s
troops and seeing to their logistic needs? Who does not
know that Libya has hired and trained a so-called Islamic
Legion, made up of mercenaries and fighting along with
Goukouni’s troops? Who does not know that military
advisers provided by certain countries whose names I
shall not mention are guiding that Islamic Legion and
Goukouni’s troops?

41. But fust, Sir, we should like to return to our congratulations, on which we barely touched last Wednesday, on
your assumption of the presidency of this important
United Nations body. You have, long diplomatic experience. You have already acted as President of the Council. You have great talent, and in the course of these few
days we have had the opportunity to admire your skill
and wisdom, as well as your firmness. In addition, you
represent a country which has sealed its friendship with
Zaire in a blood-alliance. As the country of freedom,
France has sometimes seemed to be, as Jean Giraudoux
puts it in PImpromptu de Park, the “world’s spoilsport”,
for “It was created-and created itself-to undo plots,
established roles and long-standing systems in the world.”
Thus, it is fortunate, Sir, that it is you who are presiding
over our work in the present circumstances, and we have
no doubt that, thanks to all these things, the Council is in
good hands.

48. We are fully aware that in these conditions the countries which provide those advisers and those weapons are
resorting to manoeuvres in order not to be denounced to
the Council, but it is foolish to think that these facts are
not known to the public at large and, even more so, to the
members of the Council.
49. However, if it were only a question of the provision
of weapons to Goukouni’s troops we would be dealing
with a sort of indirect aggression which, moreover, would
have been repulsed by the troops of the legitimate
Government
despite the presence of the celebrated
Islamic Legion.

42. For reasons beyond our control, we were unable personally to congratulate the representative of China, who
4

although not by all, of the representatives at the Assembly. Only the head of the Libyan Revolution supported
the Government of Goukouni and because of the insult
inflicted by his colleagues who were heads of State he had
to leave the conference hall and the Ethiopian capital.
Furthermore, Mr. Goukouni’s
Government was also
expelled at Managua and New Delhi, as far as we know.

50. The only problem was that, having failed, Libya
decided to commit direct aggression. It brought into play
on a massive scale its air force. Indiscriminately
and in
disregard of all international conventions on the subject;
it systematically bombed both military and civilian objectives, killing defenceless civilian populations.
51. Since the time of nazism, this is one of the darkest
pages ever written and one of the most barbarous acts
ever known to history. Other countries may have committed such acts or may still be doing so elsewhere, but it
seems to us that this is an excellent opportunity for the
Council vigorously to condemn once more such acts and
such practices.

58. We do not think it would be helpful to return to the
fact that the N’Djamena Government is illegitimate. We
might just recall, as we did on 3 August, that no matter
how just his cause, the fact remains that the Libyan Revolution’s head is himself an insurgent. Should we therefore
conclude that Colonel Qaddafi does not represent Libya?
It would, of course, be insane to assert such a thing.
Therefore, why would what is true of the Libyan head of
State not be true of the N’Djamena Government?

52. Too much suffering has been inflicted on the populations of Chad and it is high time that they be allowed to
live in peace so that they can tackle the task of rebuilding
their country.

59. Similarly, it seems to us childish to mention to us the
Lagos Accord [S/14378, annex r] and the declarations of
the eighteenth sessi,on of the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the OAU, held at Nairobi in June
1981. They were at the time all valid, but one must be
honest-we will not say intelligent-one
must be honest
enough to recognize that the Lagos Accord and the Nairobi declarations, to which the Libyan representative
referred, are today no longer applicable.

53. Libyan bombings in Chad are a perfectly obvious
fact that cannot be denied. There has, indeed, been an act
of aggression committed against Chad, notwithstanding
the Libyan representative’s feeble denials.
54. It will be recalled that on 1 August, the Libyan
media announced that N’Djamena’s
forces were completely encircled in the city of Faya-Largeau. Immediately
there began the pounding of the city and on 2 August the
Libyan agency JANA triumphantly announced the death
of President Hissein HabrC. That death was not, however,
borne out by facts. Will we continue to be told that Libya
has had nothing to do with what is happening in Chad? I
hope not.

60. It is as if we were told that the decrees and laws of
the ex-King Idris which were abolished by the new order
continued to be valid in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
61. The position that the N’Djamena Government is
illegitimate does not stand up to analysis. Principles and
facts establish this quite clearly. It is not for Libya or for
any country to say which governments in the world are
legitimate. The time of the Crusades belongs to the past.

55. Is Hissein Habre’s Government illegitimate? Similarly, the Libyan representative stated in the Council that
the Government of N’Djamena presided over by Hissein
HabrC was illegitimate. That represents the speaker’s
point of view only. But such statements and condemnations are in and of themselves a kind of interference in the
internal affairs of Chad. Indeed, in public international
law there exists what is known as the theory of effectiveness. We are speaking of effectiveness and not about a fait
accompli. According to that theory the effective Government of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is the one which
rules in effect in Tripoli and governs Libya. The same
applies to other countries.

62. Regarding the presence in Chad of Zairian troops
and advisers from friendly countries, everyone in this
room was surprised to hear the Libyan representative
speaking about the withdrawal from Chad of Zairian
troops or other advisers from friendly countries. This is a
little like the thief who cries “Thief? in order to sow
confusion, divert attention and make his getaway after
having committed his crime. But our brothers from the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
should realize that these
manoeuvres are not always successful, especially when the
thief is not committing his first misdeed and has been
operating in the same neighbourhood for some time. The
same is true of Libya: its interventionists seem to be
everywhere.

56. One must not confuse legality with legitimacy. Legitimacy is a sociological concept whereas legality has more
to do with legal forms. Thus, a Government can be legal
without necessarily being legitimate, and vice versa. Naturally it would be ideal for a Government to be both legitimate and legal. After all, it is not because one country
denies the legitimacy of another Government that it loses
its status. Recognition does not confer legitimacy, on the
other hand. It is only the statement of a point of view.

63. Returning to the presence in Chad of Zairian troops,
I should like to recall that if they are there it is at the
urgent request of the legitimate Government of that country and that Zaire has acted in complete independence
and sovereignty.

57. At the nineteenth session of the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of the OAU, held at Addis
Ababa, the legitimacy of the N’Djamena Government
was confirmed since it was accepted by the majority,

64. Our country, which has experienced many tragedies
of the same kind and been the victim of many acts of
aggression, has always been able to count on assistance
from friendly countries in difficult times. In spite of our
5

E

own difficulties, we cannot, therefore, fail to heed an’
revolution; and, on the other, they are poor people-but
appeal from a fraternal country faced with an. act of ’ poor people who are sitting on a golden strip which the
aggression orchestrated on a broad scale.
aggressors covet.
65. The troops of Zaire are in Chad. They certainly do
not intend to stay there for ever. Unlike other countries,
Zaire has no special interest there except to help its martyred brother, but its .troops will remain there as long’as
aggression continues and as. long as .the N’Djamena
Government wishes it to.

72. Chad has the right to live in peace, to choose its
leaders and to conduct its life in keeping with its culture
and its ‘own identity-sheltered
from treacherous sirens
and any aggressors. It is immoral-and criminal that some
States, because they are oil producers or wealthy, have
chosen to destabilize or commit acts of aggression against
poor countries. Where will all this end7 If this, is allowed
to continue, will not insecurity and the law of the jungle
become legitimate and legal?

66. Whether it is a question of the Zairian troops or
those of other friends which sent the N’Djamena Govern:
ment equipment or other assistance, we have all come to
the assistance of a country that is acting in self-defence.
One cannot reasonably.place both the aggressor and the
victim on an equal footing.

73. It is symptomatic that the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
has had and continues constantly to have unpleasant dealings with most of its neighbours, not to mention nations
thousands of miles .from its territory. If it is not Egypt, it
is the Sudan; if it is not Brazil, it is Chad; if it is not
Morocco, it is Tunisia-even
if matters seem to have been
settled there; and, if it is not the Palestine Liberation
Organization, who will be the next victim?

67.. We want it to be quite clear. For Zaire,. men come
and go but States remain. We have nothing against Mr.
s Goukouni, and if he had been in Mr. Habrt’s place, as a
nationalist and the head of a legitimate government he
could have called on Zaire to repulse alien aggression,
and Zaire, if the situation so allowed, would have acted
in the same way.

74. In conclusion, we should like to express again our
earnest hope that the Council will condemn such acts of
aggression and see to it that they cease.

68.. Moreover, as the representative of .Libya so aptly
recalled, Zairian troops had already been in Chad under the
aegis of the OAU. As such, they abided strictly by the orders
received from the command of the OAU, namely, not to
intervene in the civil war and to create conditions to restore
peace and reconciliation. Now that they are in Chad under
the orders of the legitimate Government of Chad, they will
abide by the orders of that Government to protect the
civilian populations against the fury of the aggressors.

75. The PRESIDENT. (interpretution’from French): The
next speaker is the representative of the Ivory Coast. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
76. Mr. ESSY (Ivory Coast) .(interpretation from
French): Sir, the delegation of the Ivory Coast is happy,
for two reasons, to see.you occupying the presidency of
the Council, which is debating for the third time in six
months this vital problem of Chad, which may determine
the very future of the whole of our continent. Your personal qualities and your long experience in diplomacy,
which, have in .recent years been applied to finding concrete solutions in the face of divergent interests within the
international community, will be very useful to us in this
particular matter of which the Council is seized today.
You also .represent France, a country with which my own
country is honoured to be able to maintain special relations, and one which was very quick to learn the lessons
of history and produce,. with the active assistance of our
leaders, a policy of decolonization which made it possible
for the vast majority of States concerned to achieve political independence without bloodshed. No country is in a
better position’than France to understand the tragedy of
Chad in all its dimensions-political,
economic, social
and, in particular, human-in
the face of the misfortunes
which have afflicted its people, a people aspiring only to
peace so that it can devote itself to the difficult task of
development, which is quite rightly of utmost concern to
that country’s legitimate authorities.

69. The Libyan representative spoke of the communique from the OAU Bureau calling on all States not to
interfere in the crisis in Chad and appealing to the Chadiarts to bring about national reconciliation. The Libyan
representative seems to have forgotten that, in reality, this
appeal was addressed first and foremost precisely -to his
Government, which bears primary responsibility for current events in Chad and .that, if. Tripoli had not inspired
and encouraged this killing, and ,if it had not committed
aggression against Chad, the situation we are deploring
today would. not have occurred.
70. In the final analysis, Zairian forces and friends of
Chad have intervened only because the forces of disorder
and the forces of. destabilization
had already entered,
Chad. Once these forces of aggression and genocide are
withdrawn, the other forces will .no longer have any rea-,
son to remain in Chad.
71. That said, ‘the statements of the Libyan represen:
tative-in which he clearly did not believe himself-must
not conceal the gravity of the situation in Chad. Libyan
bombing continues to kill innocent people in Chad,.
people who have done no-harm to the .Libyan people.
These innocent people have made but two mistakes:.on
the one hand, they have President Hissein Habre as
leader, who is not to the liking of the leader of the Libyan

77. My delegation takes this opportunity also to convey
its warm congratulations to your predecessor, Mr. Ling
Qing, representative of China, for the outstanding way in
which he conducted the ,proceedings of the Council last
month.
6

It will be recalled&t
at the end of our deliberations
last April [2419th and 2428th to 2430th meetings], following Chad’s complaint against Libya on account of military occupation by Libyan troops of part of Chad
territory-the
Aouzou Strip-the Council urged the two
parties to abstain from any action likely to aggravate the
situation and to settle their disputes by peaceful means, in
keeping with.the relevant principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the Charter of the Organization of
African Unity, which demand respect for the territorial
integrity and political independence of States.
78.

ments of military co-operation between it and Chad to
come to the assistance of the legitimate Government of
that country, the Government recognized by the United
Nations, the OAU and the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, and appeals to the true friends of Africa who
are anxious to see its harmonious development in peace,
freedom and independence to come to the assistance of
the legitimate Government of Chad lighting for respect,
the territorial integrity of its country, restoration of peace
and national reconstruction.
86. The statements of the N’Djamena Government and
the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and Co-opera-’
tion of Chad-confirmed
from many different sources,
and all .of which agree-demonstrate
undeniably, in spite
of Tripoli’s denials, the direct participation of the Libyan
air force in the Chad conflict, thus,fully justifying the presence at the side of the Chad Government of friendly States
which come to its aid at its request to provide military
assistance as called for by ‘the situation.

79. Statements in the debate and the difficult negotiations that made possible the drafting of a declaration read
out by the President of the Council [S/15688] showed in
particular the desire of States to see the two parties settle
their differences ,by peaceful means.
80. The nineteenth session of the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the OAU, held in June at Addis
Ababa, only acknowledged once again that which was
obvious in any case, that is, the authority of the leaders in
N’Djamena, who alone are authorized to speak on behalf
of Chad and to enter into commitments internationally.

87. Apart from Libya, none of Chad’s neighbours has
any territorial ambitions or hidden economic designs on
Chad.

81. The events that have occurred since then in Chad
have made it clear that one of the two parties-in this
case, Libya-did
not see tit to comply with the recommendations of the Security Council and the decisions of the
OAU.

88. The occupation of the Aouzou Strip draws attention to and highlights Libya’s true interests and ambitions in Chad. By dismissing at its will certain leaders of
FROLINAT
to arm others who are more subservient to its
policy and by imposing itself as judge and as party to the
Sebha agreements, it was no longer able to dissemble its
wish to bring Chad within its sphere of influence.

82. Indeed, not content with having obstinately refused
to associate itself with the efforts of the international community and, above all, those of the OAU to establish
peace in Chad and promote the restoration of the unity of
the country, undermined as it was by years of fratricidal
struggle, the Libyan Government actually strove to destroy that State by supplying its henchmen with a vast
quantity of sophisticated weapons, the annual cost of
which far exceeds the operating budget of the overwhelming majority of African States that have known only
peace hitherto.

89. Of course, internal causes can explain in part the
Chad problem-and,
indeed, this is the case in many
States-but it is, above all, external factors which go well
beyond the confines of that country, the many cases of
interference which this State in its death throes cannot
resist, which explain the present situation.
90. The concern to make Chad a united nation has been
a constant of the policy of that country ever since its independence. One factor could have played an essential role in
the emergence of national unity: the level of economic
development for which peace is indispensable. After more
than 20 years of fratricidal warfare, the only growth one is
able to observe today in Chad is that of its
underdevelopment.

83. One may well wonder what financial resources coming from what territory can permit Goukouni to justify
the exorbitant means at his disposal to destroy his country
to pursue a scorched-earth policy by providing an opportunity to the Libyan air force to rain fragmentation and
phosphorus bombs on his own brothers.

91. Condemned to live together within frontiers which it
did not choose, the different elements of the Chad population must find solutions in terms of possible coexistence
which will promote contacts, exchanges and mutual
esteem-any solution which excludes the idea of oppression
of one party by another. The Sudan, Chad’s immediate
neighbour, has been able to come up with a form of organization adopted to its country.
_’

84. In the face of such a situation, in the face of the
disproportion between the forces concerned, how can one
imagine that the legitimate Government of N’Djamena
should not have appealed to friendly countries which
might provide it with necessary aid for its own survival?
85. It is in the face of this new evolution in the fratticidal
war fomented and maintained from outside by destabilizing elements, enemies of freedom, that the Political
Bureau of the Democratic Party of the Ivory CoastAfrican Democratic Rally, meeting on 1 July 1983, published a communique in which it approved the energetic
measures taken by France within the framework of agree-

92. Chad, left to itself and free of external interference,
can overcome its internal problems by dialogue to restore
peace and stability, which will in turn permit it to devote
itself to its development in the higher interest of the people
of Chad.
7

l

93. The Council should not allow itself to be taken in
by the cry of “Thief’ uttered by the fugitive thief himself
to mask his own crime and divert attention from himself.

respected and upheld. Foremost among those principles
are those that apply to the sovereignty and independence
of States and to their territorial integrity, as well as to
non-interference in their internal affairs and non-use or
threat of force, and the settling of all conflicts and differences by peaceful means.

94. My delegation expects of the Council not only that
it recall the cardinal principles of the United Nations and
of the OAU but that it take all necessary steps to ensure
that no Member contravenes international rules without
which no State can feel safe.

101. Paragraphs 3 and 4 of Article 2 of the Charter of
the United Nations set forth quite clearly the principles I
have just enunciated, and need no further explication.
Article III of the Charter of the Organization of African
Unity’ sets forth the principles that underlie that important regional organization. It sets forth the need to
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of each
African State and its inalienable right to independent
existence, as well as affirming the principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes by negotiation, mediation, conciliation or arbitration. It prohibits subversive activities on
the part of neighbouring States or any other State. Article
VI, which concerns the obligations of members of the
OAU, requests every member to observe scrupulously the
principles enumerated in Article III of the Charter. Every
member has an absolute duty to do this, and no member
that fails to respect those articles in its relations with
other countries can remain a member of the OAU, an
organization whose survival and development we must
preserve if we want to see the hopes placed in it realized.

95. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of the Sudan. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
96. Mr. ELFAKI (Sudan) (interpretation jkom Arabic):
My delegation would like to express its gratitude and
appreciation to the President and members of the Council
at a time when it is examining an important question
closely connected with peace and security in our region
and, indeed, in the whole world.
97. We have studied with great interest the many messages which have been sent to us by the Government of
the fraternal country of Chad and listened with interest to
the important
statement by our brother Ramadane
Barma, the representative of Chad [2362nd meeting). He
reviewed the serious events which have occurred and continue to occur in his country as a result of the flagrant
aggression and interference by Libya in Chad’s internal
affairs and of the repeated bombing and bombarding of
Faya-Largeau and other villages and towns in Chad,
along with Libyan material and logistic support to the
insurgents and outlaws who have turned against the legitimate Government of Chad.

102. The delegation of the Sudan was not surprised to
read the many letters addressed to the President of the
Council by the Libyan authorities over the past few days.
We were not surprised to hear the representative of Libya
speaking in the Council on 3 August [ibid], because experience has made us familiar with the practices and habits
of the Libyan leaders. We know what they are capable of
and we know what they seek. The letters and the statement were a desperate attempt to deny Libya’s intervention in Chad. Those letters and the statement made in the
Council have mentioned that the Government of Chad, a
country that is a full-fledged member of the United
Nations and of the OAU, as well as of the Movement of
Non-Aligned
Countries and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, is illegal and does not represent the
people of Chad. Can there be any greater form of aggression and interference? The Libyan Government wishes to
impose its authority on Chad and to interfere in that
country’s internal affairs, acting against those who are
governing the country. What right or instrument do the
Libyan authorities have to legalize Governments of other
countries? Do those authorities not know that the legitimacy of Governments is an internal affair of concern
only to the people of the country involved? Such senseless
allegations cannot justify subversion or support for rebellion. Neither can they be invoked as a justification for
aggression and interference in the internal affairs of
another country or for threats against the sovereignty and
independence of another country, or occupying its territories by force. Is it not time that Libya realized that no
dispute over the legitimacy of Governments, should such
dispute arise, can serve as a pretext for occupation,
aggression or expansion, or for the appropriation of the
territory of others by force? Has Libya not learned its
lesson?

98. Today we have listened with great interest and concern to the important statement by Mr. Ahmed, Secretary
of State for Foreign Affairs and C&operation of the fraternal country of Chad, who has given us valuable additional information regarding Libyan intervention and the
bombing and bombarding of some cities in the north of
Chad. I should like to take this opportunity to welcome
him to the work of the Council.
99. The persistent and intensive acts of aggression, past
and present, of the Libyan authorities against the territory, towns and villages of Chad were described today by
the Secretary of State and yesterday by Chad’s representative as an attempt to commit an act of genocide against
the people of Chad, and as another attempt by Libya to
destabilize the Government of Chad. This is a brazen violation of the principles that we have always defendedprinciples in the Charter of the Organization of African
Unity and the Charter of the United Nations, as well as
principles of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
100. The Sudan, like all the countries neighbours of
Chad and Libya, .has a great interest in these grave developments, because they constitute an actual and direct
threat to its security, integrity and stability. They also
constitute a violation and breach of the basic principles of
relations among neighbouring countries that must be
8

c

.:

103. All attempts to prevent the legitimate Government of
Chad from participating in the extraordinary Ministerial
Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Managua last January, and the Seventh
Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries, held at New Delhi in March of this year,
have failed. Has Libya not understood that the OAU, at the
nineteenth session of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government held at Addis Ababa last June, said its final
word on the subject and that it will not countenance Libya’s
desperate attempts to challenge the legitimacy of the
Government of Chad? Does Libya want, by such peculiar
behaviour, to disassociate itself from the decisions of the
nineteenth session of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the OAU with regard to Chad?

107. With the support of sincere, fraternal African countries, the Government and people of Chad can once again
regain national unity and stability, which are necessary to
get rid of the aftermath of the periods of aggression and
insurrection and to embark on the long-awaited projects of
economic and social development.
108. In March and April last [2419th and 2428th to
2430th meetings], the Council considered Chad’s complaint against Libya, which had occupied the Aouzou
region, and the Council issued a statement on 6 April
[S/15688], noting the desire of various countries to enter
into negotiations to put an end, by peaceful means, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and the
Charter of the Organization of African Unity, to the dispute and to the escalation of the situation. The situation
that prompted the Council to issue that statement has deteriorated and become more acute. Now the two countries
must enter into negotiations, into a dialogue, to end the
dispute, which has lasted too long. A final solution must
be found. We must put an end to one of the causes of the
crises and instability that our region has experienced from
time to time.

104. There is no need to state the need for respect for
principles, covenants, agreements, resolutions and conventions and that such respect must be reflected in practice. Slogans and tine words are not enough; all countries
have eyes and ears. They can see, hear, and watch the
practices and behaviour of each other.
105. Libya’s aggression against Chad and its interference in that country’s internal affairs, as well as Libyan
occupation of part of the territory of Chad and its
renewed attempts to impose its authority and hegemony
through the use of agents, insurgents and mercenaries to
destabilize it, are obvious to all and cannot be denied.
Libya wants a regime subject to its influence in Chad and
in collaborating or even merging with such a regime,
Libya could appropriate the entire Aouzou Strip. Libya
wants a regime it can use to satisfy its greed and carry out
its conspiracies against neighbouring countries, including
the Sudan, which has been, and continues to be, the victim of countless aggressive schemes and plots on the part
of Libya.

109. It must be remembered that at its fourteenth session, held at Libreville in 1977, the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the OAU created an ad hoc
Committee2 to study the border dispute between Libya
and Chad. We hope that the two countries will co-operate
with the Committee and put a peaceful end to their dispute, by means of a dialogue, an understanding, or arbitration. Alternatively, the matter could be taken up by the
International Court of Justice, which could hand down a
just and final judgement.
110. Chad has come before the Council, which is the
international body primarily responsible for international
peace and security. That action also demonstrates the
gravity of the present situation. It is serious not only for
Chad but for the integrity and sovereignty of the countries
of the region. All necessary steps and measures must be
taken to protect the sovereignty and independence of
Chad and the security and integrity of neighbouring countries, along with the security of the world. We support
Chad’s request that Libya’s aggression against it be condemned and denounced, and that Libya end its armed
aggression and its bombing, that it withdraw its troops
from all Chad territory and that it cease giving assistance
to the insurgents and the mercenaries.

106. The Democratic
Republic of the Sudan has
expressed, here and in other international and regional
bodies, its condemnation and denunciation of all foreign
intervention in the internal affairs of any other State,
regardless of the reasons invoked or the pretexts used.
Such intervention is contrary to customs, laws and intemational agreements accepted by the whole international
community as a basis for relations between States, nations
and peoples. It is on that basis that the delegation of the
Sudan strongly condemns Libyan aggression against the
fraternal people of Chad and interference in its affairs. It
requests that this aggression and interference be ended
immediately and that Libya withdraw its troops from
Chad territory unconditionally,
so that the people of
Chad, who have long suffered, may win back their security, integrity, independence and sovereignty and the unity
of its territory. We call on Libya to put an immediate end
to material and logistical assistance that can help the insurgence against the Government of Chad. We call on it to
put an end immediately to its air and land attacks on the
towns, villages and people of Chad, and to put an end to
the use of mercenaries of all nationalities in order to sow
death and destruction in Chad territory.

111. My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
appeal to the international community as a whole, and to
African countries in particular, to support the efforts of
the Government of Chad to safeguard the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Chad, as well as
to rebuild what has been destroyed as a result of aggression, civil war and foreign intervention, in order to bring
about the economic and social development necessary for
people who have suffered so much and sacrificed so
much. We ask all those countries to give whatever assistance they can to the Government and people of Chad. We
are very grateful to those countries that have already
9

offered such assistance in an effort to help Chad to protect its independence and sovereignty and to prevent
attempts of displacement and genocide against it.

116. The situation has worsened over the ‘past five
months. One of the sides, flouting on the one hand the
statement engaging the responsibility of the Council and
on the other the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the Charter of the Organization of African
Unity, has by widespread military actions questioned
the-legitimacy of the existence of the other side-Chad’s
legitimate Government that was indeed recognized by
the Assembly of Heads of State and Governmerit at its
nineteenth session, held at Addis Ababa last June.

112. We have good-neighbourly relations with the fraternal people of Chad and Libya. We are anxious to see.
that these two fraternal peoples, as well ‘as others in the
region, will make full use of their sovereignty and independence, their bonds of fraternity and good-neighbourliness,
and will promote co-operation to bring about prosperity
and peace, which we all ardently desire.

117. The facts as reported by that other side are very
troubling.
Innocent civilian populations
have ,been
bombed for no reason-or, rather, for the sole reason of
enjoying the protection of the competent authorities of
their country.

113. The people and Government of the Sudan will continue to do their utmost to realize the hopes of all of us to
enjoy peace, stability and progress in fraternity and fruitful
co-operation.

118. How can the bombing of.Faya-Largeau be justified
except by saying that it is the result of a savage desire to
create chaos in Chad with a view to pursuing certain
unavowed goals? An end must be put to these bombings at
once, and foreign occupying troops must be withdrawn to
allow the people of Chad to ,tackle the great task of
national reconstruction it has already begun. The demand
for an end to the bombing and the withdrawal of the
occupying troops is part and parcel ‘of the refusal of the
international community to see violence set up as a political system governing relations among nations. There is no
need to recall that the occupation of a country through the
use of force is a violation of the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.

114. Mr. ADJOYI (Togo) (interpretation from French):
My delegation would like to take this opportunity to welcome Mr. Korom Ahmed, the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation of Chad. We thank him for
the important statement that he has just made. His participation in the Council’s work is an expression of his
Government’s concern about the situation in his country.
“The people of Togo earnestly hope that they and all
nations will enjoy peace and progress, but peace must
be real and contribute to the effective emancipation of
all countries. That is why Togo, given the general state
of disarray of world affairs today, threatening international equilibrium, has always advocated a fraternal
dialogue and a general meeting of minds in an effort to
bring about just solutions, in peace, to the painful conflicts which exist in our world and which take such a
heavy toll of human life.”
Those words of the President and founder of the Rassemblement du peuple togolais and President of the Republic,
General Gnassingbe EyadCma, assume great significance
given the present tragedy in Chad, where military operations suggest that tomorrow the picture will be even more
sombre.

119. Togo is a country that cherishes peace and free-.
dom, and we believe that relations among States must be
based on respect for the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of each State and on the principles of
non-interference, good-neighbourliness, non-use of force
and the settlement of disputes through negotiation.
120. In signing or acceding to the Charter of the United
Nations, all States have pledged to respect and defend
those principles. My country will always feel concern
when those principles are flouted, no matter what country
is responsible, particularly when African countries are
involved. That is why my country has deplored and continues to deplore the occupation of Chad and the bombing of civilian populations. That is why Togo joins all
other peace-loving nations that cherish the principles of
the Charter in calling for the withdrawal of the occupying
forces from Chad so that the Chadian people, which has
suffered such hardship during these long years of war,
may finally enjoy all their rights in freedom and peace.

115. It is not surprising that my country, which shares
with other members of the Council primary responsibility
for peace in’ the world, is once again trying with others to
agree on a negotiated solution to the tragedy in Chad. It
was in that spirit that we joined in the consensus that
emerged last April in the Council, which adopted a statement calling on both parties
“to settle the dispute without undue delay and by
peaceful means, on the basis of the relevant principles
.of the Charter of the United Nations and the Charter
of the Organization of African Unity, which demand
respect for political independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity**

121. My delegation appeals to both countries concerned
without delay to apply the statement of the Security
Council of 6 April [ibid.]. The international community
cannot accept the occupation and bombardment of Chad
as a fait accompli. If it did, that would establish a precedent that would jeopardize the confidence that militarily
weak, small countries have placed in the United Nations
to ensure their right to existence and independence and
respect for the integrity of their territory.

and urged
“both sides to ‘refrain from any actions which could
aggravate the current situation” [ibid.].
10

122. The people of Chad have claimed that right to existence and is prepared to go to the negotiating table in
order to exercise it. Since Libya has also declared here its
deep desire to settle the problem of Chad by means of
dialogue, my delegation has reason to hope that the guns
will soon fall silent and that there will commence negotiations to bring about an independent and free Chad in
which peace will have full significance.

gress of our peoples. Accordingly, Egypt and other fraternal African countries cannot remain silent in the face of
designs and actions which have led to instability as they
have now done in Chad. Egypt condemns Libyan aggression against Chad and supports legitimacy in Chad. We
therefore support the legitimate Government under the
presidency of Hissein HabrC.
128. At a time when we all desire stability, this is a very
serious situation posing the threat of instability. The Charter of the Organization of African Unity has forbidden the
use of force, and this makes the matter even more serious
because of the intervention of a neighbouring country,
Libya, in an internal conflict between a legitimate Government and other parties not enjoying the same legitimacy.
Libya has committed armed aggression with armoured
and airborne units; the statement by the Secretary of State
for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation of Chad before the
Council today provided considerable details of this aggression, which leaves no room for doubt about the role being
played by Libya in this aggression.

123. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfromFrench):
The
next speaker is the representative of Egypt. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
124. Mr. KHALIL (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
Since this is the first time that we speak under your presidency, the Egyptian delegation wishes to express its satisfaction at seeing France occupying the presidency of the
Council, which bears a heavy responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. We are particularly happy, Sir, to see you personally in the Chair, for
your wisdom and judiciousness are well known to us all
and are a reflection of your vast experience and expertise.
Those qualities have been manifested in your conduct of
the proceedings in the Council’s consideration of this particularly delicate matter: the complaint by Chad against
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. The circumstances surrounding this complaint have rapidly worsened and have
reached the stage of aggression and invasion of the territory of an African country and a Member of the United
Nations by a fellow African State, also a Member of the
Organization. This poses a threat to security and stability
in a vast and vulnerable region.

129. On every possible occasion, the Government of the
Jamahiriya persists in denying that it is interfering in
Chad’s affairs, claiming that what is happening in Chad is
a spontaneous internal conflict between Chadian parties,
and that Libya is leaving it up to the inhabitants of Chad
to settle their differences and is taking up a neutral position. There is a blatant contradiction here between words
and deeds: Libya’s present deeds require no further proof.
We cannot conceal the fact that the problem of Chad,
with its two parties, Libya and Chad-that
is, the legitimate Governments of Libya and Chad-presents us with
great difficulties. The people of Libya is the people of a
fraternal Arab country, and that of Chad is the people of
a fraternal African country. We &do not like to see the
territory of Chad being occupied by Libya, which refuses
to recognize the legitimate Government of Chad. Libya
refuses to negotiate with the legitimate Government of
Chad concerning the occupied Aouzou Strip, and also
refuses to settie the dispute between the two countries by
peaceful means. We are worried at seeing Libya constitute
‘a source of instability and threaten the legitimate order in
.’
certain African countries.

125. Before I go into the item under consideration todav
in detail, I should like to convey the congratulations of the
Egyptian delegation to the representative of China, Mr.
Ling Qing, who did such a good job of conducting the
proceedings of the Council in July.
126. We asked to participate in this debate because of
the deterioration in the situation in that vital part of the
African continent, resulting from the ambitions of certain
leaders in the region, from regional expansionist designs,
from foreign intervention in the affairs of other States,
and from encroachment on the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of those States. Egypt
considers that the complaint before the Security Council
is founded in the fundamental principles by which we
abide always and in all circumstances. Libyan intervention in Chad is not in the interests of the African continent
or of the cause of liberation. It ‘is a matter of constant
concern to the OAU, whose Charter we respect. I should
like to mention in this connection the resolutions adopted
by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
OAU at its previous sessions, in particular that of the
nineteenth session held last June at Addis Ababa.’

130. That is why when, last year, Libya withdrew its
forces from Chad, saying that it would no longer interfere
in the internal affairs of that African country, we
glimpsed a ray of hope that a new era of Libya keeping its
promises might be ushered in, thus opening the way for the
people of Chad to achieve true national reconciliation
emanating from the people itself, to direct its efforts
towards the development of its resources, and to, live in
peace and co-operation with all countries. That would be
in the interest of everyone. Unfortunately, we see from the
facts that Libya is still bent on its old designs and ambitions: to interfere in the internal affairs of Chad, to
impede national reconciliation, to attempt to overthrow
the legitimate Government of the country, headed by
President Hissein Habre, and to assist those who have
turned against the legitimate Government and have
breached Chad’s sovereignty through acts of aggression
by land and air.

127. Chad is sorely in need of constructive assistance so
that it can stand up against internal dissension. This is of
great importance to the OAU, we all need stability, peace
and understanding so that we can be the masters of our
own development, and so that we can ensure the pro11

131. We think that in order to.put an end to the lighting
and bring about peace and stability, so ardently hoped for
by the people of Chad, we must create a propitious climate for that. There must no longer be any interference in
the internal affairs of Chad or any attempt to oppose its
legitimate Government. This is the only possible basis for
peace and stability for the people of Chad in that vulnerable part of the African continent.

and other help to the area and, as a matter of fact, add
fuel to the tire. I am sure that everybody has read today’s
paper and knows that some 180 soldiers from France
have already been deployed and that another 100 might be
deployed very soon. We have also heard of the assistance
that is given to the Chad regime by the United States. I do
not know why these two important pieces of information
were simply forgotten.

132. As for the attempts at destabilization and the origin
of the intensive air bombardments, everyone knows that
the rebel forces have never had any air capability. How
could those rebel forces overnight come into possession of
modem bombers, which are dropping bombs of great
destructive power on civilians?

140. My delegation believes that there is a far better
solution to the problem of Chad than coming to the
Council and magnifying the problem. Chad is a very
young country. I think it achieved its independence about
20 years ago, and has unfortunately had problems almost
ever since. It was after only live years, in 1965, I think,
that the French army returned to the country, presumably
because they thought it was necessary.

133. Suffice it to reiterate, at the conclusion of our delegation’s statement, what has already been stated by the
representative .of Chad and Secretary of State, Mr.
Korom Ahmed. The Egyptian delegation hails his appearance before the Council and echoes his appeal. We wholeheartedly support him in his request made on behalf of his
country. It is incumbent upon the Council to live up to its
responsibilities under the Charter and condemn the
bombings and acts of Libyan aggression against Chad.
Libya must be called upon to put an end to these acts and
to undertake no further intervention in the affairs of Chad
and to withdraw from all ,Chad territory.

141. However, in a young country like Chad, whose
independence is only 20 years old, one can objectiveIy
assume and conceive that there might be some border
differences with the neighbouring countries. These differences, my delegation believes, should be resolved in a very
peaceful manner. It is quite unfortunate that those who
are adding fuel and contributing to the conflict are probably preventing or delaying a peaceful solution to the conflict. It is very sad that some countries, which are now
adversaries and contributing to this conflict, have signed
so many peace treaties and agreements, one of them being
the Lagos Accord [S/14378, annex ZJ, which is very recent
and the signatures to it still fresh. We therefore think the
best way is for them to go back to those previous agreements and not be used by the imperialist Powers to aggravate the situation and create further animosity between
the countries of the region.

134. The PRESIDENT
(inrepretarion from French): The
next speaker is the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran, whom I invite to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
135. Mr. RAJAIE-KHORASSANI
(Islamic Republic of
Iran): I am happy to have heard almost all the statements
made to the Council regarding the sad conflict which
exists between Chad and Libya. I have learned a lot from
those statements.

142. One good and practical way of resolving these differences is probably direct negotiation. I believe the OAU
is a very relevant and appropriate referee for this problem, particularly since the Council has not been very successful in resolving such differences.

136. I real&d, as everyone in the audience did, that
some speakers attacked the Libyan leaders. Some of them
named President Qaddafi; some of them attacked just the
leaders in general. I learned also that there is a problem in
Chad. There is a sort of insurgent movement, and I
learned that the insurgents have been moving towards the
capital but have been stopped. This information has been
passed on to me and to the rest of the audience by the
speakers. I thank them all.

143. My delegation therefore believes taking sides in this
matter, trying to work out resolutions that might create
injury for one of the parties or making any attempt to
magnify and strengthen animosity should be avoided.
144. I hope some super-Powers that always find it in
their interests to create conflicts in the area will refrain
from contributing to this conflict; I also hope that some
puppet regimes-respectfully
speaking-in
the area will
refrain from further contributing to this sad conflict.

137. I learned also that military assistance has been
given, quite legitimately, to Chad upon the request of the
Chadian regime and I think I also heard that this military
assistance has been very necessary for the survival of the
Chad regime.

145. My delegation hopes the parties will soon achieve
peace and contribute to the stability and strengthening of
the area.

138. I learned something else that was not new to any of
us, that is, that the Chad regime is legitimate and that the
people of Chad support it very strongly. I do not know
why then so much military assistance has been necessary.

146. The PRESIDENT
(interprezarion from French): The
representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has asked
to speak in exercise of the right of reply, and I now call on
him.

139. However, I did not hear anything about some other
sources which very generously offer military assistance
;
12
:
,^ ‘,

.

147. Mr. BURWIN (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretatian from Arabic): I should like to make a brief statement and at the same time exercise the right of reply.
Permit me to make some comments on the question we
are now discussing.
148. We stated clearly at the previous meeting [2462nd
meeting] that the present situation in Chad concerned
solely the Chadians and that imperialist forces were trying
to international&
the conflict in Chad by supplying one
of the parties with weapons of all kinds and sending in
troops and aircraft to support that party-that
is, Hissein
HabrC, the Commander of the north&n army, one of the
11 parties to the Chad dispute-Mr.
Hissein HabrC, who
rebelled against the legitimate Government under the
1979 Lagos Accord counter-signed
by 11 parties
[S/14378, annex Ij.
149. The Government of Goukouni Weddey is the sole
legitimate Government; it came to power not by force but
under an agreement counter-signed by neighbouring
countries and accepted by the Chadian parties; the other
Governments came to power by military coups &&at or
by force of arms.
150. We have stated more than once that the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya is neutral and is not intervening on the
side of any party, because we recognize in Chad only the
legitimate Government of National Unity, headed by
Goukouni Weddey. We have stated in the Council that
the question of Chad is an African question which is
before the OAU, which has set up an ad hoc committee.2
We have also stated that, in order to find a solution to this
problem, we have to bring about national reconciliation
and that all parties should take part in the government of
the country. We have proposed a council for national
reconciliation, under the aegis of the OAU. We expressed
our willingness, along with our African brothers, to participate in the search for the solution of this problem.
151. We should like to see an end to the assistance and
massive supplies of weapons to the northern army; we
should like to call upon the parties to bring about
national reconciliation; we should like to ask the OAU to
work towards such national reconciliation, which would
put an end to civil war and foreign interventiori in Chad.

153.’ Those countries that defend Hissein HabrC are
defying the OAU and want to make it impossible for the
OAU to find a peaceful solutiop to the conflict. It is amusing that they are not talking about the people of Chad but
of supporting Hissein Habr&. Everyone knows that he is
an insurgent and rejected by the people of Chad, and that
those countries are acting against the will of the people of
Chad, which supports its legitimate Government of Goukouni Weddey. We wonder where those countries were in
the past, and why they did not help the legitimate Government against the rebellion of its Minister of Defence, Mr.
Hissein Habr& Why did those countries not think of providing food, medical and clothing aid to Chad before
these events? They have taken advantage of recent events
to provide the rebels with all kinds of weapons which are
used for genocide against the people of Chad.
154. Permit me to say here that Mr. Habre enjoys no
popular support. He left the capital so that French, American and Zairian troops could protect it and, with a group
of mercenaries, resist the forces of the Government of
National Unity headed by Goukouni Weddey. The proof
of that can be found in the rejection by Mr. Habti of the
proposal of sending a fact-finding commission by the
OAU. It is clear he does not want world public opinion to
know that he has very few troops: just a few mercenaries
of various nationalities. Many newspapers have reported
those facts, and I shall confine myself to what has been
published by The Washington Post in its issue of 4 August
1983:
“According to French news accounts, an unknown
number of foreign mercenaries have also been recruited to serve with Habr&‘s forces and could be called
upon to help install anti-aircraft defences in FayaLargeau.***
155. Some Japanese journalists
Ab&hC and Oum-Chalouba.

also saw mercenaries in

156. I shall quote some extracts from The Washington
Post of 24 June:
“A Chadian diplomat in Washington said yesterday
that the Embassy here had not received any precise
information,
but the Chadian Chargb d’maires
in
Paris was quoted by the Associated Press as saying that
Libyans, Libyan-recruited foreigners and rebels loyal
to ousted President Goukouni were involved in the
fighting.

152. But the imperialist forces are continuing to make
charges against my country, unfortunately with the sup
port of one of the African forces that receives orders from
Washington. These imperialist forces want to find a pretext for their intervention in the area to perpetuate the
state of war. They are sending tons of weapons and
ammunition to Mr. Habrk; they are supplying him with
thousands of soldiers and mercenaries of many nationalities; they have taken no initiative to put an end to the war
and bring about reconciliation.
We hear no one in
Washington or anywhere else calling for reconciliation
within the country among all Chadian parties; but we do
hear appeals to war and war cries addressed to Chad! The
objective of those forces sent to Chad is crystal clear: to
threaten the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

“A State Department official said yesterday that
there were ‘no reports’ on Libyan use of aircraft
against the government ‘defenders of Faya-Largeau.“*
157. The New York Times of 14 July published
following:

the

“He said that as many as 600 rebel soldiers had been
killed, wounded or captured since Friday. He said no
more than ‘3 or 4’ Government troops had been lost.
*Quoted

13

in English by the speaker.

Among those killed on the rebel side, he said, were 3
Libyans, but he offered no evidence that Libyans had
been there.%
158. ,The following
August:

is from The IV&&r&r

zation of African Unity. Indeed, it was given formal,
support by the Heads-of State -and Government of
Africa at their eighteenth Assembly, held at Nairobi in
June 1981.

Post of 1

“Ironically, it was also that Government that facilitated the OAU peace-keeping force in Chad in the
aftermath of Libya’s quick withdrawal of its forces
from Chad following the request to do so by the
Government of President Goukouni. Those Libyan
forces were there at the request of the legitimate
Government of Chad. That Chad’s legitimate Govemment was forced to abandon N’Djamena in the face of
heavy forces, despite the presence of the OAU peacekeeping forces outside the country does not really
answer the question of legitimacy.”

“Battlefield reports could not be confirmed independently because journalists were not permitted to
travel to the front.*‘*
159.

The New York Times of 3 August reported that:

“Mr. Soumalia also reported that Faya-Largeau, the
largest town in northern Chad, came under Libyan air
attack Tuesday for the fourth day. He said large parts
of the oasis had been destroyed, and casualties were
heavy among the 10,000 residents and the combatants.

“At any rate that is the view of one of the
countries.“*

“It was impossible to verify the reports because journalists are not permitted to travel to Faya-Largeau.“*

163. I should like to quote another statement issued in
Accra on 9 August:

160. There are many things that I could point out here
by way of example. One recent example is the following
from The Washington Post of 10 August which reads:

“The Ghana Government yesterday, 8 August 1983,
appealed to the Organization of African Unity to
redouble its efforts to find a peaceful solution to the
Chadian conflict and to save that country from further
suffering. The Government added that the internal
conflict had been turned into an explosive international
situation because of the massive military assistance to
Habrk by the United States and France. The Foreign
Minister’s statement said that the Government was
watching with concern the worsening situation in Chad
and added that Ghana deplores the intemationalization of the Chadian conflict and supports the call of the
OAU for all outside Powers to desist from further
interference, direct or indirect, in Chad.“*

“The sources, whose information could not be independently verified, said that Libya had dispatched
Soviet-made T-62 and T-72 tanks loaded on flatbed
trucks but that the trucks had become bogged down in
soft sand 50 miles north of Faya-Largeau.“*
161. Most of this comes from the sources of Mr., Habre
and from American ‘sources,,.even from the White House
OrtheStateDepartment..
.,.,’ -.’
.I
.
.._,.
,._
162. I should like to quote also .the following article
from the Daily News,, representing Tanzania’s stand on
the question of Chad:

164. I should also like to note what was said on CBS on
27 June. CBS reported that early in 1981 the United
States Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) had begun to
provide arms to Hissein HabrC and FAN, the Armed
Forces of the North. The original amount of the appropriation for assistance to Habre was $10 million.

‘This intervention has taken not only the form of
massive military and logistic support to one faction of
the Chadian conflict, namely the Hissein Habn5 forces,
but it has also taken the form of the introduction of
military personnel under the excuse of providing training for these forces.
“The factional fighting between the Habti forces
and those of former President Goukouni Weddey is
continuing the civil war. It is neither here nor there to
argue that the Habrk r&ime is the legitimate Govemment of Chad, for from where does that Government
draw its legitimacy7 Or, to put it differently, how more
legitimate is the HabrC regime compared to the legitimate Government of Goukouni? In an attempt to justify intervention, a number of factors of recent history
are conveniently forgotten. Goukouni was the President of Chad leading a Government of National Unity.
The Government in which Hissein Habre was Defence
Minister was recognized and supported by the Organi-

165. In his statement the representative of Zaire tried to
tell us something about morality. He gave us a whole
juridical lecture on that subject. My response, however,
will not be long. Briefly, I would say that I am aware that
the authorities -of his country are forced to send their
troops to Chad because those who sent troops to the
insurrection in Katanga and who protected the Mobutu
rtgime have imposed on it the duty of sending troops to
Chad. We might have hoped that Zaire would send its
troops to one of the front-line African States confronting
the racist rkgime of Pretoria, which is occupying part of
Angola. We know that that is not possible for that
rbgime, since Zaire has very close links with the racist
rkgime in Pretoria and imports many goods from that
country, even the carrot, in violation of the decisions of
the OAU.

*Quoted

166. I do not know what Zaire’s attitude is towards the
problems of Kampuchea, but, according to the represen-

in English by the speaker.

14

tative of Zaire, those who occupy that country’s capital.
are the country’s legitimate authorities. I hope that he
would advise his Government and Zaire’s ally, the United
States, to apply the same principle to Kampuchea.

are determined to protect Libyan territory and to help our
Arab and African brothers to defend their territories.
173. Egypt, the Egypt of Nasser, and its great people
played a great role in the liberation of the third world. It
faced up to imperialism and imperialist bases. Unfortunately, the situation today is different. Egypt is a base for
aggression against Arabs; it is allied with the United
States; it is the enemy of the Arabs, Muslims and Africans
and of the liberation movement of the third world.

167. As for the theft, c,orruption and exploitation of the
goods and property of the people, I need say nothing
about the corruption and plundering of the money of the
people of Zaire, nor of the money deposited in Belgian
banks and other banks. We are aware of the price of
sending troops to N’Djamena.

174. The United States claims to be interested in Egypt.
It destroyed the Egyptian army and Egyptian schools
with arms given to the racist regime in Palestine. It supports the regime in South Africa, which is committing
aggression against the front-line States; it is sustaining
and protecting South Africa in its attacks on Angola,
Mozambique and other States.

168. The OAU appeal was addressed to Libya; it was
directed at extra-African forces. Perhaps the representative of Zaire does not know that Libya is a part of Africa,
or perhaps he considers it non-African.
169, Libyan leaders have no private bank accounts.
They are not subject to the CIA. Libya’s oil income is
exploited solely in development projects with a view to
benefiting the people of Libya. Its distribution is equitable. At the time of the visit to Washington of the President
of Zaire, the papers stated that he had lunch with Messrs.
Bush, Shultz and Casey. Everyone knows Mr. Casey-he
is the head of the CIA. A deal was worked out and
Mobutu received the price of his intervention in N’Djamena in United States dollars, through the CIA, which
were deposited in private accounts’ln American and Belgian banks.

175. We know why Egypt, that is, the Egyptian
regime-because
Egypt is a great country that plays a
great role and has been in the lead of Arabs for a long
time-is interested in Habre. The answer is very simple.
Habre supports the Camp David accords and is prepared
to establish relations with Israel. The Egyptian regime
finds itself in an awkward situation in the Arab and
Islamic world, and it must therefore use all possible
means to find regimes which might follow its own path.
176. I do not wish to respond to my colleague from the
Ivory Coast, whose country faces major difficulties. Its
President received promises of assistance from the American Administration
if he takes up an anti-Libyan position, and in particular a position against Colonel Qaddafi
who, as we know, is Mr. Reagan’s enemy number one.

170. My brother the representative of the Sudan vented
all his anger against my country. It would appear that he
was making a fine ~distinction. He expressed his pleasure
at seeing the troops of Zaire, France and the United States
in Chad, and he 1s not’ calling for the withdrawal of those
troops. He is claiming that there are Libyan troops there
and that they should withdraw. We in our country call for
the withdrawal of all foreign troops from Chad, and we
are ready’ to co-operate with the OAU in dispatching a
fact-finding commission. My country wants peace restored to Chad and everywhere else in the world. My
country is the biggest donor of assistance to Chad-not
by sending arms, but by loans, by joint agricultural ventures in agriculture, fishing and other fields, while the
United States has provided instruments of war.

177. In concluding my statement, I should like to say
that we are greatly concerned about the peace and security
of Chad. Chad is a neighbour of Libya, and the Chad and
Libyan peoples have bonds of blood, bonds forged in their
common struggle. We should like there to be peace in
Chad. Without peace we shall see imperialist ‘forces arrive
very close to our borders in the south. We are prepared to
co-operate and enter into dialogue with any’iegitimate
Government in Chad, and we are prepared to co-operate
with Chad and with other countries in economic development and to act for Chad’s well-being, if those countries
themselves wish Chad’s well-being.

171. There is no doubt that the United States is pa&ularly pleased to see dissent and struggle between us and
our brothers so that it can have a pretext to justify its
presence in the region, and to return to the days of miiitary bases and economic exploitation.

(interpretation from French): The
178. The PRESIDENT
Council has heard the statement made by the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. He had asked to
exercise his right of reply, and I granted him that right.
That being so, I must, in my capacity as President of the
Council, refer to the Council’s records, and particularly to
the statement made on 6 April by the Council’s President
on behalf of the members of the Council [S/Z5688]. That
statement, the terms of which are surely remembered by
all the members of the Council, is one in which the Council indicates that it had heard the statement made by the
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation
of Chad and the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. It is a statement in which the Council gives its

172. The representative of Egypt said many things. I
repudiate ,everything he said -about expansionist designs
and any invasion of Chad by Libya. It is not true. The
Libyan Arab’Jamahiriya
has quite enough territory of its
own, and we have no population explosion. We want to
preserve our own territory. If there are those in Egypt,
people like Sadat and those who worked with him;who
are ready to give away Egyptian and other Arab territory,
the Libyan leadership and the Libyan people are not
ready to act similarly; in such a shameful manner, but we
15

opinion about the dispute between Chad and the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya and in which the Council refers to both
parties-Chad
and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
179. In my capacity as President of the Council, and in
keeping with the text adopted by the Council, I cannot fail
to reply to the statement made by the representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya about the legitimacy and the
very existence of the Government of Chad.
180. Mr. NGUAYILA
MBELA
KALANDA
(Zaire)
(interpretation from French): The Libyan representative
had difficulty in refuting the arguments put forward by
the delegation of Zaire on the specific question before
us. He tried to look through the papers and quote some
writers. Finally he said that Zaire collaborated with South
Africa. Does he have proof! When we are speaking about
South Africa, what about Libyan oil going there via third
parties?
181. I know that the Libyan representative is a great
champion of his country’s interventionist policy. It is his
right. But is the distribution of Zairian property of any
concern to Libya? Has Zaire asked Libya to come and tell
us how to distribute our material goods?
182. Is the presence of my President in the United States
Libya’s problem? To speak of such matters is indeed interference in the internal affairs of a country. To speak of the
visit of a head of State to a friendly country is interference.
Are we here to consider the presence of our President in
the United States or to consider the matter of the Libyan
aggression against the territory of Chad?
183. Do not members of the Council believe that for the
Libyan representative to speak of the foreign or domestic
policy of Zaire is interference in the affairs of my country?
The question that we are considering here is Libyan
aggression against Chad. Let the Libyan representative
speak. Let him refute the arguments which the delegation
of Zaire put forward here.

already sent troops there? Has he organized an Islamic
army or legion to liberate Namibia? 186. If the legitimate Governments of the front-line
States request it of Zaire, we should certainly not fail
quite legitimately to help those countries, as we are helping Chad, and as other friendly countries have helped us
when we have had difficulties.
187. I reserve my right to speak again on another
occasion.
188. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
This morning, in our informal consultations, it was
agreed that we would stop the debate on the complaint of
the Government of Chad at 6 p.m. I think that under the
circumstances it would be appropriate to hold to what we
said. We could then, as agreed, immediately proceed to
take up the complaint of Libya, it being understood that
the debate on the complaint by Chad would be resumed
tomorrow, 12 August,
at 10.30 a.m.
.189. I call on the representative of Chad, though just for
one minute. I think we must stick to the arrangements we
have agreed upon.
190. Mr. BARMA (Chad) (interpretation from French): I
shall be brief. The Libyan representative has shown the
Council how many.arguments he has. He has indulged in
an exercise that has, I think-at
least this is the impression of my delegation-put
the members of the Council to
sleep. He has given confused arguments, citing newspaper
articles in an effort to prove that his country is not intervening in Chad. I do not think the members of the Council have been fooled.
191. As is apparent, the Libyan representative has not
even denied that a Libyan aircraft was shot down by the
armed forces of Chad and that its pilot was captured and
made a statement that we shall make available to the
members of the Council in a Council document.4

184. Zairian troops are present in Chad at the request of
the N’Djamena Government. Can the Libyan representative tell me that the presence of the Libyan troops in Chad
is at the request of the N’Djamena Government? Since he
will deny their presence, the Secretary of State for Foreign
Affairs and Co-operation of Chad has shown us photographs. The Libyan representative has come to tell us that
Libya is not intervening. What about the pictures?

192. As regards the sending of a fact-finding mission to
Chad, I should simply like to observe that the Government of Chad has never refused such a mission. I shall
hold to that.

185. I know that everything that we have said has gone
straight to the heart of our Libyan friend. I know that all
these matters are things that he will not be able to refute.
He has spoken about events that are happening in my
country. Why are we not giving assistance to the frontline States attacked by South Africa? Has he himself

NOTES

The meeting rose at 6.25 p.m.

’ United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 479, No. 6947.
* A/3U310, annex II, decision AHG/Dec.l08 (XIV).
3 A/38/312, annex, resolution AHG/Rev.106 (XIX).
’ Subsequently issued under the symbol S/15928.

16

i&I
;;UIL+~

+I

;I!,“-

,L;l.jWI.L;i~$c,il~,,s~L;sjl,._K;

,9x

.jjJ,idJ,,,J+4..-LI-;ld\;

&

Jdl

&iJ

3;-&_&

-A
wl-..d

.;!A,.+.

J

ta~lmrxiDE8lrj~Qi~
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

idr;ilft~~lull5lftpll!fl!!J6tlPJ~iB'I

RixdsB#sio

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

CSIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairiea et les a~encex deposttatres
du monde entier. lnformez-vous
auprh de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Natlonh Unw.
Sectton des ventes. New York ou Geneve.
KAK

llOJlY~MTb

M3~AHMR

OPL-AHM3AUMM

06~EAMHEHHblX

HAUMH

HauttR MOiliHO
KynMTb
B KHllxHblX
\lara3MHa\
w arewcTaax
BO Bcex paitoHax h4wpa. Haeonrtre
CnpaBKM
06 I~3nawm
B Bawev
KHII~~;H~\I
biara3tine
timt nmtnire
no anpecy: Opratttt3aunn
OGaenrinemibtx
HatmA, Cekuttn
n0
nponaxe
ti3narcuk,
HbtO-fiOpK
ww
xerteea.
ki3LlaHWl

@I-aHW3aUHN

COMO

CONSECUIR

06bUlHHeHHbIX

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerias y casas distrtbuidoras
en
todas panes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirt’jase a: Naciones Unidas. Section de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.
