S/2022/63

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 January 2022
Original: English

Fourteenth report of the Secretary-General on the threat
posed by ISIL (Da’esh) to international peace and security
and the range of United Nations efforts in support of
Member States in countering the threat
I. Introduction
1.
In adopting its resolution 2253 (2015), the Security Council expressed its
determination to address the threat posed to international peace and security by
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant 1 (ISIL, hereinafter referred to as “Da’esh”) 2 and
associated individuals and groups and requested that the Secretary-General provide
an initial strategic-level report on the threat, followed by updates every four months.
In its resolution 2610 (2021), the Council requested that the Secretary-General
continue to provide, every six months, strategic-level reports that reflect the gravity
of the threat posed by Da’esh to international peace and security and the range of
United Nations efforts in support of Member States in countering the threat.
2.
The present report is the fourteenth such report. 3 It was prepared by the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, 4 the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the Office of Counter-Terrorism, in close collaboration with other United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact entities.
3.
During the second half of 2021, the threat posed by Da’esh and its affiliates to
international peace and security continued on the trajectory observed in my previous
reports and remained significant. The interplay between terrorism and conflict and
the threat of regional spillover is a strategic challenge, while online terrorist
radicalization and recruitment and attacks inspired by Da’esh remain a foremost
concern outside conflict zones. Echoing the report of the Secretary-General on Our
Common Agenda (A/75/982), Member States reaffirmed, during the high-level
general debate of the seventy-sixth session of the General Assembly, the need for
continued cooperation to prevent and counter terrorism as a priority for the
international community and multilateral cooperation.
__________________

Listed as Al-Qaida in Iraq (QDe.115).
In line with General Assembly resolution 75/291.
3
See S/2016/92, S/2016/501, S/2016/830, S/2017/97, S/2017/467, S/2018/80, S/2018/770,
S/2019/103, S/2019/612, S/2020/95, S/2020/774, S/2021/98 and S/2021/682.
4
The Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004) and
2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al -Qaida and the Taliban
and associated individuals and entities. The present threat assessment is based in part on the
Team’s twenty-ninth report (S/2021/83).
1
2

22-00537 (E)

070222

*2200537*

S/2022/63

II. Threat assessment
A.

Overview of threat
4.
During the reporting period, Da’esh continued to suffer leadership losses, while
its affiliates maintained a high level of activity and attacks in Africa and gained in
strength and visibility in Afghanistan following the Taliban takeover. The interrelated
issues of foreign terrorist fighters, other Da’esh fighters and their family members
continued to concern Member States acutely. International efforts to address the
human legacy of the Da’esh so-called “caliphate” in camps for internally displaced
persons or detention facilities in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic did not
progress at a pace commensurate with the urgency and gravity of the issue.
5.
Outside conflict zones, cross-border travel remained difficult for Da’esh and
other terrorist operatives owing to measures to contain the spread of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) and efforts by Member States to implement Security Council
resolutions 2178 (2014), 2396 (2017) and 2482 (2019). The pandemic has continued
to make it harder for terrorists to raise money and identify and attack suitable targets.
However, Member States remain concerned about the impact of the pandemic on
terrorist radicalization and recruitment online, especially among young people. They
continue to expect that attacks, some of them plotted during the pandemic, may occur
when lockdowns ease.

1.

Da’esh leadership
6.
The group’s operational leaders remain mainly in the Syrian Arab Republic,
while some of its other leaders, who provide mostly financial and logistical support,
are present in neighbouring countries. 5 The leader of the group, Amir Muhammad
Sa’id Abdal-Rahman al-Salbi (QDi.426), went a further six months without showing
himself to his supporters or communicating directly. No video or audio recordings
featuring him have been released since he assumed leadership, in late October 2019.
One Member State observed that he takes extreme measures to ensure his security,
allowing no electronics to be carried in his vicinity. He is believed to move regularly
between Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic.
7.
In a continuation of leadership losses since al-Salbi assumed control, Da’esh
suffered a major setback in the capture by the Iraqi authorities in October of Sami
Jasim al-Jaburi (alias Hajji Hamid) (not listed), who was responsible for Da’esh
finances and believed to be al-Salbi’s most senior deputy and a possible successor.
He was reportedly found in possession of a residency permit identifying him as a
refugee in a neighbouring country. Member States differ as to how significant this
will prove, but the fact that al-Jaburi was taken alive means that the Iraqi authorities
could acquire valuable intelligence.

2.

Da’esh fighters and their family members in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic
8.
The precarious situation of foreign terrorist fighters, other Da’esh fighters and
their family members stranded in detention in the core conflict zone, especially in the
north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic, remains among the most pressing and urgent
issues for Member States. Progress towards a comprehensive solution has continued
to be slow and further complicated by the COVID-19 pandemic. During the reporting
period, the Government reported having repatriated over 400 Ira qi families,
consisting of over 1,700 individuals. Member States in Europe repatriated a few
women and children from the conflict zone, including women who had had active

__________________
5

2/17

Information provided by Member States.
22-00537

S/2022/63

roles in Da’esh. In all, 59 children (25 girls and 34 boys) of foreign origin were
repatriated from Iraq to two different countries. 6
9.
The Hawl camp remained severely overpopulated, with around 56,000 camp
residents, according to the assessment of most Member States, against an intended
capacity of 40,000. An estimated 94 per cent of camp residents were women and
minors, with two thirds of the children under 12 years of age. The foreigners’ annex
at the Hawl camp still housed approximately 2,000 women and 7,000 children. The
security situation at the camp continued to deteriorate, with 91 murders reported since
January 2021. The transfer of some highly radicalized women to the nearby Roj camp
has eased security concerns somewhat. 7 The United Nations continued to advocate
the provision of security at the camps in a manner that does not endanger residents or
violate their rights and that does not restrict humanitarian access.
10. As time elapses, the risk that this protracted humanitarian, human rights and
security crisis will exacerbate the global terrorist threat landscape in the medium t o
long term is increasing. Da’esh exerts social control over the Hawl camp, with
residents exposed to Da’esh ideology and predation. According to one Member State,
the group has reinstated its “Cubs of the Caliphate” programme, targeting mainly
young boys, including, reportedly, two foreign children, selected for training to form
the next generation of Da’esh fighters. In the absence of repatriation, children and
their families are reportedly resorting to desperate and unsafe measures to leave the
camps, including ones that put them at physical risk, risk of smuggling, risk of
recruitment into armed groups and risk of child or forced marriage.
11. Member States in Europe report that most of the women who had returned from
camps in the conflict zone two years ago have disengaged from Da’esh. At the same
time, security concerns over adult returnees persist, as illustrated by the attempted
escape of a female returnee from a French prison in November 2021 who wished to
return to the core conflict zone. Some Member States, including in South-Eastern
Europe, highlight the challenges of reintegration, with some individuals requiring
ongoing monitoring.
3.

Da’esh finances
12. Da’esh leadership located in and around the core conflict zone continues to
control access to substantial liquid financial resources, although well below the
amount that the group held before its territorial defeat. Several Member States
estimate the group’s current reserves to be between $25 million and $50 million, with
some suggesting that the lower sum is more accurate. According to one Member State,
most of the remaining cash reserves of Da’esh are located in Iraq. Member States
report that the group is now consistently spending more than it fundraises, with
revenues in the low hundreds of thousands of dollars and expenditures in the midhundreds of thousands of dollars. Funds are spent primarily on payments to fighters
and family members of deceased fighters, as well as on operational activities and
attempts to release fighters from detention. Revenues continue to be generated by
opportunistic extortion, looting and kidnapping for ransom.
13. The Monitoring Team reported previously that Da’esh relies most heavily on
unregistered informal cash transfer (hawala) networks and cash couriers to move money.
According to one Member State, cash payments are regularly couriered to the Syrian
Arab Republic from neighbouring States, with Da’esh cells receiving reduced payments
monthly. There is reportedly also a well-established system for distributing funds to
Da’esh family members residing both in and outside the Hawl camp, using a ledger

__________________
6
7

22-00537

Information provided by the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNI CEF).
Information provided by Member States.
3/17

S/2022/63

system maintained by female Da’esh supporters. Families claim funds using, in some
cases, an identification number assigned to them when they lived under the group’s
physical control. Several hawala lenders are reported to operate in Hawl, including
elements of the Rawi network highlighted previously by the Monitoring Team. 8
14. Member States assess that Da’esh leadership exerts sufficient control over its
reserves to allow the transfer of significant sums to certain affiliates abroad. Da’esh
in Afghanistan, according to one Member State, has received in excess of $500,000
from the Da’esh core after more than a year of receiving no funding. Ismatullah
Khalozai (not listed) is described by one Member State as an international financial
facilitator responsible for delivering approximately $87,000 to Da’esh in Afghanistan
and for personally smuggling a Da’esh courier from Afghanistan to Turkey. It will be
important to monitor any change in Da’esh core financial support to its affiliate in
Afghanistan as an indicator of the strategic importance that the group attaches to the
country following the Taliban takeover.
4.

Da’esh access to weapons
15. Member States remain concerned about the glut of weapons, especially small
arms, that exists in the Middle East, Africa and Afghanistan, to which Da’esh, its
affiliates and other terrorist groups could gain access. Such concerns have been
exacerbated by the Taliban takeover in Afghanistan, given the large quantities of
weaponry and other military equipment in the country. With Afghanistan facing a
severe economic, financial and humanitarian crisis, there is a risk that tradable
commodities such as arms and related materiel could be acquired by organized
criminals and terrorists inside Afghanistan and even that they could find their way
into neighbouring countries.

B.

Regional developments

1.

Africa
Central and East Africa
16. A regional terrorism threat is emerging in Central and East Africa, characterized
by a proliferation of funds, intensified recruitment efforts and terrorist tactics linked to
Da’esh affiliates in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Mozambique. In
Mozambique, Cabo Delgado Province saw continued attacks by Ahl al-Sunna walJama‘a (not listed). The group led by Abu Yasir Hassan (not listed), a Tanzanian national,
is estimated to have 600 to 1,200 fighters, comprising mostly locals but also some
fighters from Tanzania. 9 It has pledged allegiance to Da’esh, which regards it as its
component Islamic State Central Africa Province. However, Member States in the region
assert that there is no clear evidence of Da’esh command and control over Ahl al-Sunna
wal-Jama‘a. Nevertheless, they are increasingly worried about the spread of terrorism in
the region of the Southern African Development Community and view enhanced crossborder cooperation as critical to curbing the movement of foreign terrorist fighters.
17. Member States have noted that the forces deployed by the Southern African
Development Community and Rwanda in Cabo Delgado Province in July at the
request of Mozambique caused serious setbacks for Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a, given
that several large-scale operations destroyed its bases and training camps, neutralizing
senior leadership responsible for recruitment, indoctrination, attacks and abductions.
Since August, over 300 Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a fighters have reportedly been killed
in these operations. Sporadic violent attacks on civilians have since increased in more

__________________
8
9

4/17

See S/2021/655, para. 68.
Information provided by Member States.
22-00537

S/2022/63

remote areas, and Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a appears to be displaced rather than
defeated. Its fighters have continued to regroup into smaller, more autonomous cells
and to mount guerrilla attacks on security forces, beheading civilians as a warning
not to cooperate with government authorities or foreign troops. They have plundered
villages for food and provisions and have reportedly abducted young girls as sex
slaves and young boys as child soldiers.
18. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Allied Democratic Forces (not
listed), led by Seka Baluku, are responsible for the escalation of violence against
civilians and security forces in the North Kivu Beni territory and their expansion into
the Ituri Province Irumu territory. Baluku has taken an even harder line than his
predecessor (who was arrested in May 2015), and pledged allegiance to Da’esh in July
2019 and again in September 2020. There are indications that this has led to a fracture
within the Allied Democratic Forces leadership. Member States assess that cooperation
on communication between the Forces and Da’esh serves to amplify the status and
propaganda of the local Forces while enhancing the image of the Da’esh global footprint.
19. An attack by improvised explosive device in front of a popular bar in Beni town
on 25 December was attributed by the authorities to the Allied Democratic Forces,
and Da’esh claimed responsibility for it several weeks later. The attack suggests a
tactical change, which could be intended to sow fear in the larger public and attract
visibility for propaganda purposes.
20. The Allied Democratic Forces appeared to re-engage in Uganda. In October, the
country suffered two deadly bombings bearing the hallmarks of the Forces and
attributed to the group by the Ugandan authorities, which arrested the local Forces
coordinators of the attacks. In November, three suicide bombers struck central
Kampala, after which at least seven suspects were killed and well over a dozen others
were arrested in a counter-terrorism operation, including the suspected Forces recruiter.
West Africa
21. Several Member States report that Da’esh and Al-Qaida affiliates in West Africa
appear to have made decisive progress by exploiting local grievances, overwhelming
stretched security forces and navigating complex interrelationships between armed
groups. While some national authorities are inclined to pursue dialogue, others
consider that negotiations risk consolidating the influence of terrorist groups such as
the Da’esh affiliate Islamic State in the Greater Sahara (QDe.163) and the Al -Qaida
affiliate Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin (QDe.159).
22. The leader of Islamic State in the Greater Sahara, Adnan Abu Walid al-Sahraoui
(QDi.415), was killed in August in the tri-border area between Burkina Faso, Mali and
the Niger and replaced by Abdul Bara al-Sahraoui (not listed), an experienced logistician
who had previously operated in Libya. Several Member States report that, in October
2021, Abdul Bara met in Mali with a delegation of Da’esh leaders that had travelled
from the Da’esh core area to assess and guide its affiliates in the Sahel and Nigeria. After
several operational setbacks, 400 to 1,000 Islamic State in the Greater Sahara fighters
adopted a more defensive posture in the Liptako-Gourma area of the Niger with the
objective of extending it towards Niamey and Tahoua; their operations are now focused
on soft civilian targets, whereas they previously attacked military camps. 10
23. In Nigeria, Islamic State West Africa Province (QDe.162) was strengthened by
the death in May of Abubakar Mohammed Shekau (QDi. 322), leader of the rival
Boko Haram group (QDe.138). Member States disagree as to the accuracy of reports
that Abu Musab al-Barnawi (not listed), leader of Islamic State West Africa Province,
__________________
10

22-00537

Information provided by Member States.
5/17

S/2022/63

was killed in a fight with Boko Haram in September. The group has sought to integrate
Boko Haram fighters, but unification has proved difficult.
24. Increasing attacks in Cameroon and the Niger underscore the ability of Islamic
State West Africa Province to expand beyond Nigeria. In the Diffa region of the Niger,
another senior leader of the group, Abba Gana (not listed), led more than 20 terrorist
attacks in 2021. Several Member States reported that the group’s tactical gains in
north-eastern Nigeria may have increased its revenues, including through war sp oils,
extortion of the local population and the fishing and agriculture industries and
exploitation of charitable payments.
North Africa
25. The authorities in Morocco remain concerned about the unpredictable nature of
the threat from Da’esh and Al-Qaida, notwithstanding counter-terrorism successes
that have suppressed the groups’ activity in the country. A number of Da’esh-inspired
lone actors were arrested, and three Da’esh cells were dismantled between June and
October 2021.
26. In Libya, terrorist activity has declined with the failure of Da’esh to attract new
recruits and control territory. According to Member States, the group’s affiliate
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant – Libya (QDe.165) has been degraded to some
50 fighters. Although weakened, it retains some operational capability and prioritizes
its presence in southern Libya, where it aims to reorganize its command. Unresolved
political issues in Libya could provide space and opportunity for Da’esh to reassert
itself, especially in the Fazzan region.
27. In Egypt, activity by Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis has been reduced. The group is a
local affiliate of Da’esh, which has been featured extensively in its propaganda. No
terrorist attacks have been attributed to or claimed by Da’esh or Al-Qaida in mainland
Egypt since 2019. This is credited both to counter-terrorism operations and an
initiative to promote the defection of Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis leaders, which has
lowered morale and reinforced the impression that the group is declining, while public
investments in infrastructure, transport and housing in the Sinai increased.
2.

Middle East
28. Da’esh continues to operate as an entrenched rural insurgency in Iraq and the
Syrian Arab Republic, exploiting the porous border between the countries while
maintaining operations in areas of low security pressure. Da’esh is estimated by
Member States to retain between 6,000 and 10,000 fighters across both countries,
where it is forming cells and training operatives to launch attacks.
29. In the Syrian Arab Republic, Da’esh remains active notwithstanding ongoing
counter-terrorism operations, although its attacks have recently been more limited.
The group uses desert hideouts for training, possibly for regional operations or even
to revive an external operations capability. It continues to find a limited safe haven
primarily in the central Badia desert in Homs, while smaller cells operate in the northeast and, to a lesser extent, in Idlib, in the north-west. 11
30. In Iraq, ongoing counter-terrorism efforts have yielded positive results in
reducing Da’esh activities, with the October 2021 Babylon Music Festival proceeding
without incident. However, cells remain active in desert and rural territories, and the
group uses urban areas to expand its clandestine networks. A surge was reported in
Da’esh fighters crossing the borders from the Syrian Arab Republic to Iraq, including

__________________
11

6/17

Information provided by Member States.
22-00537

S/2022/63

through the Sinjar area, and taking shelter in the Hamrin mountain range. 12 Although
Da’esh activity in Anbar Governorate has decreased, the region is assessed to have
favourable conditions for the group to redeploy and strengthen its fighting capacity,
and it is reportedly already building strongholds and tunnels, with many slee per cells
and hundreds of fighters in Anbar desert.
31. Da’esh maintained the ability to launch attacks at a steady rate in Iraq, including
hit-and-run operations, ambushes and roadside bombs, with a marked concentration
in Kirkuk, Diyala and Salah al-Din Governorates. It continued to attack both
government forces and civilians with the apparent aim of instigating panic and
increasing pressure on the authorities. Da’esh activity has become more frequent on
the edges of the Kurdistan region of Iraq, including a high-profile attack in December
that resulted in 13 deaths.
3.

Asia
Central and South Asia
32. The security landscape in Afghanistan changed dramatically on 15 August,
following a Taliban military campaign that seized 33 of 34 provincial capit als,
including Kabul. There are no recent signs that the Taliban has taken steps to limit
the activities of foreign terrorist fighters in the country. On the contrary, Member
States are concerned that terrorist groups enjoy greater freedom in Afghanistan t han
at any time in recent history. They have, however, reported only small numbers of
foreign terrorist fighters moving to Afghanistan.
33. Member States assess that the strength of the Da’esh affiliate in Afghanistan,
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan (QDe.161), has increased from earlier
estimates of 2,200 fighters to now approaching 4,000 following the release by the
Taliban of several thousand individuals from prison. One Member State assessed that
up to half the individuals are foreign terrorist fighters. While Da’esh controls limited
territory in eastern Afghanistan, it is capable of conducting high-profile, complex
attack such as the 27 August bombing at Kabul airport, which killed over 180 people,
and several subsequent attacks, in particular against the Taliban and members of the
Shia community.
34. Da’esh in Afghanistan continues to be led by Sanaullah Ghafari (QDi.431), an
Afghan national. The group is taking advantage of the turmoil in the country, including
by recruiting fighters from the Eastern Turkistan Islamic Movement (QDe.088) and the
Turkistan Islamic Party, among other foreign terrorist groups. 13 It aims to position itself
as the chief rejectionist force in Afghanistan and to expand into neighbouring Central
and South Asian countries and is viewed by the Taliban as its primary armed threat.
Member States are concerned that, if Afghanistan descends into further chaos, some
Afghan and foreign violent extremists may shift allegiances to Da’esh.
South-East Asia
35. Member States in the region are concerned about the potential resurgence of a
safe haven in Afghanistan for international terrorist activity, as well as about social
media messaging that “celebrates the Taliban victory”, which could be used as a
recruitment tool for violent extremism locally. National authorities in the region are
not reporting any immediate uptick in attempted travel to Afghanistan, but are alert
to this possibility.

__________________
12
13

22-00537

Information provided by Member States.
Information provided by Member States.
7/17

S/2022/63

36. Both Indonesia and the Philippines reported significant counter-terrorism gains,
leading to an overall decline in terrorist activity and cautious optimism that the
operational capability of several groups in the region may be significantly degraded.
At the same time, the threat of attacks by lone actors or inspired by ra dicalized
individuals remains a concern.
37. In August, Indonesia disrupted plots to attack its Independence Day
celebrations, with the arrests of members of both Jemaah Islamiyah (QDe.092) and
Jamaah Ansharut Daulah (QDe.164). The reported arrest of Jemaah Islamiyah leader
Abu Rusdan (QDi.186) in September has further weakened the group. In September,
Indonesian security forces killed Ali Kalora, the leader of Mujahidin Indonesian
Timur (QDe.150), potentially severely affecting the group’s long-term viability; one
Member State observed that the group’s remaining members appear to be in retreat.
In the Philippines, security forces killed the leader of Daulah Islamiya, Salahuddin
Hassan, in October in Maguindanao Province. Hassan was described by the Philippine
authorities as one of their most wanted terrorist fugitives.
4.

Europe
38. According to several Member States in the region, there is a common pattern in
ongoing investigations of cases of home-grown terrorism. They typically involve
young individuals with underlying vulnerabilities and a combination of a fascination
with extreme violence and personal grievances, which make them receptive to Da’esh
and Al-Qaida propaganda.
39. Following the killing of a high school professor in France in October 20 20 by
an individual of Chechen background, investigations led by several European
Member States identified terrorist threats associated with several individuals and
networks originating in the Northern Caucasus and parts of Central Asia, which had
formed sleeper cells in European cities. Additional individuals from these
communities who had travelled to the Syrian Arab Republic and Iraq but were
previously unknown as foreign terrorist fighters were identified. Other investigations
highlighted the financing of terrorism through the exploitation of charitable giving by
individuals of Chechen background. 14
40. Migration routes remain under scrutiny by relevant European State authorities,
as illustrated by the arrest in Bulgaria in November 2021 of a Belgian-Moroccan
foreign terrorist fighter returning from Turkey who had been an associate of
Abdelhamid Abaaoud, the “mastermind” of the 2015 Paris attacks directed by Da’esh.
Several Member States cited cases of irregular migrants from Iraq who were
subsequently identified from battlefield evidence as Da’esh operatives.

III. Updates on responses to the evolving threat
A.

Overview
41. Terrorism-related developments since my previous report have further
highlighted the challenges posed by an increasingly decentralized Da’esh. However,
the COVID-19 pandemic has continued to present States with formidable challenges
in all policy areas, counter-terrorism included. The urgent need for pandemic-related
mitigation and recovery has diverted resources away from the counter-terrorism
efforts of Member States and related international support, as noted in the fourth
analytical update published in December 2021 by the Counter-Terrorism Committee

__________________
14

8/17

Information provided by Member States.
22-00537

S/2022/63

Executive Directorate on the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on terrorism,
counter-terrorism and countering violent extremism. 15
42. At the same time, many events organized in 2021 to take stock of 20 years of
counter-terrorism since the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001 underscored the
need to continuously monitor the evolving terrorist threat, enhance counter-terrorism
cooperation and strengthen national and regional counter-terrorism legislation, policy
frameworks and capacities, in line with international law, including international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
43. In the outcome document of the special meeting held in November by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee to commemorate the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001), the successes and significant steps taken by Member States
towards its implementation are recognized, while the fact that much still remains to
be done at the national, regional and international levels is noted. This is also apparent
in the updated versions published in November of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate global survey of the implementation by States of Council
resolution 1373 (2001) and other relevant resolutions 16 and of Council resolution
1624 (2005). 17
44. Member States have reaffirmed that the United Nations system should continue
to play a key role in supporting their efforts in this regard by reinforcing the importance
of its Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact, spearheaded by the Office of
Counter-Terrorism through key counter-terrorism mandates, including through the
comprehensive review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy by the
General Assembly in June, and the renewal by the Security Council in December of the
mandates of the Monitoring Team and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate in its resolutions 2610 (2021) and 2617 (2021), respectively.

B.

Suspected Da’esh fighters and their family members in conflict zones

1.

Current situation
45. Significant concerns persist regarding the situation of individuals with alleged
links to United Nations-designated terrorist groups who are stranded in Iraq and the
Syrian Arab Republic, especially thousands of women and children. There has been
no improvement in the dire conditions in which they are detained, which are marked
by considerable hardship, curtailed humanitarian assistance, violations of
fundamental rights and freedoms and a volatile security situation.
46. Violence continues to be reported inside camp facilities in the north-east of the
Syrian Arab Republic, including murder, enforced disappearances and other abuses
attributed to individuals with suspected links to Da’esh. 18 There are reports of
children, primarily adolescent boys, including foreign nationals, held in detention
facilities for adults without due process or due regard for the best interests of the child
and with no measures of redress. Holding them in detention facilities without legal
justification has significant moral, legal and security implications and may constitute
a breach of international human rights law.

__________________

See https://www.un.org/securitycouncil/ctc/news/impact-covid-19-pandemic-terrorism-counterterrorism-and-countering-violent-extremism-update.
16
See https://www.un.org/securitycouncil/ctc/sites/www.un.org.securitycouncil.ctc/files/
2021105_1373_gis.pdf.
17
See https://www.un.org/securitycouncil/ctc/sites/www.un.org.securitycouncil.ctc/files/files/
documents/2021/Nov/ctc_gis_1624.pdf.
18
Information provided by Member States.
15

22-00537

9/17

S/2022/63

47. In September, the United Nations system formally launched the Global
Framework for United Nations Support on Syrian Arab Republic and Iraq Third
Country National Returnees and the multi-partner trust fund to support requesting
Member States in the protection, voluntary repatriation, prosecution, rehabilitation
and reintegration of individuals with suspected links to United Nations-designated
terrorist groups returning from Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. Coordinated, “all of-United Nations” support continued to be provided to Iraq, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, the Maldives, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, co-led by the Office of CounterTerrorism and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF).
2.

Protection
48. Trafficking in persons in the context of armed conflict, including from camps
located in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic, remains a grave concern. In
August, the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women and
children, published a report exploring the intersections between trafficking by
proscribed groups and terrorism, highlighting failures in providing assistance to the
victims of such trafficking (A/76/263).
49. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) has continued to advocate the voluntary, safe and dignified return of Iraqi
and Syrian internally displaced persons, including survivors of sexual violence and their
children. The perceived affiliation of some of these individuals with Da’esh makes them
vulnerable to human rights violations and other abuses, including harassment,
stigmatization and ostracization. Robust and sustainable solutions are required to ensure
the return of internally displaced persons, which should take into account the needs of
receiving communities, including security and reintegration challenges.

3.

Repatriation
50. United Nations entities have continued to engage with Member States towards
the voluntary, safe repatriation of their nationals from Iraq and the Syrian Arab
Republic on the basis of the informed consent of the concerned individuals and guided
by the best interests of the child, including through the development of gendersensitive, age-appropriate and human rights-compliant policies for repatriation. Such
policies must comply with all States’ respective obligations under international law.
The consent of relevant Governments to any activity to be underta ken in territories
under their control is a paramount consideration in all repatriation efforts. Although
several States have been proactive in repatriating their nationals, the pace of
repatriation from the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic remains slow, and many
States are only repatriating orphaned or unaccompanied children. Since January 2018,
a total of 1,454 children (712 girls and 742 boys) has been repatriated to 22 countries
in Central Asia, Europe, the Middle East and North Africa. 19

4.

Prosecution
51. In November, a member of Da’esh was for the first time convicted of genocide
against the Yazidis, in addition to crimes against humanity and war crimes, following
a trial in Germany. This was an encouraging development as Member States con tinue
to face challenges in ensuring accountability for the crimes committed by Da’esh. In
this regard, the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) has
expanded its core investigative work and accelerated the implementation of a major
evidence-digitization project. It has expanded its support for 14 Member States by

__________________
19

10/17

Information provided by UNICEF.
22-00537

S/2022/63

identifying, securing, organizing and cataloguing evidence obtained in conflict zones
and conducting interviews with survivors and witnesses.
52. In November, the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre within the Office
of Counter-Terrorism, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC ) convened a workshop with
government and civil society representatives from the Middle East and North Africa
to develop a compendium of practices and lessons learned in the prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration of suspected terrorists. The Office of CounterTerrorism, the Directorate and UNODC launched a joint project to support Burkina
Faso in developing and implementing strategies for the screening, prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration of persons associated with terrorist groups. The thr ee
entities also continued to implement a joint project in support of the Regional
Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience Strategy for Areas Affected by Boko Haram
in the Lake Chad Basin Region.
53. It is crucial that States uphold their respective obligations under international
law when bringing suspected terrorists to justice, including with respect to detention,
due process and fair trial. Major concerns remain in some States regarding allegations
of torture and ill-treatment, overreliance on confessions, long periods of detention
without charges and use of the death penalty for counter-terrorism offences that do
not meet the threshold of most serious crimes necessary under international human
rights law for imposing such a sentence.
54. All children previously living under subjugation by Da’esh, including those
alleged to be associated with Da’esh or other armed groups, must be treated primarily
as victims. They should be seen first as survivors of grievous violations of their rights,
regardless of their age.
55. In August, the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and
OHCHR published a joint report on legal conditions and procedural safeguards to
prevent torture and ill-treatment and to ensure human rights in the administration of
justice in Iraq. 20 The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali and UNODC continued to support the Specialized Judicial Unit
against Terrorism and Transnational Organized Crime and other judicial institutions,
including through technical and logistics support, in the prosecution of serious crimes
and terrorism-related trials.
5.

Rehabilitation and reintegration
56. The United Nations continued to support Member States in their development
of comprehensive and tailored rehabilitation and reintegration programmes that are
gender-sensitive, age-appropriate and in compliance with international human rights
law. In Central Asia, UNODC supported rehabilitation and reintegration efforts
regarding children associated with terrorist groups, while UNICEF worked with
governments across Central Asia, the Southern Caucasus, Europe and North Africa to
implement best practices for the reintegration of children who have returned from
conflict zones. UNICEF continued to support national authorities in Burkina Faso and
Nigeria in the adoption of handover protocols for the release and transfer to civilian
authorities of children associated with non-State armed groups, including groups
affiliated with Da’esh, supported Mali and the Niger in the effective implementation
of such protocols and provided support for the reintegration of the children involved.
57. Member States continued to face challenges in managing violent extremist
prisoners and preventing terrorist radicalization within correctional settings. The
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, UNODC and the Counter-Terrorism

__________________
20

22-00537

See https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Countries/IQ/UNAMI_Report_Administration_of_
Justice_EN.pdf.
11/17

S/2022/63

Committee Executive Directorate continued to participate in a joint pilot project to
assist Kazakhstan, Tunisia and Uganda in this regard, including in the development of
tailored prisoner classification frameworks and associated risk and needs assessment
tools. In Mali, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali and UNODC continued to support the implementation of a road map to prevent
and combat violent extremism and terrorist radicalization in prisons.

C.

Supporting victims of Da’esh
58. Victims of sexual and gender-based violence committed by members of terrorist
groups, including Da’esh, require stronger protection and support. In November, the
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and the Committee
on the Rights of the Child issued a joint statement 21 calling upon States to comply
with their obligations under the relevant international conventions and to provide
comprehensive support and protection to women who survive sexual violence and
their children.
59. The United Nations continued to assist the Government of Iraq in implementing
the Yazidi Survivors Law, which provides, inter alia, assistance and reparations for
survivors of Da’esh and affirms a survivor-centred approach. UNAMI continued to
support the Government’s implementation of the Joint Communiqué on Prevention
and Response to Conflict-Related Sexual Violence, which ensures that sexual
violence-related considerations are adequately reflected in the work of the national
Counter-Terrorism Committee of Iraq. UNITAD has continued to actively support
gender-competent and age-disaggregated aspects of investigations into crimes
committed against the Yazidi community, including conflict-related sexual violence
and acts of enslavement.

D.

International and regional cooperation
60. Member States and international and regional organizations have continued to
promote enhanced counter-terrorism coordination and cooperation. Some Member
States have taken positive steps to overcome operational challenges, which have been
complicated by the COVID-19 pandemic, in mutual legal assistance and judicial
cooperation, specifically in matters such as extradition, investigation and prosecution.
61. UNODC promoted cross-border cooperation among Algeria, Libya and Tunisia
for the investigation and prosecution of terrorism-related offences. The CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate continued to support the Southern
African Development Community in reviewing and implementing an amended
regional counter-terrorism strategy, in particular in the light of the violence in Cabo
Delgado Province, Mozambique, and the border regions of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Mozambique and Tanzania. In Central Asia, the Directorate led capacity
consultations with Central Asian States on counter-terrorism issues, and United
Nations entities continued to assist Member States in developing regional and
international cooperation to prevent the movement of terrorists, including foreign
terrorist fighters, in compliance with international law.
62. In September, the Office of Counter-Terrorism, UNODC and the InterParliamentary Union organized the first Global Parliamentary Summit on CounterTerrorism to identify effective approaches for parliamentarians to contributing to the
prevention and countering of terrorism. The Summit addressed support for victims of

__________________
21

12/17

See https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/CRC/Statements/Joint -CEDAW-CRC-jointStatment-on-Children-Born-of-Rape.doc.
22-00537

S/2022/63

terrorism, including draft model legal provisions developed by the Office of CounterTerrorism, UNODC and the Inter-Parliamentary Union, as well as hate speech, the
prevention of terrorist radicalization and challenges faced by the Sahel region.

E.

Border management and law enforcement
63. United Nations entities continued to strengthen the capacities of Member States
to detect and prevent cross-border movements of terrorists, including through
enhanced cooperation and operational information-sharing. In October, the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate organized a regional expert workshop for Central Asian States to raise
awareness and enhance capacity regarding the responsible use and sharing of
biometric data. In December, the Directorate published an analytical brief on
biometrics and counter-terrorism. 22 In October, the Counterterrorism Watchlisting
Toolkit was launched by the Global Counterterrorism Forum as the result of a joint
initiative co-led by the United States of America and the Office of Counter-Terrorism,
with the support of the Directorate.
64. The multi-agency Countering Terrorist Travel Programme, led by the Office of
Counter-Terrorism, continued to assist Member States in detecting and interdicting
terrorism and serious crime-related threats at borders using advance passenger
information and passenger name records in accordance with Security Council
resolutions 2178 (2014), 2396 (2017) and 2482 (2019), international standards and
recommended practices, as well as human rights principles and relevant privacy laws.
A comprehensive virtual consultation led by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate for Iraq in July resulted in a road map for tailored assistance.
In September, the Programme delivered interactive online training for Mongolia.
65. In September, the Office of Counter-Terrorism launched a programme on threat
assessment models for aviation security to support Member States in developing interagency coordination to share relevant terrorist threat information and improve
internal operational capacity to comply with international aviation security
requirements. In December, the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre conducted
training for the Central Asian region, focusing on the land border between
Afghanistan and Tajikistan, and organized a regional expert workshop on maritime
security for East Africa.
66. United Nations entities continued to support Member States in addressing the
possible linkages between terrorism and organized crime. For instance, in October,
the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute and UNODC
held a capacity-building workshop for Mauritania in this regard, which will be
replicated in other countries in the Sahel region. In Central Asia, the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
UNODC and the Office for Disarmament Affairs collaborated on capacity
consultations and capacity-building for Member States, with a specific focus on the
terrorism-arms-crime nexus.
67. Through capacity-building activities and training sessions, the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre and its partners provided ongoing support to Member
States in strengthening cooperation to prevent terrorist use of conventional and
non-conventional weapons and developing response and detection plans. UNITAD
accelerated its investigation into the development and use of chemical and biological

__________________
22

22-00537

See www.un.org/securitycouncil/ctc/news/cted-publishes-analytical-brief-use-biometrics-counterterrorism#:~:text=in%20counter%2Dterrorism-,CTED%20publishes%20Analytical%20Brief%20
on%20the%20use%20of%20biometrics%20in,of%20biometrics%20in%20counter%2Dterrorism .
13/17

S/2022/63

weapons by Da’esh, including the identification of potential victims a nd witnesses
and by gathering photographic and medical records as evidence.
68. United Nations entities continued to mainstream human rights into their
counter-terrorism-related support to Member States and to offer dedicated capacitybuilding for law enforcement. The Office of Counter-Terrorism and UNAMI engaged
in consultations with Iraq in this regard, as did OHCHR with the Ministry of Defence
of Mozambique.

F.

Countering the financing of terrorism
69. Countering the financing of terrorism is a critical priority for Member States
and the United Nations in the fight against Da’esh and other terrorist groups. A joint
special meeting in November of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2462 (2019) outlined current terrorism-financing methods and
explored linkages with transnational organized crime, the abuse of new technologies
and payment methods and the exploitation of natural resources. In December, a
thematic summary assessment of gaps in the implementation of Council requirements
on countering the financing of terrorism, prepared by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate in consultation with the Monitoring Team, was
submitted to the Office of Counter-Terrorism through the Counter-Terrorism
Committee for the purpose of designing targeted technical assistance and capacitybuilding efforts, as mandated in resolution 2462 (2019).
70. The United Nations continued to support Member States in increasing their
national capacity, building institutional mechanisms and enhancing regional
collaboration to counter the financing of terrorism. In this regard, United Nations
entities pursued close cooperation with the Financial Action Task Force and Task
Force-style regional bodies. The Under-Secretary-General of the Office of CounterTerrorism and the Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate held bilateral meetings with the President of the Task Force in December
to further strengthen cooperation.
71. UNODC delivered capacity-building support to Indonesia, Mali, North
Macedonia, Senegal and Tajikistan in financial investigation and worked on financial
disruption plans with Burkina Faso, the Niger and Somalia. The Office also delivered
legislative assistance to the Action Group against Money Laundering in Central
Africa and supported Burkina Faso and Côte d’Ivoire in establishing national assetfreezing committees in compliance with Security Council resolution 1373 (2001).
72. In August, the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre organized a capacitybuilding workshop for officials from the Office of the Prosecutor of Iraq, the Financial
Intelligence Unit, regulatory authorities and law enforcement agencies. In September, the
Centre and its partners held a capacity-building workshop to support the implementation
of the regional operational plan of the Eastern and Southern Africa Anti-Money
Laundering Group. In October, the Centre convened, in collaboration with the Middle
East and North Africa Financial Action Task Force and the Financial Intelligence Unit of
Egypt, a regional workshop to strengthen capacities regarding the role of law
enforcement and prosecution in countering and investigating terrorist financing.
73. UNITAD has widened the scope of its investigations into the economic structure
of Da’esh to encompass key revenue streams, including trade in oil and antiquities,
the takeover of local agricultural sectors, enslavement, and pillaging and persecution
targeting ethnic and religious minorities across Iraq. The United Nations Educational,

14/17

22-00537

S/2022/63

Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) developed an international
communication campaign 23 to prevent and counter illicit trafficking in cultural
property as a source of terrorism financing and to protect cultural property from the
threat of armed conflict.

G.

Countering the use of new technologies for terrorist purposes
74. Stronger, multi-stakeholder international cooperation is needed to counter, in
line with international law, the use of rapidly evolving new technologies for terrorist
purposes, including information and communications technologies and their enabling
impact on other threats, such as terrorist access to and use of chemical, biological,
nuclear or radiological materials.
75. The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, in collaboration with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the International Criminal
Police Organization (INTERPOL) and UNODC, provided capacity-building
assistance and training to Bangladesh, Burkina Faso, Malaysia and Mongolia on the
use of new technologies in counter-terrorism investigations in full respect of human
rights and the rule of law and protecting critical infrastructure from terrorist
cyberattacks. These efforts notably draw on the joint United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre-INTERPOL handbook for law enforcement on using open-source
methods and online information to prevent, investigate, prosecute and adjudicate
terrorist crimes, the second edition of which was launched in November.
76. In November, the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre and the
International Telecommunication Union conducted a global cyberdrill, training more
than 100 participants from 28 Member States on using online information, including
cryptocurrency transactions, to respond to and investigate a ransomware terrorist
attack against critical infrastructure. In December, the Centre and the Naif Arab
University for Security Sciences, in Saudi Arabia, organized regional training for
Member States from the Middle East and North and West Africa on digital forensics
for cybersecurity and counter-terrorism investigations.
77. The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre and its partners trained more than
450 officials from Iraq, Jordan, Kenya and Malaysia on preventing terrorists from
acquiring conventional weapons or chemical, biological and nuclear weapons of mass
destruction. The Centre organized a tabletop exercise on responding to a chemical
terrorist attack for a response network across cities in Europe and North America and
supported Iraq and Jordan in the preparation of response plans and the Horn of Africa
region in strengthening cooperation on nuclear detection and response.

H.

Countering terrorist narratives and engaging with communities to
prevent and counter violent extremism conducive to terrorism
78. Reflections within the international community on the progress achieved since
the adoption of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) underscored the need to
redouble efforts to stem terrorist radicalization and recruitment across the ideological
spectrum, including by engaging with communities to counter terrorist narratives and
address the conditions conducive to terrorism as part of a comprehensive counterterrorism approach. Da’esh, its affiliates and other terrorist groups have continued
their efforts to exploit socioeconomic hardship, grievances and political tensions,
which have often been exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic. Social media

__________________
23

22-00537

See https://en.unesco.org/news/real-price-art-international-unesco-campaign-reveals-hiddenface-art-trafficking.
15/17

S/2022/63

monitoring efforts identified a surge in hate speech, in particular following the Taliban
takeover in Afghanistan.
79. Concerns over terrorist exploitation of social media, including gaming-adjacent
platforms, have been compounded during the pandemic. Following the second
Counter-Terrorism Week at the United Nations, in June, the United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre, UNESCO and the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations
organized a session with video gamers from Asia to develop innovative ideas to
prevent and counter violent extremism conducive to terrorism on gaming platforms.
In December, The Office of Counter-Terrorism organized an expert round table on
video games and violent extremism as an introduction to a high-level meeting to be
held in 2022.
80. In October, the United Nations convened a Global Education Ministers
Conference on addressing hate speech through education, which resulted in
recommendations for Member States in this regard. The Office of the Special Adviser
to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide continued to provide support
to United Nations field entities in developing tailored strategies in response to hate
speech, and it developed a guidance note on gender-based hate speech. UNESCO
conducted further awareness-raising and capacity-building with regard to leveraging
education to address hate speech in Cameroon, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Sudan while continuing to support Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger in
preventing violent extremism through teacher development.
81. In July, the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, in partnership with the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, organized a webinar for young
women and men from South Asia and South-East Asia to create an interactive, youthled and intergenerational space in which to share experiences of preventing and
countering violent extremism. The United Nations Development Programme engaged
with partners to strengthen the integration of mental health and psychosocial support
into peacebuilding and prevention programming and policy. The United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) continued
to partner with regional and national stakeholders to strengthen gender-responsive
policies and processes through gender mainstreaming and promoting the participation
of women in security sector decision-making processes and mechanisms.
82. The United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute
developed an initiative to assess the potential correlation between climate risks and
violent extremism in Chad. In Iraq, UNESCO continued to restore cultural heritage
destroyed by Da’esh and to address gender norms and stereotypes through education,
and UNAMI developed an interactive platform to highlight local youth-led peace
narratives to strengthen social cohesion and counter Da’esh propaganda. The
International Organization for Migration continued to support the Government of Iraq
in developing and implementing local plans of action to prevent violent extremism
conducive to terrorism.

IV. Observations
83. Successful counter-terrorism efforts against Da’esh have severely weakened its
senior leadership and reduced the finances of its core, while the group is also
constrained by rivalry with Al-Qaida and other non-State armed groups. However,
Da’esh and its affiliates persist and continue to display opportunism. The threat that
they pose to international peace and security remains potent and is even growing in
some regions where its interplay with conflict and organized crime complicates
dynamics further. This is a stark reminder that security responses are necessary but
not sufficient to succeed against Da’esh and its strategy of entrenchment by winning
16/17

22-00537

S/2022/63

over sympathizers and coercing communities. Progress against terrorism is contingent
on progress across collective goals – in sustaining peace, achieving equitable,
inclusive and sustainable development and ensuring human rights for all. In my report
on Our Common Agenda, it is emphasized that terrorism is a strategic security risk
that requires continued multilateral cooperation as part of a new agenda for peace.
84. Collective vigilance and cooperation against Da’esh remain essential. The threat
that it will pose as the world eventually emerges from the COVID-19 pandemic is
unpredictable. Meanwhile, the hardships and grievances that people have experienced
during the pandemic, as well as online violent extremist propaganda, add fuel to the
group’s appeal in and outside conflict zones. Illicit trafficking continues to supply
Da’esh followers with small arms, light weapons and ammunition, while rapidly
evolving new technologies provide new opportunities for terrorist purposes and
tactics. The expansion of Da’esh affiliates in parts of Africa could have serious and
lasting repercussions well beyond the continent. The turmoil in Afghanistan and the
unresolved situation of individuals with suspected links to Da’esh who are stranded
in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic risk aggravating the medium- to longterm threat. I reiterate my call to all States concerned that have not already done so
to facilitate the voluntary repatriation of the women and children concerned, in
accordance with the obligations of the States under international law, including the
principle of non-refoulement and the best interests of the child.
85. On 11 September 2021, the sombre twentieth anniversary of the Al -Qaida
attacks on the United States was marked, and tribute was paid to the victims and
survivors. This was an opportunity to take stock of progress towards and lessons in
preventing and countering terrorism following the impetus of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001), including in dealing with the emergence of Da’esh from the
remnants of Al-Qaida in Iraq. Civil society organizations called for meaningful
changes in support for victims and to re-anchor counter-terrorism in human rights and
gender equality while also safeguarding principled humanitarian action. These
priorities were reinforced by the General Assembly in the seventh review of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, along with the imperative of law enforcement and
criminal justice cooperation and responses to prevent and ensure accountability for
terrorist crimes, in line with international law. While the primary responsibility to
counter terrorism, including Da’esh, lies with Member States, the United Nations will
continue to support them through a range of efforts, including integrated and genderresponsive capacity-building based on human rights for requesting countries. I
welcome the continued leadership and guidance of the Security Council in this regard,
as well as the renewal of the mandates of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team.

22-00537

17/17
