UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-SIXTH

YEAR

232r

MEETING:

21 DECEMBER

1981

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/232 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda I..II.I.II*I.lllll..I~,~IIIII..IIII....,IIII....

1

Date of elections to fill a vacancy in the International Court of Justice (S/14799) , ,

1

Statement by the Presider,: regarding the 2306th meeting I**,II,I,,****,,,1

1

Statements by representatives of outgoing members.. . . , . . . , . . , , , , . , . . , , , .

1

Statement by the Secretary-General

6

IIIIII.III,I,,I.,.I...II....,........

Statement by the President II..III.II..,IIIII.,,....I....,II,.,,..,,,.,.

7

S/l’V.2321

1; -2.050
?

NOTE
Symbols
of United Nations documents
are composed
of capital
bined with figures.
Mention
of such a symbol indicates n refcrencc
Nations document.

letters comto a United

Documents
of the Security
Comlcil (symbol
S/ . , a) are normally
published
in
qtuuIcrly
.YII/~/~/~~III(~II/.\ of the ~?~licitrl
l2~wmls
o/‘/lrc
.Srcrrri/y
C‘ouucd.
The date
of the document
intlicatcs
the supplcmcnt
in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions
of the Security
Council,
numbered
in ;~ccorclancc
with II
system adopted
in 1964. are published
in yeerly
volumes
of Nc.wdo/icmy
od
IhYsi,uc.\
r:/’ /lrc, .Swrwic,v
C’rwwil.
The new system.
which has been applied
retloxtively
to resolutions
xlopted
before I January 1905. became fully opefiitivc
011 that

date.

2321st MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 21 December 1981, aa 4.30 p.m.
!

President:

Mr. Olara A, OTUNNU

(Uganda).

Pleserl!: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, German Democratic Republic, Ireland,
Japan, Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines, Spain,
Tunisia, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2321)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Date of elections to fill a vacancy in the International Court of Justice (S/14799)
T/w twetirtg

was culled

to order

at 4.40 p.m-

Adoption of the agenda
The agmla

IIYIS adopted.

Date of elections to fill a vacancy in tbe International
Court of Justice (S/14799)
I. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council have
before them document S/14799, which contains a note
by the Secretary-General.
2. The recent death, on 12 December, of Judge
Abdullah El-Erian has created a vacancy in the International Court of Justice that has to be filled.
3. I am sure that 1 am expressing the sentiments of
all the members of the Council in extending sincere
condolences to the delegation of Egypt on this sad
occasion.
4. Judge El-Erian was educated at Cairo, Harvard
and Columbia Universities, and lectured at Cairo
University from 1943 to 1961. From 1959 to 1968, he
was Director of the Legal and Treaty Department of
the Egyptian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, From 1968
to 1979, he served as Deputy Permanent Representative of his country to the United Nations, Permanent
Representative to the United Nations Office in Geneva
and then Ambassador to France and Switzerland. He
had been a member of the International Court of Justice
since February 1979, and his term of office would have
.~,>, ..I :.1 1‘..,%
.,,..*... tnoo

5. His loss has been deeply felt by the Government
and the people of Egypt, by the International Court
of Justice and by the international community.
6. Under Article 14 of the Statute of the International
Court of Justice, the Security Council is required to
fix a date for the election to fill any vacancy in the
Court. Members of the Council have before them in
document S/14809 the text of a draft resolution prepared in the course of consultations.
7. It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to vote now on the draft resolution. Unless
I hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote.
A vote was ta&m

by s/row of hands.

The druft
resolrttion
(rrsoliitio~i
499 (1981)).

was

adopted

ro~anhnously

Statement by the President regarding
the 2306th meeting
8. The PRESIDENT: I wish to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The President of the Security Council has been
informed by the Secretariat that following the
2306th meeting of the Security Council, on 5 NOvember 1981, devoted to the election of five members of the International Court of Justice, a further
examination of the ballots established that an error
had inadvertently been made in the tally of votes
on the first ballot.
“As the final result of the voting would have
remained the same, the Council confirms that the
result of the balloting announced at the conclusion
of the 2306th meeting remains valid.”
Statements by representatives of outgoing members
9. The PRESIDENT: As it appears that this may be
the last formal meeting of the Council for the curren!
year, I propose to call on members who wish to speak
before I adjourn this meeting.
10. Mr. MUa
LED0 (Mexico) (hterprctatiotf
,fkor,t Spcotish):
Mr. President, you have called US
tmvtlrrv this ~~f’tr~~mn fo :wlnnt R derision within

II

:I

~. ~.
lour competence concerninpl the date on which a mem= ber of thk International Co&t of Justice will be elected
-:to replace Judge Abdullah El-Erian, whose passing
‘saddens us. You have sought to res&e at the same
-~time, with the tact and skill that you have so frequently
shown, the matter relating to the inadvertent error
made in tallying the votes in the first ballot in the
election of five members to the Court on 5 November.

international relations and the political pressures
-stemming from bipolarism and hegemonism. My
country was put forward to take a Latin American
seat on the Council at a time of institutional crisis
threatening the Organization towards the end of the
thirty-fourth session of the General Assembly. Without hesitation we assumed the high responsibility
offered us to serve the international community, and we
have no regrets at having done so.

I 1. My delegation particularly thanks you for the care
that you have shown in dealing with this matter.
My Government’s request that the Council take a
decision on it was motivated solely by a concern to
safeguard the prestige of this body and to see that its
actions were worthy of respect. We agree that, in
principle, that mistake did not in any way affect the
final outcome of the voting, but we feel that only the
Council has the competence to confirm or ratify the
validity of its decisions. That has now been done
through a statement by the President, endorsed by all
the members, which is without a doubt a healthy
precedent which will help to enhance our authority.

17. The Secretary of State for External Relations
of Mexico emphasized here, as we began our work
[2/9&/t meeting],
the risks involved in autonomous
action by the Council and stated that for our country
membership of this body could be meaningful only if
the decision had been taken to act independently and
constructively. He pointed out that we were not joining
this body as allies, friends or enemies of anyone,
but in order to support just causes and to defend
principles.

12. We are far along in the year and our agenda is
brief. Thus, this meeting will doubtless close the
year’s work and is a propitious occasion for farewells, auld lang synes and good resolutions.
13. We shall hear a statement by the Secret-ryGeneral, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, who today is taking his
leave of the Council. We have lived through so many
hours with him and shared so many challenges and
hopes that the hour of leave-taking, of saying goodbye,
is a difficult one.
14. Mr. Secretary-General, you may be sure that what
you have done for the Organization and in it has been
a daily example of devotion and strict professionalism
with a high sense of duty. None of the major or even
the minor international problems of the last 10 years
was outside your notice; you paid attention to ali of
them; and there were more than a few crises which
weie attenuated or resolved because of your timely
and prudent intervention. Your image remains associated with the history of our time, and you take with
you the well-deserved gratitude of the United Nations
and the friendship of those who can call themselves
your colleagues. We wish you every success.
15. My delegation also must bid you all farewell,
because we are coming to the end of the mandate
entrusted to my country by the General Assembly.
After two years of sharing intense experiences with
other members of the Council, this is a time of genuine
emotion for those of 11swho have had the privilege
of taking par1 in the Council’s work on behalf of
Me- ice.
16. For 34 years-almost the entire life of the Organization-my Government did not consider the possibility of joining the Council, It felt that this body was
a ioo vivid reflection of the imbalance of power in

=

I/
i

18. Our experience in the Council, which I do not
have to rehearse now, has been highly positive. It has
shown us that, despite consti:utional limitations, strict
adherence to the principles of the Charter is compatible with the demands of political compromise
which are ineluctable in a body of this nature. This is
possible provided that there is a willingness to negotiate and as long as there is no fear of a rupture and as
long as our legitimate positions are not sacrificed in the
name of false unanimity.
19. I wish to bear witness to the progress signified
by the growing solidarity among the developing countries, permanent or non-permanent members of this
body. The policy of non-aljgnment and the innumerable
struggles of the Group of 77 are gaining an ever clearer
and more influential expression in the decisions of the
Council. Otherwise, it would noi reflect the aspirations
of the international community and would simply
become an anachronistic obstacle to the process of
making the United Nations more democratic.
-~
20. The highly regarded delegations of the German
Democratic Republic, the Niger. the Philiouines and
Tunisia are al&leaving. They;liie us, haveihared the
tribulations of this period and we can rightly call them
our classmates. With all of them we achieved a high
level of understanding and deepened our political and
human relations. May these links endure and increase
in other bodies and in renewed struggles.
21. To all those who will continue for a greater or a
lesser time here, we wish to express recognition of and
gratitude for their unquestionable diplomatic and
persoaal qualities, and we also wish to thank them fol
the cordial and respectful way in which the Mexican
delegation has been treated at all times. We shall
certainly work together in joint tasks in the future.
22. We wish to mention in particular Ambassndol
Jacques Leprette of France, who presided the Council

1,
I,
\

assures

n. My
nerican
1 crisis
-of the
.y Withsibility
and

we

lations
?- work
smous
Guntry
Snly if
:ly and
joining
nyone,
defend
do not
It has
;mstrict
T comeomise
rhis
is
,negoand as
.fin the

@lified
counzf this
e rable

:!earel
of the
ations
iimply

29s of
Zrman
‘6 and
&I the
them
1 high
d and
:i’ease
r ora

3.;’ and
: and
III fo1
‘J’ ican
~illall
r..

s:\dor
J’ liicil

when-our country joined it. He was most helpful to us
then, and it<s-a,_coincjdence,that
we are leaving
~together.mm~
~~~~~~~
~ ~~ -~~ ..~ ~~~

beginning of 1982, are to me both a consolation and a
guarantee of the quality of the contribution that they
will certainly make to the Council’s discussions.

23. Por a country with such a long past as Mexico
has, this has actually been but a day in our lives, but
one rich in learning. We hope that our second term
in this body has contributed, albeit modestly, to the
affirmation of the principles of justice which are the
very reason for the existence of the United Nations
and which some day must prevail over the recurring
dictates of force.

29. Finally, I must mention particularly the exemplary collaboration which develcped naturally and
continuously among the non-aligned members of the
Council. Their preparatory work together, in what is
known as the caucus room, made a particularly Positive contribution to the work of the Council as a
whole.

24. Finally, we trust that thanks to the responsible
and independent outlook of States, the Council will
fulfil its primary duty by working for peace and international ditente.
25. Mr. SLIM (Tunisia) (Lltcrprerutioitfrom
Fremh):
On 3 1 December, the mandate of Tunisia on the Council will come to an end. I dare to believe in the wisdom
of the world and its leaders in hoping that they will
respect what is generally called the end-of-the-year
truce and that they will spare us any fresh threat to
international peace and security. If that is indeed the
case, then this meeting will be the last in which Tunisia
will take part during its term as a member of the
Council.
26. Therefore I should like to express my emotion and
sadness at having to lose something from which I have
benefited for almost two years-the unique privilege
of rubbing shoulders almost daily with eminent colleagues whose experience and competence have
been for me a source of enrichment. I am deeply
grateful to them for that.
27. .To those among us who will still bear in 1982 the
heavy responsibility of maintaining peace and security
throughout the world. I should like to wish all the
courage and patience they will certainly need. They
may rest assured that, for my part, outside this body,
I shall be their spokesman and their defender whenevet
any impatience is expressed about the persistonce of
conflicts and tensions around the world. I shall bear
witness to the continuing efforts and the vast amount
of work-not always visible from outside-that they
untiringly do as members of the Council, showing
among other things their physical resistance.
28. To those countries like Tunisia, whose terms of
office come to an end this year, to our colleyues and
friends, the representatives of the German Democratic
Republic, Mexico, Niger and the Philippines, whose
personal qualities and spirit of friendship and cooperation I have come to value, I wish to say that the
perfect co-operation that developed among our delegations will, in other bodies, within the Organization
and elsewhere, continue with the same harmony and
fruitful results. The well-known talents and broad
experience of the representatives of Guyana, Jordan,
Poland, Togo and Zaire, who will be replacing us at the

30. We have learned that the great competence and
wide experience of our colleague and friend, the representative of France, Jacques Leprette, have led his
Government to appoint him to new and important
duties. While bowing to the imperatives of the diplomatic career and congratulating him on this fresh mark
of confidence, we cannot but express to him our
sincerest regrets at seeing him leave us. We shall miss
him, as well as his wise counsel. Indeed, we shall
always remember his personal contribution to our work
and his skill in finding the succinct and measured
formula, which have always been decisive factors in
guiding the Council. We wish him every success in
his new post.
31. At a recent private meeting, I had an opportunity
to tell the members of the Council how sure I was
that I was leaving this body having gained the benefit
of their friendship, as well as their counsel and experience. I would add today my certainty that the Council, this supreme body responsible for the maintenance
of international peace and security, is,’ despite the
criticism it sometimes has to endure, fully capable of
discharging that responsibility if only the sacred principles of the Charter remain the only basis for its
stands and its action.
32. For its part, Tunisia, which this year is celebrating
the 25th anniversary of its admission to the United
Nations, and which for all this period, has lived in
peace, without provoking or threatening anyone,
striving to promote friendship and co-operation with
all parts of the world, remains faithful to the purposes
and principles of the United Nations and more than
ever attached to the principles of the Charter, particularly that concerning the peaceful settlement of
disputes. In this spirit, during its term of ofice on the
Council, Tunisia has unswervingly sought to make ifs
contribution to the work of the Organization and to
the enhancement of the Organization’s prestige and
authority.
33. The attainment of this goal has been sought too,
with both faith and conviction and with determination
and skill, by the Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, over the last IO years-10 years in the service of
the United Nations in the defence of its principles, and
in the service of the international community fol
greater understanding among peoples and wider cooperation among States. The altogether remarkable

I

on the basis of the Charter. We are very gratified to
record that during our two-year term of office in the
Council, this-body has t&e!! a nulfiber ofco!!s!r@be
decisions.

job done by Mr. Waldheim, his firm and courageous
stands,-his resolute support for just causes, whether in
-the Middle East, in Africa or elsewhere, are things
which Tunisia, an Arab and African country, cannot
-but stress here before paying him the most cordial and
~slncere tribute to his lofty accomplishment~~~ and
limitless devotion,

40. Each of us is aware of why the Council has not
always proved able-nor is it always able, in factto discharge its responsibilities. The Council is not in
any wise to be regarded as a world government, nor
should any attempt be made to alter its functions to
fit that purpose. The Charter has vested in the Council
all the authority it requires for it to discharge the
functions vested in it. Making use of that authority
seems to me to be ace of the most fundamental factors
which will make for successful action on the part of
the Council.

34. In expressing its thanks and gratitude to the head
of the Organization as his term of office draws to a
close, the Tunisian delegation is convinced that
Mr. Waldheim will remain for the Organization a
heeded and sought-after counsellor in all matters
relating to international affairs and to peace and
stability in the worki. The Tunisian delegation is all
,the more pleased to pay him this tribute, since we are
convinced that his activities at the service of the Organization will be pursued with the same determination
and conviction by the new Secretary-General,
Mr. Javier P&ez de CuBllar.

41. The German Democratic Republic has twice had
the honour of occupying the presidency of this body.
We should like to avail ourselves of the opportunity
which is given us today to thank all our colleagues for
their co-operation. We are p :.:ticularly grateful to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, who has at
all times supported us with his advice and his actions
and whose tireless efforts have quite properly won
world-wide recognition. I am very pleased to say that
it was indeed a signal honour for me to represent the
German Democratic Republic for more than eight years
precisely during that term of office. May I, Mr. Secretary-General, offer you heartfelt wishes on your
birthday and wish you health and personal well-being
and the very best of everything.

35. The personal qualities of Mr. Wrez de CuelIar
and the lofty responsibilities he has held both within
his country and outside it, as well as the especially
important international missions with which he has
been entrusted within the Organization, leave no doubt
about his qualifications as a highly regarded interlocutor, respected by all, not only within the Organization but in the various capitals of the world. The
great sensitivity shown by Mr. P6rez de CublIar to the
crucial problems of our time-those of the third world,
on which today hang the balance and prosperity of
the entire world-is an additional cause for optimism
and confidence.

42. We should also like very warmly to thank the
Under-Secretary-General,
Comrade Ustinov, and all
his colleagues in the Secretariat for the very kind cooperation which we were able to rely on at all times.

36. May I express here to the new Secretary-General
our gratitude for his having inspired these feelings of
confidence and optimism, and extend to him our
warm congratulations and best wishes for every
success in the noble and difficult task awaiting him.

43. In conclusion, may I assure the Council that
the representative of the German Democratic Republic
intends always to do everything he can to support this
supreme body of the United Nations in the discharge
of its duties, including its prime responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security.

37. In closing, Mr. President, I would beg your
indulgence and that of the members of the Council
to convey the thanks of the Tunisian delegation to
the Under-Secretary-General for Political and Security
Council Affairs, Mr. Ustinov, to Mr. Ortner and to all
their co-workers fat the assistance and effective COoperation they have always given us. Our thanks go
also to the interpreters, translators and other Conference Services personnel.

44. Mr. President, once again I should like to express
to you our gratitude for your diplomatic talents, for
your skill in discharging the functions of President
of this supreme body. Our delegation admires you.
4.5. Mr. OUMAROU (Niger) (i/lrc~rp,rrcrric,I(
Jkm
Fre,lck): In a few days, the Niger will be leaving this
prestigious body, in whose work we have participated
for more than two years in very worthwhile deliberations which have contributed to the peace and security
of the world. For us, it is therefore the moment to take
a look back and to express a certain feeling of regret
-regret that soon we will have ;7 give up the respected
title of member of the Council, which we bore like a
banner and which in all areas has won us considcrntion
and deference; regret that we must leave a body that
we have frequented as a kind of club because its

38.

Mr. FLORIN (German Democratic Republic)
(ir~te,prathn~
flu/n Rmsion):
Since it is very likely
that this meeting will be the last one in which the
German Democratic Republic will participate as a
non-permanent member of the Council, I should like
to say a few words.
39. In keeping with the principles of the foreign
policy
of our Socialist State, the delegation of the
German Democratic Republic has bent every effort
to promote
the resolution of the items on our agenda
4

.tified
to
:e in the
4 IlIc!iye

has not
i factis not in
ent, nor
iions to
Council
fi.ge the
uthority
IIfactors
-part of

atmosphere- was so egalitarian and its debates so
responsible and harmonious; regret. finallv. ~that we
must leave when so many problems ;,etnain-and when
we were beginning truly to perceive the substance, the
limits and the glimmers of a solution.

1
I

t&e bad
is body.

ortunity
gues for
11 to the
1 has at
actions
-!y won
spay that
<cent the
h t years
Xr. Secbji your
:$-being

47. Equally, the Niger as a member of the Council went through the difficult and tense time when
52 Americans had to spend 444 days in captivity,
despite the pleas of the world and the constant efforts
of the Council, Historv will record that their %2ration.
although it was finally won through negotiations
outside the framework of the United Nations, nevertheless owes it to this body that positions were made
more flexible and resistance was overcome by energetic action and repeated initiatives.

iink the
&nd all
rind coztimes.
Cil that
.epublic
rort this
sc harge
!ity for
express
tits, for
.&dent
) ou.

‘I ,fhll
irll: this
cipatetl
&sliberx curity
10 take
F regret
$1jetted
e like a
e r,ation
d s,’ that
.u’-ic its

46. Nevertheless, in looking back briefly over the
past two years, the Niger can express pleasure that it
was present at, amongst other events, the independence of Zimbabwe; we are aware of how lona that was
debated in the Council when that country-was still
the rebellious Southern Rhodesia. Thai decolonization
is of course the work of the Lancaster House agreement, but it would never have resulted in such success
without the combined, vigorous and stubborn work
of the United Nations, particularly of the Council. It is
always a privilege and a pleasure to be present at those
crucial moments whelm certain milestones in history
are being laid. Today Zimbabwe is living in peace and
confidence, proof that this was a fine undertakinn
and well acc&nplished.

i
!

48. Finally, we participated in the consideration
of numerous crises, particularly in Asia, in South
Africa and in the Middle East. Sotne of those crises
are today virtually over, and we are very pleased at
that fact. But if others still smoulder and preoccupy
us, it is not because we have not made an effort to
deal with them. Thus, we very clearly rejected the
invasion of Afghanistan and have called for the withdrawal of foreign troops from that country. We also
condemned the actions taken bv Israel aeainst the
Palestinians, denounced the Israeli plan to make
Jerusalem the capital of the Hebrew State, requested
international status for that Holy City, demanded that
the Arabs be given back their lands which have been
occupied since 1967, shared the distress of Lebanon,
supported the efforts of that country IO pl’cserve its
territorial integrity, pleaded for all the States of that
region finally to live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries; and, of course, we have deeply
deplored the war between Iraq and Iran, which we still
regard as being truly useless and supertluous.
49. As for southern Africa, we have stated our attachment to the unconditional independence of Namibia,
as laid down in resolution 435 (1978), and we deeply
deplored the failure of the Geneva talks, which means
that this Territory still continues, as we reach the end
of the year 1981, to suffer South Africa‘s presence,
persecution and exploitation. We have al:;0 proclaimed

our opposition to the inhuman policy of ccpwrhcid,
which has orevented the black South Africali~maiority
from coming into-its own or recovering its dignit;.
We have rejected the policy of bantustanization,
expressed our solidarity with the South-West Africa
People’s Organization, the African National Congress
and the Pan Africanist Congress, and we have vigorously condemned South Africa for its acts of sabotage
and aggression against the front-line States.
SO. I should like now to express the gratitude and
appreciation of my delegation to all the present tnembers of the Council who did us the honour of giving
US their friendship and whose unanimous esteem
and active assistance helped us considerably in approaching the problems before us and evaluating the
facts. Special mention is due the permanent members
of the Council: Mrs. Kirkpatrick of the United States,
who has felicitously introduced a new sensibility in
the Council and whose frankness and firmness are
fully equal to the role of her great country; Mr. Troyanovsky of the Soviet Union, who is always very
attentive and obliging and whose forcefulness at all
times has aroused our admiration; Mr. Leprette of
France, whose courtesy has given us reassurance even
at the most difficult moments and who only raises his
voice to bring to the Council the wisdom and tact of
his prestigious country; Mr. Ling Qing of China,
discreet but effective. of whom one can sav that with
him China has resoldtely decided to make-its weight
felt in the United Nations: Sir Anthonv Parsons of the
United Kingdom, open-minded and pragmatic, whose
level-headedness and sureness of touch have always
tnade an appreciable contribution to the work of the
Council. From each of these representatives my delegation has learned a great deal which will certainly
inform our future contribution to the work of the
United Nations.
51. Finally, I should like to say a few words about
Mr. Waldheim, our dynamic Secretary-General who
will soon be leaving that offlice after having brilliantlv
and conscientiously discharged his functions f&
10 years, 10 years which have made an indelible mark
on the United Nations and of which the least we can
say is that they have considerably enhanced the
Organization’s prestige and universality. In discharging
his functions, Mr. Waldheim has been not only the
distinguished head of the United Nations, but the
servant and friend of all continents, of all peoples and
of all countries. Always ready to place himself at the
service of peace and understanding among nations,
he has carried out his task with grace, self-sacrifice
and dignity. Today, we can say that he fully deserves
the thanks of the *vorld and of all nations. I hope that
he will re8ard these words as expressing the sincere
and unfailing gratitude of the Republic of Niger.
52. In conclusion, I should like to address sincere
thanks to the members of the Secretariat entrusted
with Secrlrity Council affairs. Their contribution to
our work has always been appreciated, and my delegation is grateful to them for it.

c
53. Mr. YANG0 (Philippinesj: As this may be the last
~opportunity for my delegation to speak during our
--Iterm of membership on the Council, I should iiks to
~~ -express, on behalf of General Carlos P. Romulo,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Philippines, who
headed the Philippine delegation to the Council during
the months of July 1980 and September 1981, our
deep appreciation and gratitude for the opportunity
afforded us to serve on the Council.
54. I must acknowledge that it was a sobering experience fnr us to work with all the members of the Council ovel the past two years. The co-operation extended
to my delegation and the spirit of harmony and unity
we witnessed in the cause of the principles and objectives of the United Nations will not easily be forgotten.
We did our best to work for the sake of those principles
and objectives and to contribute what we could,
conscious always of our responsibility as a member of
the Council to discharge our mandate of preserving
and maintaining international peace and security.
Clearly, we treasure in our hearts the many experiences
we have gaineci by virtue of our membership on the
Council. We have been afforded the rare opportunity
of participating in discussions on major questions
affecting the work of this important organ of the United
Nations. We have been privy to the anxieties and
apprehensions of the Council in difficult circumstances. We have benefited enormously from all
those.experiences.
_~
_
55. We feel that it could be said that we have done
our duty, and so today we bid farewell to our colleagues
on the Council with a feeling of self-satisfaction and
of great friendship for you, I&. President, and for all
our esteemed colleagues and our co-workers in the
Secretariat, all of whom have helped the Council to
discharge its responsibilities.
56. We understand that the Secretary-General will
make a statement before the Council adjourns. In that
connection, we should like to make some brief remarks.
For the past 10 years, the Secretary-General, Mr. Ktrt
Waldheim. has been at the forefront of the Organization in its efforts to solve the many complex and nagging
problems confronting the world. Mr. Waldheim not
only has served with the utmost skill and competence,
but also has contributed much towards the achievement of the lofty principles for which the United Nations was created. He leaves an indelible imprint on the
Organization, a body composed of numerous countries with diverse interests and concerns. Yet he has
skilfully managed to reconcile those divergent interests
and to echo those concerns in an effective and graceful
manner. He has always been sensitive to the genuine
aspirations of the developing countries. For those
reasons, we owe him a profound sense of gratitude.
His love for the Organization truly reflects his staunch
commitment to the cause of universal peace and
understanding among all countries and peoples.
As he leaves us, we wish him success in his future
endeavours.

57. Mr, LEPRETiTE (France) (iWvpWrrifvf
fion
&VI&:
Although I represent a country which is not
an outgoing member or’ the Council, I should like-to
sav a few words now that the time has come for me to
leave the Council. They are words of gratitude.-gratitude to you, Mr. ~President, for your mastery of the
function which you assumed so &ort a time ago: your
career is already moving on a rising curve of success.
On behalf of the Group of Western European and
other States, I had the pleasure and the honour to pay
a tribute to you, Mr. Secretary-General, during a
memorable and solemn ceremony last week in the
General Assembly.’ I should like to express my gratitude also, and above all, to you my dear colleagues,
who for five years have given me your co-operation,
your friendship, your support. I recall that, as Ambassador Miinoz Ledo mentioned just now, I was President of the Security Council when those of our friends
who are leaving us today joined the Council to give
us the benefit of their experience and their assistance.
You have bid me farewell in such warm terms that it
would be pleasant to remain to hear more.

info!
=colI
011 t
act \

1

-Sh

Artic
of tll
prob
Cout

58. I should like to thank the officials of the Council,
as well as their assistants, who have helped me throughout these years. I thank the interpreters and translators
who have made my statements intelligible when they
might not have been, the verbatim reporters, whose
patience is endless, and others who work silently and
efficiently for the Council. I also thank all those I have
overlooked, who will, I hope, forgive me. To all of you,
at the time when my five-year mission is coming to
an end, I should like to say that the experiences I have
had in the United Nations, in the service of peace,
have been the most stimulating and engrossing of my
entire diplomatic career.

65.
in th
elemi
to 111~
and z
cil 01
ciatel

,

66.
numl
evokl
in set
the g
an en
Secrf
speec
and I
forrm
opera
peacf

I

67.
and I

59. I wish to ex.tend to all~of you my warmest wishes
for the future. Farewell.
60. The PRESIDENT:
General.

I now call upon the Secretary-

Statement by the Secretary-General
61. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Let me at the
outset express my profound gratitude to the members
of the Council who have spoken today for the kind
words they addressed to me. Their remarks are indeed
heartening to me and reflect the close co-operation
that has always existed between the Council and me
during my term of office.

64.
dent
of t
elem
is cc
very
avail
to hi
such
any
offer
the s

has rig
ularly

62. Since this may well be the !ast time that I have
the opportunity to address thu Council, I should like
to con&de by making a few remarks on the work of
the Council and, in particular, on the relationship
between the Council and the Secretary-General.

and
Natio
again
extrer

63. In the IO years that I have been Secretary-General, I have derived great satisfaction from the close
working relationship I have always enjoyed with the

6X. ’
intern
adds
the e\

;Council and its members.. Especially in times of
-gathering tension and crisis, it is essential that this
-=close relationship be maintained, not only in order to
avoid misunderstandings or to keep the Council fully
informed of developments but also to ensure that the
Council, on the one hand, and the Secretary-General,
on the other, complement each other’s actions and
act with unity of purpose.
64. 1 have always kept in close touch with the President of the Council on current matters. The President
of the Council exercises an extremely important
element of leadership, especially when the Council.
is confronted with difficult problems. It is therefore
very necessary that the Secretary-General make
available to the Council the information that is available
to him, any suggestions that he may have for obtaining
such additional information as may be required and
any informal advice that he may find appropriate to
offer for dealing with current difficulties. Sometimes
the Secretary-General himself can take certain actions
-short of, or including, formal notification under
Article 99 of the Charter-which
further the purposes
of the Council and can contribute to the solution of
problems. At such times also it is essential that the
Council and the Secretary-General act in concert.
65. The development of the system of consultations
in the Council has, I think, provided a useful new
element in its work. It has also proved very helpful
to me, both as a means of keeping the Council informed
and as an informal means of consulting with the Council on action to be taken. I have always highly appreciated those consultations; I thiok they constitute
great progress in the Council’s working methods.
66. In the past 10 years, we have been through a
number of serious crises. The Middle East war of 1973
evoked a highly effective response from the Council
in securing the cessation of hostilities and putting on
the ground a peace-keeping force. That episode was
an excellent example of the way the Council and the
Secretary-General and his staff can act together and
speedily in a dangerous crisis. That episode had another
and broader result in providing the occasion for the
formulation of a working basis for peace-keeping
operations which has proved very useful in subsequent
peace-keeping operations.
67. I do not wish to make a list of all the important
and rather difficult questions with which the Council
has dealt in the last 10 years. I would, however, particularly single out the crisis in south I.ebanon in 1978
and the subsequent establishment of the United
Nations Irrterim Force, and also the Council’s handling,
again in concert with the Secretary-General, of the
extremely difficult case of the hostages in Iran.
68. The Council is a good example of an evolving
international institution. Each chapter of its history
adds something: to its experience and contributes to
the evolution of its working methods :u~tl reputation.

That is why the actions that the Council takes or, on
occasion, fails to take both create precedents of vital
-importance for its future authority and effectiveness,
As I said in my farewell statement to the General
Assembly,’ the maintenance of international peace
and security is the primary function of the United
Nations-a goal of which we must never lose sight.
69. It has therefore been a particular privilege and
challenge to me to play some part in the evolution of
this extremely important organ of the United Nations.
I like to think that whatever small contributions we
may all have made during this period will add something useful to the structure of peace which we are
trying to build in the United Nations.
70. May I conclude by expressing to you personally,
Mr. President, and to all the members of the Council
my warm appreciation for your co-operation and most
of a11for your friendship. You personally, Mr. President, have shown great skill, clear-headedness and
objectivity ir dealing with an unusual number of vev
complex and difficult questions. I referred to them
only recently during the luncheon that you so kindly
gave for us. I think the United Nations is lucky to have
people of your calibre-and, if I may say so, especially
young people of your calibre-to serve it, I wish you
and all my friends in the Security Council all success
in your vital task.-~
.;~-~
- ---Statement by the President
71. The PRESIDENT:
The life of the Security
Council moves in rapid annual cycles, beginning each
January and ending in December. In January the
Council welcomes new members, and in December
it has to bid farGwc$l to the outgoing non-permanent
members.
72. This December we feel even more acutely the
pains
of separation, not only because five non-permanent members are leaving the Council and two of
our senior colleagues are departing from New York
altogether, but also because the Secretary-General is
taking leave of the Organisation after a decade of very
distinguished and dedicated service.
73. I should therefore like to take this opportunity to
pay a very special and well-deserved tribute to our
friend Mr. Kurt Waldheim.
74. When the history of international relations over
the last decade is written, the name of Mr. Waldheim
will be associated with the most important events
of that period. Indeed, I cannot think of any major
international concern of our time in which the United
Nations unde: Mr. Waldheim’s leadership has not left
an enduring impact. Mr. Waldheim’s masterly use of
quiet diplomacy has turned that art into a most effective
tool for resolution of conflicts. He never left a stone
unturned in his efforts to weave a common thread of
understanding between those with otherwise con-

.

-flitting interests, His personal compassion enabled
lihn to understand better the enormous suffering that
~~ -afflicts our world. Under Mr. Waldheim’s direction,
the United Nations has made great strides in its efforts
-to alleviate this suffering by extending generous help
to many of our nations in the fields of economic and
social devclopmcnt, disaster relief and health care.
75. Coming as I do from Africa, I cannot forget that
it was durhrg this last decade that the peoples of Africa,
with the encouragement and support of the United
Nations, were able to dismantle some of the most
entrenched bulwarks of settler colonialism on that
continent. Mr. Waldheim has been a reliable and
consistent friend of Africa,
76. Mr, Waldheim, you have served the international
community well. With a quiet determination and a
sturdy spirit, you have borne 10 years of exacting
service with remarkable grace and good cheer. A
decade ago you came to the service of the United
Nations as a diplomat from Austria; today you leave
the Organization as a statesman who belongs to the
world.
77. I wish you and Mrs. Waldheim many blessings
and a lot of happiness in your new life.
78. I must say a word about two of our senior colleagues who have been true pillars of the Council.
They not only are leaving the Council now but will
soon be departing from the Organization altogether.
Ambassador Jacques Leprette of France has represented his country in the Council for five years. He
will soon leave New York to take up the important
tasks of representing his country in Brussels, another
hectic centre of multilateral diplomacy. Ambassador
Peter Florin of the German Democratic Republic, after
representing his country at the United Nations fat
eight years, two of them spent in the Securitv Council,
will soon return to Berlin to continue his-important
functions as Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
his country. We wish both of them all success in these
important endeavours. I am sure that, as they have
done in New York, in their new responsibilities they
will continue to build bridges among the countries and
peoples of the world.

79. 1 am sad to see that no less than four of my colleagues in the non-aligned caucus whose friendship and
solidarity have been a constant source ofstrength to me
are leaving the Council this month,
80. -1 shall miss the benefits of Ambassador TaIeb
Slim’s wide experience and seasoned judgement. I have
said this before, but I do not mind repeating it now,
that I remain grateful to him for his help, which has
made my present tasks more bearable. I shall always
remember with admiration Ambassador Yango’s
steadfast commitment, his generous spirit and his
patient understanding in difficult times. We shall
miss the contribution of the only delegation within
the non-aligned caucus which is an original signatory
of the Charter of the United Nations. I cannot forget
the kindness of my dear brother Ambassador Id&
Oumarou of the Niger. From the outset he took me to
the quiet shade of the baobab tree and there, like a
good African elder, he initiated me into the ways of
the Council. I have learned much from his wisdom and
example. I know that this is only the beginning of our
long common journey in the service of Africa. I shall
miss very much the valued advice of Ambassador
Porfirio Muiioz Ledo of Mexico. His boundless energy
and probing mhrd were always a rich source of inspiration to us all. He has embodied so well the tradition of
ideas and innovation which is the heritage of his great
country.
81. Finally, may I say that 1 look forward to I January 1982, when I can pass 011 my present responsibilities to my good friend Ambassador Oleg Troyanovsky of the Soviet Union, whose broad shoulders
are so much better suited to carry the delightful burdens
of this office.
82. I wish you all very happy and restful holidays.
71re m?elirlg ,‘mse (115.45 p./ti.

NOTES

.
