S/PV.7694

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7694th meeting

Tuesday, 24 May 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aboulatta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Egypt)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Seck
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
United Nations-African Union peace and security cooperation: Chapter VIII
application and the future of the African Peace and Security Architecture
Letter dated 9 May 2016 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2016/428)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-14510 (E)
*1614510*

S/PV.7694

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/428, which contains a letter dated
9 May 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Egypt to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a concept paper on the item
under consideration.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security

I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.

United Nations-African Union peace and
security cooperation: Chapter VIII application
and the future of the African Peace and
Security Architecture
Letter dated 9 May 2016 from the Permanent
Representative of Egypt to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2016/428)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Australia,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Botswana, Brazil, Canada, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Ethiopia,
India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy,
Portugal, Kazakhstan, Montenegro, Morocco, the
Netherlands, Nigeria, Pakistan, Romania, Rwanda,
South Africa, the Sudan, Sweden, Turkey and Thailand
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; His Excellency Mr. Téte António,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations; Mr. Haile Menkerios, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to the African Union and
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Sudan and
South Sudan; and His Excellency Mr. Macharia Kamau,
Permanent Representative of Kenya and Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. João Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.
2/57

begin

24/05/2016

its

Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Secretary-General, I wish to thank Egypt and you, Sir,
for bringing us together today for this timely discussion.
I will limit myself to making four points.
First, on this tenth anniversary of the annual
consultations between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council, we should
look back over those 10 years and measure the progress
achieved to strengthen our partnership in maintaining
peace and security on the continent. Indeed, in their
first joint communiqué of 2007 (S/2007/386, annex),
the Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council committed to the development
of a stronger and more structured relationship, and
underlined the particular importance of support for the
operationalization of the African Peace and Security
Architecture (APSA).
Ten years later, I am glad to bear witness to the
fact that one of APSA’s key pillars, the African Standby
Force, is about to be declared operational at the African
Union Summit in July. This progress has made been
through a series of phases in the context of the socalled African Capacity for Immediate Response to
Crises and on the basis of a strong collaboration with
the United Nations in the development of key policy
and guiding documents, as well as at the practical level
in the planning for the AMANI Africa II Field Training
Exercises, all of which were key milestones in the
operationalization of the African Standby Force.
The Secretary-General has repeatedly underscored
that strengthening global and regional partnerships
is absolutely critical, especially in Africa, where the
United Nations clearly must continue to work very
closely with the African Union to maintain peace
and security on the continent. But it is only through
concrete instances of collaboration that progress in
building mutual trust becomes tangible, leading to an
upgrading of the level of cooperation. This brings me to
my second point. Several milestones have signaled this
16-14510

24/05/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

change of nature in the partnership between the two
organizations on peace and security matters.
First, by issuing its new road map for the African
Peace and Security Architecture from 2016 to 2020,
the African Union has clearly moved away from
ad hoc activity-based responses towards a more
strategic position.
Secondly, the African Union and its regional
economic communities and mechanisms have
significantly strengthened their capacities over the
past decade, while seeking to leverage the comparative
advantages of each organization and consistently
recognized the primary responsibility of the African
Union for the regional mechanisms. African regional
partners are involved in peace efforts across the
continent, often facing significant human costs, as
illustrated by the case of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM).
Thirdly, as Council members know, a joint United
Nations-African Union framework for an enhanced
partnership in peace and security will be signed by the
Secretary-General and the African Union Commission
Chairperson in 2016. In that respect, the United NationsAfrican Union relationship is graduating from an earlier
support-and-capacity-building model. The partnership
is much stronger now, based on a common vision of
purpose and the efforts to be undertaken. Indeed, the
strategic partnership has made considerable progress
through its specific coordination arrangements. This
can be clearly in the Joint Task Force developed as a
cooperation mechanism between the decision-making
bodies of both secretariats to manage conflict
prevention and peacekeeping.
This has led to some important decisions, including
the recent establishment in Addis Ababa of a joint working
group on sustainable financing; the effectiveness of
AMISOM, particularly in relation to command and
control; and support for the Somali National Security
Forces, in the context of the upcoming elections and
the reduction of European funding. More generally, the
Joint Task Force has increasingly encouraged proposals
to help the African Union and the United Nations
coordinate messaging. Members will have noted the
recent increase in and regularity of joint communiqués
on issues in which we have a shared interest. There has
also been far more information-sharing, joint analyses
and follow-up of developments on upcoming elections
or crisis situations in Africa.

S/PV.7694

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
example, the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has been lending support to the African Union-led
facilitation efforts led by Mr. Edem Kodjo. Beyond
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United
Nations and the African Union have maintained a
strategic engagement between the Office of the Special
Envoy for Sudan and South Sudan and the AU HighLevel Implementation Panel aimed at advancing a
peaceful resolution of the outstanding issues between
the Sudan and South Sudan, where the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the High
Representative of the African Union, former President
Konaré, are working closely together and with the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission to advance the
implementation of the Peace Agreement.
My third point relates to the trend of growing
cooperation between our two organizations on the
ground, including, as I have said, the planning and
management of peace support operations and support
for greatly increased African Union institutional
capacity in this regard. This area of cooperation has
been the most active of our partnership recently.
Specific achievements in these areas include, as I
have already mentioned, support for the development
of AMISOM strategic concepts of operations and the
drafting of revised strategic directives for AMISOM
leadership. We have also made strenuous joint planning
efforts to ensure the deployment and management of
the African-led International Support Mission in Mali
and the African-led International Support Mission for
the Central African Republic. All of that was followed
by transition planning to facilitate a smooth hand-over
from the African Union to the United Nations.
Turning to Somalia, cooperation with the African
Union is clearly a cornerstone of our collective efforts,
and remains a model of partnership that we should
tirelessly try to improve and enhance. We will therefore
continue to work together with Somali leaders to bring
the country out of the conflict that has plagued it for
over two decades and make decisive progress towards
peace. In this year of elections, it is more important
than ever to work hand in hand. Once again, we remain
fully committed to supporting AMISOM.
The African Union, directly or not, is the most
important partner of the United Nations when it
comes to peacekeeping. Three simple statistics will
serve to illustrate that fact. Out of 16 United Nations

16-145103/57

S/PV.7694

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

peacekeeping missions, 9 are deployed in Africa;
80 per cent of all our uniformed peacekeepers serve in
Africa; and more than 50 per cent of all contingents
throughout the world come from African Union member
States. That serves to demonstrate the absolute need for
a strong partnership to be able to put an end to all those
conflicts and provide support for peacebuilding.
I have no doubt that the Security Council will join
me in expressing profound gratitude to all of the African
countries that are contributing with troops and police to
peacekeeping operations. They are working relentlessly
and with courage in incredibly difficult circumstances
to restore peace and stability in volatile environments,
risking their lives every day — as we unfortunately
see all too regularly from the painful statistics, as we
mentioned to Members States last week during the
annual meeting on Blue Helmets. We should therefore
pay tribute to their efforts and to the memory of those
who have made the ultimate sacrifice. We, the United
Nations and the African Union, need to relentlessly
pursue our efforts to provide our peacekeepers with the
necessary training and equipment to strengthen their
security and improve their performance, all the while
ensuring that they adhere to the highest level of conduct
and discipline expected of them and observe the values
and principles that our respective organizations are
committed to.
That brings me to my fourth and final point, and I
shall conclude quickly. With a view to further enhancing
all those efforts and our partnership, the SecretaryGeneral has called for more predictable and sustainable
financing and support to African Union peace support
operations authorized by the Security Council. I am
pleased to inform members that the United NationsAfrican Union joint review on financing and support
to African Union peace operations will be launched
tomorrow, when a technical seminar will begin by
evaluating the various United Nations models of support
to date. That will feed into the process carried out by
the High Representative for the African Union Peace
Fund, Mr. Donald Kaberuka, to enhance predictable
financing.
A review of re-hatting experiences in Mali and the
Central African Republic has shown that predictable
financing remains critical to the success of transitions
from African Union peace operations to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. The review also confirmed
the fact that no support modality is sufficient on its
own. In that regard, there is a need to pursue efforts to
4/57

24/05/2016

optimize the full range of support modalities, including,
as I mentioned at the beginning of my statement, the
timely operationalization of the African Standby
Force. Let us bear in mind that this is a critical issue
in strengthening collective security together. A more
effective African Union, as a regional arrangement
under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
will make it possible for the United Nations itself to
further and better respond to situations on the ground
and the needs of Member States. Ultimately, financing
is part of a broader partnership. We therefore remain
firmly committed to support all the efforts of the
African Union to build capacity on mission planning
and support, as well as standards and performance.
Once again, financing is part of that global vision.
The President (spoke
Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. António:
Mr. António (spoke in French): At the outset, on
behalf of the African Union Commission, allow me
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your country’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I also commend you on your initiative
to convene this timely open debate a day after the
tenth annual consultative meeting between the African
Union Peace and Security Council and the Security
Council of the United Nations, as well as on the eve
of the fifty-third anniversary of the establishment of
the Organization of the African Unity, forerunner of
the African Union. I also welcome the presence in
New York of the members of the Peace and Security
Council, a delegation led by its Chair, Ambassador
Mmamosadinyana Molefe, Permanent Representative
of the Republic of Botswana to the African Union.
The increasingly important role of regional and
subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security is a major feature of
the post-Cold War international security landscape.
Regional organizations now have a central place in
the international security architecture and are viewed
as key elements of security in their respective regions.
That reality is nowhere more evident that in Africa. The
transition from the Organization of African Unity to the
African Union (AU) was certainly the most remarkable
development in Africa, given its major implications
it has had at the international level. In that context,
the development of the African Peace and Security
Architecture has made it possible for the African Union
16-14510

24/05/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

and its regional mechanisms to become major players
in international peace support missions. They are the
first responders to security crises and armed conflicts
and the initiators of political processes that have made
it possible to provide those operations with mandates.
They are also the largest troop contributors. That
recasting has been based on the significant changes
that have occurred in the African security landscape,
the evolution of which has been difficult to predict or
to control.
Those developments have had a positive impact on
the African Union-United Nations partnership over the
past ten years. The strategic relationship between the
African Union and the United Nations has continued
to grow with a view to building a more coherent and
effective partnership within the framework of Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and article
17 of the Protocol Relating to the Establishment of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union.
This strategic partnership has in particular allowed
our two organizations to maintain regular consultations
on issues of concern and of mutual interest in the area
of peace and security, where collaboration has been
the most extensive. Regular consultations between the
AU Peace and Security Council (PSC) and the United
Nations Security Council, along with the ever closer
coordination between the AU Commission and the
United Nations Secretariat, well illustrate the shared
will to foster greater synergy between the African Union
and the United Nations. In that regard, the convening
yesterday of the tenth annual consultative meeting
between the African Union Peace and Security Council
and the United Nations Security Council produced a
joint assessment of the state of the partnership between
the two Councils, 10 years after its establishment. It
highlighted the need for a profound reorganization
of this mechanism with a view to its readjustment,
readaptation and strengthening to ensure its viability
and its effectiveness.
Particular emphasis was placed on the founding
elements of a true strategic partnership that the PSC
wishes to build with the United Nations Security
Council, based on the following: the principle of
mutual respect, the taking into account of comparative
advantages of the two Councils, the need to adopt
methods of work that are clearly set out, orientation
towards action and results, and an approach having
a strategic and comprehensive character that truly
integrates all issues of peace and security in Africa.

S/PV.7694

There should be a spirit of shared responsibility,
cooperation and close coordination.
The peace operations review process conducted
by the United Nations last year also provided an
opportunity to review our relationship with a view to
ensuring greater flexibility and predictability and so
that we could guarantee sustainable financing for the
peace operations carried out jointly by the African
Union and the regional economic communities and
regional mechanisms in Africa. That undertaking was
all the more necessary because the African Union
and its regional mechanisms continue to play an
increasingly dominant role in the promotion of peace,
security and stability on the continent, notably through
the deployment of peacekeeping operations.
Indeed, if the peacekeeping operations of the
African Union are deployed effectively, they will be
able to better pave the way for the deployment of United
Nations operations, which in their turn could support
long-term stabilization activities in the countries
concerned. However, African Union operations still
suffer the lack of predictable, flexible and sustainable
financing and depend to a significant extent on the
voluntary support of international partners.
While it is true that the African Union very much
appreciates the support it receives from its partners, it
is also true that the lack of predictability, flexibility
and, increasingly, sustainability of financing has had
negative consequences for the effectiveness of operations
carried out by the African Union. In that regard, the
financial, operational and logistical difficulties of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
if appropriate responses are not found — to cite one
example — will certainly have negative implications
on the eve of decisive political and security schedules
for the future of the country. We are of the view that
AMISOM has added value as the first African Union
mission to combat terrorism, an experience that the rest
of the world could share.
The African Union believes that using assessed
contributions from the United Nations budget should
be considered a viable option in the spirit of burdensharing between the two organizations. Concurrently,
we are aware that it will also be necessary for Africa
to mobilize increased resources on the continent so
that it can finance its own peace operations. The Heads
of State and Government of the African Union have
made a commitment to finance about 25 per cent of

16-145105/57

S/PV.7694

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

the peacekeeping operations conducted by the African
Union. That decision will be gradually implemented
so that it reaches an optimal operational level by
2020. This will therefore mean that 75 per cent of the
budgets of missions carried out with Security Council
authorization will be supported by the United Nations
through assessed contributions. As Mr. Ladsous has
already said, Mr. Kaberuka, the special envoy of the
chair of the commission on the issue, will work towards
that objective.
It is appropriate to highlight once again that the
strategic partnership between the African Union and
the United Nations in the area of peace is in constant
evolution. We should ensure the optimal use of
opportunities and available resources, thanks to the
intervention of actors who can act with better advantage
on the ground in the search for solutions. The ultimate
objective is the prevention or the resolution of conflicts,
no matter how or when they emerge.
The President (spoke
Mr. António for his briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. Menkerios.
Mr. Menkerios: I thank you, Mr. President, for
the opportunity to address the Council in this open
debate on cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union in the area of peace and security. I
thank Egypt as President of the Security Council for
bringing us together today for this timely debate, and
for the discussions between the two Councils yesterday
as well.
While much progress has been made to address
conflicts in Africa, threats to international peace and
security in the continent remain real and numerous.
The findings and recommendations of the recent highlevel reviews of United Nations peace operations and
of peacebuilding architecture emphasize the imperative
for strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations and regional organizations, particularly with
the African Union. This is based on the recognition
that no single organization can succeed on its own
in addressing the challenges that confront us. The
United Nations values cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations. In the past decade, regional
and subregional organizations have gained greater
influence over conflict dynamics and regional politics.
My office, the United Nations Office to the
African Union, is a critical bridge in supporting and
6/57

24/05/2016

strengthening the rapidly evolving cooperation and
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union in peace and security. We are already reaping the
dividends of our partnership. Working closely with the
African Union and with regional economic communities
and mechanisms, we have made significant progress in
enhancing consultations, harmonizing positions and
jointly engaging in international efforts to avert open
conflict and to manage ongoing ones in many parts
of the continent. Increasingly, the United Nations has
been working hand-in-hand with the African Union
and regional mechanisms to stabilize volatile situations
throughout the continent, from the Lake Chad Basin to
Somalia, Burundi and the Sahel. The 2016-2020 road
map of the African Peace and Security Architecture
(APSA) emphasizes coherence and coordination across
all pillars of the APSA, and between the AU and its
regional mechanisms, and provides a coherent approach
for strengthening joint peace and security actions with
the United Nations.
In recent weeks, the United Nations and the African
Union have acted together to de-escalate political
tensions in the Comoros. Concerted United Nations
and African Union engagements with the parties in the
Comoros show the value of having the international
community speak with one voice on an issue to
encourage restraint and promote peaceful outcomes
to disputes. Those efforts should continue, and I am
convinced that they will.
In Burundi, we are working with the African
Union, the East African Community and other partners
to support the parties to engage in an inclusive
dialogue, the only way to resolve their differences in
a sustainable manner. The Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union need
to continue to work together to encourage Burundians
to find a durable solution to their crisis.
Yesterday the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the AU held their tenth annual
consultations. The two Councils met informally in
Addis Ababa in February, with a focus on the situation in
Burundi alone. We commend the growing relationship
between the two Councils, as it helps build synergies,
coordinate positions and promote the adoption of
resolutions that are mutually supportive. To enhance
the value of the growing strategic partnership between
our two organizations, the Secretariat is working
with the African Union Commission to systematize
working-level consultations, share information,
16-14510

24/05/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

support joint training and carry out joint exercises on
early warning and conflict prevention. As part of our
efforts, we are working on a holistic approach that will
elevate the partnership from an ad-hoc arrangement
to a more institutionalized approach to conflict
prevention, management and resolution. In that regard,
we are finalizing a joint United Nations-African Union
framework for an enhanced partnership in peace and
security. I am hopeful that the two Heads of the two
organizations will sign the framework before the end
of the year.
The report of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and the subsequent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/682) call
for a stronger overall partnership to ensure that the
Councils can draw on a more resilient and capable
network of actors, while continuing to stress the need
for the African Union to have access to predictable and
sustainable funding. The reports also call on the United
Nations and the AU to strengthen conflict prevention
and mediation capacities.
The African Union has built, and continues to put
in place, the African Peace and Security Architecture,
underpinned by the realization that conflicts are resolved
through political solutions. Our collective challenge is
to support and strengthen the Architecture, particularly
the African Standby Force and the African Union’s
preventive diplomacy and mediation capabilities. I am
more hopeful than ever that efforts to strengthen the
partnership between the African Union and the United
Nations will remain critical to the ongoing quest for
security and stability in Africa. I wish the Council
fruitful deliberations and look forward to the outcomes
of this open debate and suggestions on how we can take
them forward.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Menkerios for his briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. Kamau.
Mr. Kamau: I would like to begin by commending
you, Sir, for having organized this important and
timely open debate on the cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union. We appreciate
the detailed concept note (S/2016/428, annex) to guide
this debate. I also thank you, Sir, for having invited
me to brief this meeting in my capacity as Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). I would also like
recognize the presence of the members of the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union at today’s

S/PV.7694

meeting, and I too extend my welcome to them to
New York.
Over the past decade, the strategic partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union and
other subregional organizations in Africa has grown
significantly, in line with Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations. Our cooperation in the area of
peace and security has been critical to our collective
progress and achievements. Today’s debate provides
us an opportunity to review the status of the strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union. On 27 April, the Security Council and the General
Assembly adopted identical resolutions — namely,
General Assembly resolution 70/262 and resolution
2282 (2016) respectively — on the review of United
Nations peacebuilding architecture. Those resolutions
are comprehensive and far-reaching documents. They
have introduced the notion of sustaining peace and
the importance of national, regional and international
efforts aimed at preventing the outbreak, escalation,
continuation and recurrence of conflict. Those
resolutions have further strengthened the foundation of
our cooperation.
Current global realities include an increasing
number of violent conflicts, exacerbated by the
deepening refugee crisis, rising terrorist threats and
violent extremism. There is clearly a need to focus
on conflict prevention and addressing the root causes
of conflict. The primacy of politics should guide our
collective work in peace operations. We must not let
situations deteriorate into violent conflicts for us in
order to react with security or military measures.
We need to change our mindset away from military
engagements and towards the prevention of conflicts.
We can achieve that through horizon-scanning, shared
joint analysis, dialogue, mediation and accompaniment
in situations of crisis. We must re-focus our work on
conflict resolution rather than on conflict management.
That is the essence of our collective efforts for
sustaining peace.
The peace and security challenges that we face
are too extremely complex and interlinked for any
single organization to address them alone. They
call for collective action. To succeed in our goal of
sustaining peace, we need to reframe and reprioritize
our responses. We must never forget that peace is at the
core of that for which the Charter stands for. It must
run through all our collective efforts, ranging from
conflict prevention to peacebuilding, peacekeeping,

16-145107/57

S/PV.7694

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

reconstruction and, indeed, sustainable development.
That renewed approach to sustainable peace would
allow us to best adapt to today’s global realities. Rather
than wait until a crisis breaks out and then make a
default or template recourse in the form of a response,
we need to integrate sustaining peace in our security,
development and human-rights agenda. We feel that we
cannot emphasize that point enough.
The twin resolutions I just mentioned foresee a
Peacebuilding Commission that is proactively focused
on assisting countries to prevent conflict and sustain
peace. The PBC is expected to become a more efficient
and flexible convening platform for policy dialogue
and for availing all countries that seek the support of
the United Nations for achieving sustainable peace an
opportunity to work through that platform. We are fully
committed to making that a reality. In our commitment,
we will continue to strengthen national ownership
and leadership in our engagement, because we are
convinced that the responsibility for sustaining peace
is shared between the Government and all national
stakeholders, including youth, women and civil society.
The new resolutions on the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture also stress the importance
of the partnerships and cooperation between the United
Nations and the regional and subregional organizations,
in particular the African Union. The Peacebuilding
Commission has been working closely with the African
Union and the regional economic communities in
Africa to increase synergies, enhance coherence and
complementarity of our joint peacebuilding efforts.
For instance, we have been able to work closely and,
speaking in one voice, to complement our joint efforts
to sustain peace in Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, the Central
African Republic and Burundi. Similarly, over the
past year the Commission has increased its focus on
thematic, cross-cutting and regional peacebuilding
challenges.
The Commission held regional discussions on
peacebuilding in West Africa in January and April this
year. Those discussions provided a unique opportunity
to look at the growing cross-border challenges beyond
the confines of specific countries. The discussions also
centred on strategies to address the challenges that arise
when working with the countries in the region, as well
as when working within and in concert with the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the African Development Bank and
other international and regional actors. We are looking
8/57

24/05/2016

forward to further strengthening and deepening this
partnership in view of the new road map for the African
Peace and Security Architecture. We are aware that
this road map would provide a framework for practical
measures to reorient the African Union Post-Conflict
Reconstruction and Development Framework.
The Peacebuilding Commission intends to use the
momentum generated from these new resolutions, and
the commitment of the Security Council and the General
Assembly, to further enhance and institutionalize
cooperation with the African Union. We will aim to
arrive at an agreed framework for further consultations,
exchange of information and analysis, and opportunities
for joint initiatives aimed at sustaining peace in Africa.
I am planning to lead a delegation of the
Peacebuilding Commission to West Africa in mid-June,
including Liberia, Sierra Leone, Guinea and Senegal, to
draw attention to the peacebuilding priorities and needs
within the context of post-Ebola recovery. Our visit to
Senegal, the current chair of ECOWAS, will provide
an opportunity to discuss the regional peacebuilding
challenges and priorities.
As we work together to strengthen our partnership,
we also intend to leave no one behind. We must focus
on the inclusive participation of young people in our
peacebuilding efforts. It is evident that investing in
young people guarantees peace and security, as well as
development. It is our responsibility to provide young
people with the opportunity to play their rightful role in
peacebuilding and development.
Similarly, we must also acknowledge the
importance of women’s leadership and participation in
conflict prevention, resolution and peacebuilding. We
must particularly include gender-related issues in all
discussions pertinent to sustaining peace, and promote
the gender dimensions of peacebuilding, including
through the strengthening of women’s meaningful
participation in peacebuilding. Importantly, we also
intend to work very closely with Mr. Donald Kaberuka
in the context of the African Peace Fund. We also look
forward to working with him and to achieving greater
success in raising additional funds for both the African
Peace Fund and the broader Peacebuilding Fund of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
In conclusion, we must link our joint peacebuilding
efforts to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly 5 70/1) and the African Union’s
Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want. The opportunities
16-14510

24/05/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

contained in these mutually reinforcing and coherent
frameworks must be supported to achieve inclusive
growth, sustained development and peace and security
for Africa.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Kamau
for his briefing.
The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject
of today’s meeting. I thank Council members for their
valuable contributions to this statement. In accordance
with the understanding reached among the members of
the Council, I shall take it that members of the Security
Council agree to the statement, which will be issued as
a document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2016/8.
I shall now give the floor to the members of
the Council.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to begin by commending the Egyptian presidency of
the Security Council for organizing this open debate, as
well as for the concept note (S/2016/428, annex) that was
circulated in order to provide input for this discussion.
I would also like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Hervé Ladsous; the
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations, Mr. Téte António; the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General to the African Union, Mr. Haile
Menkerios; and the Permanent Representative of Kenya
and Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Mr. Macharia Kamau, for their briefings.
I also take this opportunity to highlight today’s
adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2016/8
on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security.
The growing number and complexity of current
conflicts presents a series of challenges. That is evidenced
by the continued increase in demand for peacekeeping
operations. In recent years, the number of Blue Helmets
deployed has reached an unprecedented level. The
great majority of peacekeeping operations — almost
90 per cent of uniformed personnel — are deployed in
Africa and, as Mr. Ladsous pointed out minutes ago,
over 80 per cent of the annual peacekeeping budget is
used there, often in situations where there is no peace
to keep and where there are a number of asymmetrical
threats posed by non-State actors whose relationships

S/PV.7694

with transnational criminal organizations have made it
very difficult to isolate and address problems.
These growing threats to international peace
and security are developing in a context in which the
financial resources of the United Nations in general,
and of Member States in particular, add another layer
of difficulty, requiring the greatest possible efficiency
in the use of those resources. Therefore, the need to
efficiently address the complexity of these threats and
to find solutions make partnerships with international
actors, in particular regional and subregional
organizations, increasingly important.
New threats to international peace and security, and
grave existing humanitarian crises require, now more
than ever before, the development of close regional and
global alliances that will make more effective responses
possible. Such alliances should respect the competencies
of each organization, maximize synergies and promote
complementarity. That is why we agree that now is the
time to discuss and agree on a clearer framework for
such cooperation, which is particularly urgent for our
ties with the African Union.
It is no coincidence that the recent reviews of the
United Nations peace and security architecture have
reached the same conclusion — that the challenges of
the twenty-first century are too broad and complex to be
addressed solely within the scope of the United Nations.
That is why it is necessary to revitalize the provisions
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
in order to more effectively guarantee international
peace and security. The review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture highlights the importance
of cooperation with regional structures. That includes
cooperation with the African Union as, nowadays,
all of the countries for which the Peacebuilding
Commission has country-specific configurations are
African countries.
In addition, at the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations it has been recognized that,
among other things, regional organizations have the
potential to offset the United Nations deficit in rapidresponse capacity. Similarly, the forces of the region
have on many occasions proved to be essential in
initially responding to crises and bringing to bear
important understandings of local realities. They also
provide a direct link in terms of influence and regional
political authority.

16-145109/57

S/PV.7694

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Nevertheless, we always need to ensure that there is
strict respect for the principle of impartiality. That has
at times been somewhat of a challenge given that, in the
close relationships that exist between different regional
entities, there can sometimes be a clash between the
national interests of the countries of the region.
The idea presented in the concept note for this
debate to take up the recommendations of the Panel
with regard to cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations is very timely, in particular
when it comes to strengthening the strategic alliance
between the United Nations and the African Union.
In that regard, my delegation views favourably the
Panel’s recommendation to ensure that the formulation
of peace-operation mandates should involve closer
collaboration. To that end, the Security Council and the
Secretariat should make a commitment to ensuring that
more dialogue and closer coordination takes place with
the relevant regional organizations before a mandate is
authorized. That is particularly true when a regional
operation has been deployed, or is about to be deployed.
In that contex, the Security Council should turn more
frequently to the advice and experience of regional
partners.
It would also be timely to assess the possibility
of gradually harmonizing the policies and norms that
regulate United Nations peacekeeping operations with
the norms applicable to other peace operations mandated
by the Security Council, especially with regard to the
protection of civilians. The relationship between the
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union should be further strengthened
through increased interaction and consultation so as to
make it possible to develop a common understanding of
conflicts and to formulate commons strategies.
The Ramos Horta report (see S/2015/446) indicates
that one of the major weaknesses of the current system
is related to the status of the financing of the strategic
alliance. Therefore, the United Nations and the African
Union should join forces to undertake joint efforts in
order to establish sustainable, predictable and flexible
mechanisms that are capable of supporting African
Union peace operations. It is also worth recalling that the
Report of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review
of the Peacebuilding Architecture (see/2015/490),
entitled “The Challenge of Sustaining Peace”, also
highlights that efforts in peacebuilding need to be
supported through the allocation of predictable and
sustained resources.
10/57

24/05/2016

I would like to express support for the principles of
cooperation that the High-level Panel proposed. Those
principles are the basis for a strategic partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union and
can also serve as a benchmark for future collaboration
between the United Nations and other regional
organizations. They include the process of adopting
decisions through consultation and a common strategy;
a division of labour based on respective comparative
advantages; analysis, planning, monitoring and joint
evaluation; an integrated response to the conflict cycle,
including prevention; and transparency, accountability
and respect for international norms.
Bearing in mind the significant existing challenges
that we face, actions aimed at strengthening regional
alliances should not undermine the participation and
contribution of non-regional actors to peacekeeping
operations deployed in Africa.
I would also like to highlight that the new African
Peace and Security Architecture road map for the
period 2016-2020 is an excellent tool that clarifies the
role of each actor involved in the peace and security
architecture on the continent. It establishes indicators
and specific objectives in five priority areas, namley,
conflict prevention, crisis and conflict management,
post-conflict reconstruction and peacebuilding,
strategic security and coordination and partnerships.
In conclusion, Uruguay would like to reiterate
its commitment to the process for the review of
peacekeeping operations. We are convinced of the need
for the recommendations of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations to be fully discussed as soon
as possible. The United Nations peacekeeping system
is still far from being prepared to deal effectively with
today’s complex and changing international scenario,
and it is our obligation to take urgent measures in
that regard.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the various briefers for their introductory
statements, which were very enlightening. I would
also like to thank Egyptian presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this important debate.
The Security Council has just returned from
Somalia. The operation deployed there — the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) — is the most
tangible example of cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union, but it is far from being
the only one. I will make three comments in that regard.
16-14510

24/05/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

First, regional organizations have become key
partners for the implementation of peace operations.
That is one of the main conclusions from the reports on
peace operations and peacebuilding. It is an irrefutable
fact. African organizations working in the context of
the African Union Peace and Security Architecture
are increasingly shouldering their responsibility in
the framework of Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations. Their political role in acting as
mediator and providing support has increased, as
illustrated, for example, by the role played by the East
African Community in Burundi and by the Economic
Community of Central African States in the Central
African Republic under the mediation of the President
of the Republic of the Congo. The latter made possible
the successful conclusion of the political transition in
the Central African Republic.
Those organizations also play a welcome military
role in complementing United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as shown during the transition from
the African-led International Support Mission
to Mali to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali; and from
the African Union-led International Support Mission
to the Central African Republic to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic; as well as in the specific
role played by African forces in AMISOM and in the
joint multinational task force on combating terrorism.
On behalf of France, I would like to pay tribute to
the African forces who every day serve peace on the
continent under conditions that are often very difficult
and at a heavy price.
I would like to add that, for the Security Council,
dialogue with regional organizations should become
a reflexive instinct. Such dialogue is in the interests
of all, and above all in the interest of peace. It should
enable us to forge a consensus that puts forward the
initiatives of the African Union or of a subregional
organization, when one exists.
Secondly, France would therefore like to encourage
a greater role and a growing recognition of the African
Union and other regional organizations in conflict
prevention, peacekeeping, and peacebuilding. France
welcomes the strengthening of the links between the
African Union and the United Nations through the
establishment of liaison offices in New York and Addis
Ababa. Another example is through institutionalizing
the annual exchanges between Security Council and

S/PV.7694

the Peace and Security Council of the African Union,
such as the one we held yesterday here in New York. All
those initiatives are essential.
At the bilateral level, France is one of the main
partners of the African Union in strengthening African
peace capacities.France contributes every year to the
training of tens of thousands of soldiers, with more than
29,000 African soldiers trained in 2015. Among those
trained by France and engaged in operations, nearly
30 per cent were deployed in AMISOM. France is also
deploying, in support of the African forces and United
Nations peacekeeping operations, national operations
in the Sahel and the Central African Republic, which
are financed by its national budget.
Our debate on cooperation with regional
organizations would not be complete if we did not
recognize the decisive role played by the European
Union, of which there are many examples. Since
2007, the European Union has financed AMISOM in
the amount of €1.1 billion. The European Union also
financially supports the African Peace and Security
Architecture. Many missions, such as the European
Union Capacity Building Mission, the European
Union military operation and the European Union
Training Mission, are deployed on the continent and
on its shores in support of African States. In terms
of regional organizations, there is a genuine strategic
tripartite partnership among the United Nations, the
African Union and the European Union, which is being
established with France’s full support.
Thirdly and lastly, in this context, we must continue
to engage with determination in strengthening this
strategic partnership. It is essential for the United Nations
to fully engage early on in defining a comprehensive
and coordinated crisis management framework,
both from the political and security viewpoints. The
example of the situation in Mali demonstrates this well.
The United Nations is intervening in a context in which
the regional dimension is crucial, following an African
Union operation and in support of the implementation
of a peace agreement that was negotiated in the region.
All of these dimensions are inextricably linked.
In this regard, the issues of transitions between
successive missions and coordination among
simultaneous missions are areas that require special
attention. In this connection, bringing those involved
up to United Nations standards, the training of regional
contingents and greater awareness on human rights

16-1451011/57

S/PV.7694

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

issues seem to us of utmost importance in the context
of United Nations peacekeeping.
Finally, the financial sustainability of military
operations remains a major concern. Today, the
African Union is heavily dependent on external
contributions to finance its operations. The goal is
for African organizations to be able to gradually take
over an increasing share of the funding of their action.
Presidential statement S/PRST/2016/8, which we have
just adopted, reflects the issues we are discussing
today. France is determined to continue its efforts
and cooperation with the United Nations and the
African Union, as well as all regional organizations, in
this direction.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I want to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate to
discuss the major issue of United Nations-African
Union cooperation. We commend your delegation,
Sir, for choosing to convene this meeting at this very
opportune time on the heels of yesterday’s anniversary
of the tenth joint meeting between the Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council.
This meeting also follows the most recent
Council mission to Africa, which was its third this
year. During its Somalia leg, Council members had
a valuable opportunity to see directly on the ground
and better appreciate a very decent pattern of African
Union-United Nations cooperation in the area of peace
and security, exemplified by the effective teamwork
of the African Union Military Observer Mission in
Somalia, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia and the United Nations Support Office in
Somalia. It also allowed us to identify inevitable
shortcomings and discuss the ways to address them.
We thank the briefers for their comprehensive
presentations, which gave us a dynamic picture of
lively cooperation between the two organizations. We
also welcome the adoption of presidential statement
S/PRST/2016/8 at this meeting.
From the outset, I would like to note that Ukraine
aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by the
observer of the European Union.
Over the past decade, the role of the African Union
(AU) and subregional organizations in promoting peace
and sustainable development among African States
has increased exponentially. The African Union has
demonstrated its ability to take the lead in the effective
12/57

24/05/2016

resolution of conflicts and its views and policies
on this matter are of particular value for the United
Nations. The launch of the African Peace and Security
Architecture and the establishment of its structures, as
well as the deployment of the African Union’s peace
support operations authorized by the Security Council,
are a clear testimony to the growing importance of
enhancing United Nations-AU cooperation.
In recent years, the African Union has proved to
be a valuable partner of the United Nations. On many
occasions, the African Union and its member States
have been able to step in promptly to help maintain
peace and security or bring in a measure of stability
in crisis situations. The African Union’s presence
also has the extra benefit of providing additional
political legitimacy and leverage to international peace
operations. We value very much the readiness of the
African Union to tackle problematic or sensitive issues
head on, especially when the United Nations is not able
to act expeditiously.
The African Union’s response to the crisis in
Somalia and Mali come to mind in this respect. Another
case in point in our view is the situation in Burundi.
There, my delegation believes that the deployment of a
robust and meaningful United Nations police presence
would be very much in accordance with our shared
goal of preventing a further escalation of this crisis. In
this light, we call for increased consultations between
the two Councils and the broader use of preventive
diplomacy tools and mechanisms, as envisaged by
resolution 1625 (2005).
One of our common threats is terrorism, especially
as we see the rise of new types of terrorism-related
threats to international peace and security. We call for
greater unity and stronger international partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
in combating this dangerous phenomenon, including
in particular through effective implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. It
is also important to enhance our cooperation to cut off
the sources of financing for terrorism and to prevent the
supply of arms to terrorists.
In recent years, we have seen progress in developing
the strategic relationships between the United Nations
and the African Union in the area of peace and security.
At the same time, we have to admit that challenges
remain and that more should be done to further
strengthen this relationship to effectively address
16-14510

24/05/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

common collective security concerns in Africa.In this
context, Ukraine welcomes the new African Peace and
Security Architecture road map 2016-2020, aimed at
greater coordination and cohesion between the United
Nations and the AU in fulfilling their priority tasks.
The presidential statement that was just adopted also
serves this purpose well.
Last year, the High-Level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations, in its report (S/2015/446), called for
the United Nations to deepen its strategic partnership
with the African Union through consultative
decision-making and common strategy. Therefore,
we look forward to the finalization in 2016 by the
Secretariat and the AU Commission of a joint United
Nations-AU framework for enhanced partnership in
peace and security. This instrument will provide a
blueprint for early and sustainable engagement between
our Organizations before, during and after conflict.
In the most recent United Nations-AU communiqué
(S/2015/212, annex), it was agreed to conduct a joint
field mission to a conflict situation or area in Africa,
to be identified through consultations during 2015.
However, such a mission did not take place and we look
forward to revisiting this effort in the course of 2016.
As we look at the African Union flag, we can see
the white colour representing Africa’s desire to have
true friends around the world. Africa can continue to
fully count on Ukraine as its reliable friend and strong
advocate of peace, democracy and development on
the continent. As Ukraine has applied for observer
status in the AU, we intend to use this perspective
and enhanced relationship with the African Union to
advance cooperation and dialogue on a broad range of
issues, including security.
To conclude, I wish to use this opportunity to
convey my cordial greetings on the occasion of Africa
Day to be observed tomorrow.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): I would like to begin
by expressing my sincere appreciation for Egypt’s
initiative in holding an open debate on this important
topic. I also thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, the Permanent Observer of
the African Union (AU), the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to the African Union and the
Permanent Representative of Kenya in his capacity as
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) for their
comprehensive briefings.

S/PV.7694

Today I would like to talk about ownership and
partnership. I would like to highlight the importance of
African ownership supported by effective partnership
through United Nations-African Union peace and
security cooperation.
The African Peace and Security Architecture
(APSA) is the central framework for the consolidation
of peace in Africa. APSA embodies the vision of
African solutions for African problems — in other
words, ownership. Since its creation, APSA has had to
adapt and adjust to complex developments in the field
of peace and security in Africa. Accordingly, the areas
of cooperation and coordination between the AU and
the United Nations have both grown and diversified.
In order to make APSA more effective under today’s
challenging circumstances, it is important to fully utilize
the cooperative strengths, expertise and knowledge of
the United Nations to promote these African solutions.
In this regard, the United Nations Office to the AU
(UNOAU) plays a critical role in the United NationsAfrican Union partnership by providing crucial
technical advice to the African Union Commission
(AUC) on matters of capacity-building and operational
support. United Nations-African Union joint planning
and management, supported by the UNOAU’s capacitybuilding efforts, have brought positive impacts to the
transitions from AU-led peace operations to United
Nations peacekeeping missions, such as from Africanled International Support Mission to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and from the African-led International Support
Mission to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic. Japan believes that further efforts by the
UNOAU to build institutional capacity in APSA are
crucial to bringing coherence to the consolidation of
peace in Africa.
That said, partnership with the UNOAU cannot
substitute for ownership on the part of the AU. The
African Union Mission in Somalia, authorized by
resolution 1744 (2007) pursuant to Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, is a good example of
such ownership.
The leading instruments of APSA are the regional
economic communities and regional mechanisms
for conflict prevention, management and resolution.
These building-blocks of APSA are in a position to
best understand the particular context behind any

16-1451013/57

S/PV.7694

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

conflict within its scope. This is why, for example,
the role played by the Economic Community of West
African States Mission in Guinea-Bissau has been
pivotal in maintaining security in that country. These
examples show the unique strengths and proficiencies
that regional and subregional organizations can bring
to conflict resolution in Africa, and which neither
individual countries nor the United Nations can provide.
The United Nations-African Union partnership
has the potential to provide even greater impacts on
the ground in the areas of conflict prevention and
peacebuilding. Japan believes that the impact of the
AU Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development
Framework and the African Solidarity Initiative can be
enhanced by coordinating the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission with the African Union as elaborated in
resolution 2282 (2016), on the review of United Nations
peacebuilding architecture. The UNOAU can also help
enhance coordination between the AU Commission and
the Peacebuilding Support Office.
When we celebrated the Golden Jubilee of the
Organization of African Unity/African Union in
2013, Japan reaffirmed that African ownership is the
unshakable foundation of development in Africa.
The year 2013 was also the twentieth anniversary
of the Tokyo International Conference on African
Development (TICAD) process. Ownership, as I have
highlighted today, is one of the underlying principles of
TICAD. It is Africa that knows Africa’s problems best
and Africans who are the keenest for a solution, and it is
Africa that will ultimately find the way forward. Japan
has full confidence in Africa’s capacities.
Africa is high on Japan’s diplomatic agenda this
year. In July, during our Council presidency, Japan
will hold an open debate on peacebuilding in Africa.
In August of this year, Japan, together with the AU
Commission, the United Nations, the United Nations
Development Programme and the World Bank, will
co-organize the TICAD VI Summit, which will be
hosted by Kenya, making it the first time in its 23-year
history that a TICAD summit is held on the African
continent. We will fully utilize today’s discussion in
our preparations for these events.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming Japan’s
strong commitment to ensuring peace and security
in Africa.
14/57

24/05/2016

Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today’s debate. I also
thank all our briefers for what they have just told us.
I want to underscore the United Kingdom’s
commitment to the links between the African Union
and the Security Council. I said it in the informal
session and I will say it here: when we cooperate, we
make a real difference. The corollary of that, of course,
is that when we do not cooperate, we both lose.
I want to focus my remarks on one particular
example of this. Others have alluded to it, but I wanted
to go into it in a little bit more detail, because it matters
so much. The example I have in mind is the cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
in Somalia. We touched on this subject in our formal
meeting yesterday, but our time was limited.
Last week, the Security Council saw at first
hand how our two organizations work together in
that country to make a real difference to the lives of
ordinary Somalis after a quarter of a century of conflict.
I must pay tribute to the men and women of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). The AMISOM
contribution to peace and security in the country and
the sacrifices it has made cannot be overstated.
I also welcome the contribution of the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS). UNSOS
logistical support has been crucial to AMISOM’s
successes against Al-Shabaab. Working together, they
are providing space for the political process, allowing
the Special Representative and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia to carry out their vital
tasks. We are now discussing how to reinforce this
within the United Nations.
AMISOM continues to play a vital role in
underpinning security in Somalia and keeping the
pressure on Al-Shabaab. In doing so, they are giving
the Somali national security forces crucial time to
develop so that those forces can eventually take up
the AMISOM mantel. That process now needs to
accelerate, in step with Somali’s political transition to
a federal future. But it is also critically important that
troop-contributing countries stay the course, with the
full backing of the Security Council. Early withdrawal
would put at risk the brave and significant investment
that they and regional partners have made in Somalia.
We all know that the long-term responsibility for
Somalia’s security rests with its own security forces. To
16-14510

24/05/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

succeed, they need the assistance of the international
community — assistance that can help them build
an inclusive and integrated Somali national army
and police force. Yet one of the most striking things
from last week’s visit was how slow, fragmented
and uncoordinated this effort can be. The Federal
Government must articulate clearly the needs and gaps
in support in order for donors to be able to help to the best
of their ability. We need those who pledge assistance,
training, equipment and funds to be transparent and
coordinated in their approach as well. That is the only
way to secure an effective, professional security force
that can take on a greater share of responsibility for
security in Somalia, and underpinning that effort
must be sustainable financing for the Somali National
Army. We must all encourage the efforts of the Federal
Government towards greater transparency, and paying
salaries on time is key to achieving that goal.
For all the gains of the past four years, it is clear
that there is much more work to do. The year 2016 is
critical for Somalia. It is a crucial milestone towards
the democratic, representative future that Somalis
so urgently and so desperately deserve. Just after the
Council’s visit to Somalia last week, the President
took a vital step towards that future by approving
the electoral model. I am pleased that the Council
could welcome that through a press statement agreed
yesterday. But that is just one step. Together, the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) need to stay the
course, so it is vital that the Council continue to support
both AMISOM and UNSOS to help deliver the electoral
process and security for all Somalis.
Let me close with one final, broader thought.
Somalia shows what we can achieve when our two
organizations work together and how important it is to
continue to do so. But we know that there is so much
more that can be done across Africa. Just think what
we could achieve with even stronger cooperation on
conflict analysis, on early warning and on mediation.
Our efforts are heading in the right direction, but there
is always room to do more. That means getting better at
standing up, managing and eventually closing African
Union-led peacekeeping operations, and as Hervé
Ladsous said, it means moving AU missions to a more
stable and sustainable financial footing. To do so, we
need to see the AU deliver on its own commitment to
contributing 25 per cent of AU mission costs by 2020,
on which basis the United Nations would be able to
regularize its own funding, which is in all our interests.

S/PV.7694

The work of Mr. Kaberuka, High Representative
for the AU Peace Fund, on a road map for meeting
that commitment is a very important step forward. We
look forward to seeing concrete proposals for greater
United Nations oversight of AU missions and greater
accountability. Through those steps, not only will
the finances of AU missions be regularized, but their
performance and accountability will improve. That
would make a substantial contribution to peace and
security in Africa and would have a lasting benefit for
so many people outside the Chamber.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): The convening of today’s
debate is timely, particularly with the presence in New
York of the delegation of the African Union Peace
and Security Council. We had a fruitful discussion
yesterday and listened attentively to its members’
expert knowledge on the situation in Africa. The
comprehensive and detailed concept note (S/2016/428,
annex) provides us with an insightful analysis, captures
the political dynamics and argues for greater synergies
between the African Union (AU) and the Council
in order to pursue our common endeavour in the
maintenance of peace and security in Africa.
I wish to thank all of the briefers for their
respective presentations, which as a whole further
augmented the need for closer collaboration between
the Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council. While we are encouraged by the significant
gains and successes achieved to date, it is obvious that
the common take from our regular deliberations on
African issues concludes with the glaring fact that both
sides would profit from a more effective and efficient
partnership. That calls for our active collaboration
on well-defined strategic objectives based on clearly
defined divisions of responsibility. Given our shared
assessments, calibrating appropriate responses together
would complement our collective efforts. In that regard,
comparative advantages, complementarity of mandates
and optimal use of resources and capacities must also
be taken into account.
Malaysia is pleased to join consensus on presidential
statement S/PRST/2016/8, which was just adopted.
The statement outlines measures in taking forward
the outcomes of the recently concluded peacebuilding
architecture review exercise, which is applicable to the
United Nations-AU relationship and the African Peace
and Security Architecture.

16-1451015/57

S/PV.7694

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

In aligning ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the delegation of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, I wish to add the following
points.
Managing conflict cannot prevail as a default
approach on the part of either the United Nations or
regional organizations, including the AU. The emphasis
on primacy of politics should compel us to move
towards a prevention-centred approach. To effect such
a shift, efforts should be directed towards preventing
conflicts from escalating into full-blown threats. In
that connection, United Nations and AU preventive
diplomacy measures and mechanisms should be more
coordinated and geared towards enabling the early
detection of potential crisis situations and by the early
sharing of information.
The review of the peacebuilding architecture
recognized the AU as a key partner of the
Peacebuilding Commission and provided further
impetus for collaboration between the PBC and the
AU on peacebuilding efforts. In that regard, a focused
engagement within the PBC and the AU Peace and
Security Council is welcome, and its outcome should
continue to fit into the broader United NationsAU dialogue. Events such as the recent high-level
meeting on the theme “Sustaining Peace: Mechanisms,
Partnerships and the Future of Peacebuilding in Africa”,
provided an early opportunity to unpack Security
Council resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly
resolution 70/262. Further opportunities towards their
implementation should be pursued.
The foundation and pillars underpinning the
African Peace and Security Architecture are strong
and forward-looking. A significant constraint in
realizing its full potential is therefore the lack of
necessary resources, particularly flexible, sustainable
and predictable funding. In welcoming African efforts
in that regard, we also believe that the United Nations
could assist further. In doing its part, Malaysia recently
pledged a modest contribution of 400,000 Malaysian
ringgit to the Peacebuilding Fund. We hope that it will
go towards supporting programmes and initiatives on
sustaining peace and stability in Africa.
Last but not least, we are further encouraged
to note the direct funding allocated in May by the
Peacebuilding Fund to the AU Commission to support
peacebuilding activities in Burundi as the first step
of such progress. That is a groundbreaking step to
16/57

24/05/2016

strengthen cooperation between the AU and the United
Nations in sustaining peace. The United Nations and
the AU have come a long way in their collective efforts
to build stronger cooperation. Lessons learned and best
practices on cooperation should be regularly shared
with a view to producing results oriented towards real
operational benefits on the ground. We stand ready to
contribute to that end.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
commend Egypt for its timely convening of this open
debate on the crucial matter of maintaining international
peace and security, United Nations-African Union (AU)
peace and security cooperation and the future of the
African Peace and Security Architecture.
Let me thank the Egyptian delegation for the
concept note (S/2016/428, annex) provided to guide
our deliberations today and our briefers for their very
concise and constructive contributions to this debate.
I also take the opportunity to welcome the African
Union Peace and Security Council presence in New
York to discuss strategic issues with the Security
Council, with a view to strengthening cooperation
between our organizations. That coincides with the
tenth anniversary of the annual joint meeting of the AU
Peace and Security Council and the Security Council,
which was held very constructively yesterday.
Tomorrow the African continent will celebrate the
fifty-third anniversary of the moment when 32 African
leaders expressed their determination to promote
the ideals of pan-Africanism, understanding and
cooperation among the African peoples, and to create
the conditions needed to establish and maintain peace
and security on the continent. However, the pledges
made at the time to establish justice and sustainable
peace in Africa have still not materialized to this day
and remain aspirations rather than reality for a good
number of African countries and peoples.
The African continent is currently hosting 9 of the
16 peacekeeping operations authorized by the Security
Council, consisting of more than 90,000 troops and
supported by more than 15,000 personnel. The African
Union Peace and Security Council has deployed a
considerable number of troops under Security Council
mandates, which must render the two bodies’ dialogue
and cooperation necessary and more coordinated and
effective, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. Last year, the African
Union deployed a road map for the African Peace and
16-14510

24/05/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Security Architecture for 2016 to 2020 as a strategic
document, putting particular emphasis on deliveries
by all stakeholders involved in the Peace and Security
Architecture, including partners and external actors.
The road map aims to cover the various phases of the
conflict cycle through five strategic priorities — conflict
prevention, conflict management, post-conflict
reconstruction and peacebuilding, strategic security
issues, and coordination and partnerships.
How can the Security Council support the successful
implementation of those strategic priorities? And how
can the outcomes of the 2015 reviews that the United
Nations has conducted of its peacekeeping operations
and architecture, and of the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, be
coordinated with implementation of the African Union
road map and, more broadly, with the African Peace
and Security Architecture? In trying to give answers
to those questions, we will focus on the three phases of
the conflict cycle — prevention, management and the
post-conflict period. With regard to the prevention of
conflict, the institutions and mechanisms of the African
Peace and Security Architecture, such as the Peace and
Security Council and the early-warning systems at both
the continental and regional level, play a critical role
through preventive diplomacy, mediation and electoral
observation missions aimed at defusing any potential
threats or risks to peace and security.
The 2015 reviews underscored the importance of
addressing the root causes of conflict by involving all
segments of society, promoting inclusive development
and human rights and protecting fundamental individual
and collective freedoms. They also emphasized the
importance of addressing the specific concerns of young
people, in order to promote harmonious development,
and of ensuring women’s equal participation in
conflict prevention efforts and increasing their role
in the decision-making process. During yesterday’s
discussion of the partnership between the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council, a consensus developed on the need to improve
their collaboration in analysing and assessing threats,
as well as their coordination of preventive diplomacy
and mediation efforts. When, despite the best efforts of
national stakeholders and the international community,
a conflict cannot be avoided, the Security Council and
the Peace and Security Council have additional reasons
to join forces in helping the parties to that conflict to
reach a political agreement in order to put an end to the

S/PV.7694

hostilities and, if necessary, to resort to the use of force,
in accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter.
Last year, the United Nations engaged in a review
of its peacekeeping operations. The High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations, chaired by
José Ramos-Horta, former President of Timor-Leste,
presented a comprehensive report (S/2015/446) focused
on the changing nature of conflict, the evolving mandates
of peace operations, managerial and administrative
arrangements and difficulties, planning, partnerships,
the protection of civilians and human rights, and special
political missions. In particular, the African Union
Peace and Security Council was extensively consulted
and given an opportunity to lay out its common position
and focus on the priorities for regional institutions in
managing crises and conflicts — recognition of the
Security Council’s authority to authorize enforcement
action and the need for constant consultations and
exchange of information related to ongoing crises and
conflicts and for mutual respect and complementarity.
The new, unprecedented threats faced by some
African countries in 2013 led them to devise a solution
to the delays in the operationalization of the African
Standby Force, which was originally scheduled for
2008. The African Capacity for Immediate Response
to Crisis has been proposed by a number of African
countries, including Angola, in order to fill the
capability gap, find funding, provide ownership for
African countries of conflict situations on the continent
and come up with an immediate response to crises. It
is not intended to replace the African Standby Force,
and steps are being taken to harmonize it with the
Standby Force’s structure. The Security Council should
be better informed and engaged about that process and
should assess how it can better support it and render
it operational.
Last month, the Security Council adopted resolution
2282 (2016), while the General Assembly adopted
an identical resolution (70/262), on the review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture, extending
the scope of peacebuilding to all phases of conflict,
not just the post-conflict period. Noting that the 20162020 road map addresses peacebuilding, we would
suggest that the African Union appropriate the new
United Nations approach to peacebuilding, in order to
adapt the African Peace and Security Architecture to
today’s challenges.

16-1451017/57

S/PV.7694

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

As the three reviews of the United Nations
framework for peace have outlined, preventing conflict
and implementing the principle of aid in the definition
of sustaining peace are key to avoiding conflict — the
unfulfilled aspiration first expressed more than 50
years ago and reiterated in the African Union’s fiftieth
anniversary Solemn Declaration, in which Africa’s
leaders stated their determination to achieve the goal of a
conflict-free Africa, now a pillar of the African Union’s
visionary Agenda 2063. Today’s debate is therefore a
timely one, and I am sure that our deliberations and
the presidential statement (S/PRST/2016/8) we adopted
this morning will contribute to making Africa a more
peaceful and prosperous continent, as we all desire.
Mr. Taula (New Zealand): I thank our briefers this
morning. We welcome this open debate and in particular
the presence of our colleagues from the African Union
Peace and Security Council.
The past 10 years have seen enormous growth in
our relationship, and there is now a genuine consensus
that the Security Council cannot carry out its mandate
effectively without cooperating closely with the African
Union (AU) and the regional economic communities.
Integration with the African Peace and Security
Architecture is key to this, as noted in each of the
United Nations high-level reviews in 2015. Today, New
Zealand would like to focus on two main areas.
First, we need to strengthen practical cooperation
in preventing conflict, as other speakers have
highlighted. In our view, the foundations are very good
for cooperation on conflict prevention. One of the major
strengths of the African Union and its subregional
organizations is that they have dedicated significant
resources and energy to identifying emerging crises
and agreeing collective responses to prevent conflict.
Good examples are the AU’s early efforts on Burundi
and the leadership of the Economic Community of
West African States on Burkina Faso. Moreover, in our
experience, the Secretariat and the AU Commission
cooperate well at the institutional level to identify early
warning indicators and develop recommendations for
early action. There is, however, a lot more we can do.
As identified during a seminar on conflict
prevention we hosted for Security Council and AU
Peace and Security Council members in Addis Ababa
last month, we need to be more joined up, and at an
earlier stage. Effective conflict prevention requires early
engagement and political will on the part of all actors,
18/57

24/05/2016

as well as unified messaging and coordinated action.
What emerged at the seminar was that, at present, there
is a lack of trust on many issues between key actors:
the United Nations, the AU, subregional organizations
and member States. This is a major obstacle to acting
more effectively in cooperation, and is often rooted in
differing conflict analyses and concerns about respect
for sovereignty.
If we are to overcome these challenges, we need to
begin from a basis of shared information and analysis
about emerging crises and their causes, which can
in turn lead to shared objectives and strategies for
preventing conflict. We hope to see such cooperation
in the coming months on emerging issues of mutual
concern. Early engagement on the growing tensions
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo would be
a useful place to start. To do this, we will need to
translate our rhetoric of partnership into practical and
meaningful engagement between the two Councils on a
more consistent basis.
We had a very good meeting yesterday canvassing
some of these points, and New Zealand very much
hopes that we can institutionalize regular informal
engagement between the Councils that focuses on
substantive action. Key focus areas could include the
following: early joint analysis of emerging situations,
setting out key facts and discussing interpretations and
possible strategies so that all actors can discuss how
to act in concert early and according their respective
comparative advantage; and mandating and actively
supporting information-sharing between the two
Secretariats, increased resourcing for political analysis
and conflict prevention, and actively discussing
relevant information with Member States. We would
like to see regular informal discussions between the
two Councils — be through the Presidents, troikas or
the full Councils — to build common understandings
on crisis situations and agree on common objectives and
credible responses. We also support and deploying joint
AU-United Nations field missions, where possible, at
both the secretariat and Council levels. In this regard,
New Zealand supports a joint mission withe Peace and
Security Council to South Sudan, in support of effective
implementation of the Peace Agreement.
The other important issue that New Zealand wishes
to highlight this morning is that of the financing of
AU peace operations. We share the view that there is
a strong need for a more sustainable model, and hope
that the international community, including the United
16-14510

24/05/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Nations, can be strategic and creative in working out
how to properly support Council-mandated missions
that the African Union is prepared to lead. The urgent
need to make progress in this regard was underlined
again during the Council’s visit to Somalia last week.
New Zealand welcomes the efforts of the AU to
mobilize funding from within Africa. We are realistic
about capacity limitations in this regard. Our own
expectation is that United Nations assessed contributions
will need to be a part of any long-term solution, and we
are ready to explore proposals for joint financing of AU
operations by the United Nations and AU members. We
have no illusions regarding the sensitive and complex
issues this raises, but we believe that ongoing reliance
on ad hoc models for financing AU peace operations
continues to hamper their effectiveness and that this is
not sustainable in the long term.
In closing, cooperation between the United Nations
and AU on peace and security matters has improved
significantly, but it remains a work in progress. It is
in all our interests that we take further steps to unlock
the potential that more effective cooperation holds for
both organizations.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Egyptian delegation for
initiating today’s very important meeting. Russia firmly
supports the expansion and deepening of cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union and
subregional organizations.
We welcome the progressive development of the
partnership between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council on the basis
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, as
affirmed by the detailed discussions held between the
members of both Councils here in New York yesterday
on a wide range of issues related to the African continent.
At the basis of such partnerships is the recognition of
the primary responsibility of the Security Council for
the maintenance of international peace and security
and the complementarity of the efforts of the United
Nations and regional organizations, leveraging the
comparative advantages of each.
It is clear that regional and subregional organizations
in Africa know the situation there better than anyone
else and have conflict prevention and settlement
mechanisms that are better adjusted to local situations.
We therefore support the principle of African solutions
for African problems. We welcome the progress made

S/PV.7694

in the establishment of the African Peace and Security
Architecture, whose central roles are assigned to the
Peace and Security Council, the Continental Early
Warning System and the African Standby Force.
Despite the efforts of Africans and international
partners, Africa unfortunately remains vulnerable to
all sorts of crises. We have recently seen an increase
on the continent in the potential for conflict and new
serious challenges to peace and security, while the
number of displaced persons has reached a historic
high. In such conditions, it is increasingly urgent to
ensure constructive engagement between the United
Nations and the African Union to prevent and resolve
conflicts. In this context, we welcome the sharing of
efforts between the two organizations to stabilize the
situations in Darfur, Somalia, Mali and the Sahel as
a whole, Burundi, the Central African Republic and
South Sudan, and on the Sudanese track.
Promising cross-cutting areas for partnership
include the fight against international terrorism,
transnational organized crime, piracy, and the illicit
traffic in arms and drugs. The potential crisis response
of the AU is very useful and in need of international
support. In our view, the priority must now be given
to strengthening the African Standby Force. We must
also coordinate the efforts of international partners
in helping to build the African Union’s peacekeeping
capacity, taking into account the positive experience
gained, inter alia, from the activities of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
the African Union Mission in Somalia.
We believe that Chapter VIII of the Charter provides
a sound legal basis for the African Union peacekeeping
operations mandated by the Security Council and for
assistance in the establishment of the African Peace
and Security Architecture. We also believe it important
to be able to rely on a predictable, reliable and flexible
financing, including through the African Peace Fund.
At the same time, we consider it necessary to ensure
feedback, particularly in terms of the adequate periodic
accountability of the African partners to the Security
Council concerning the peacekeeping operations
authorized by the Council.
In principle, we believe that it is also important for
the General Assembly to conduct a thorough analysis of
the issue of providing additional logistical and financial
assistance to African Union peacekeeping operations
through the assessed contributions of Member States.

16-1451019/57

S/PV.7694

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

We firmly believe that the further strengthening of
the United Nations and the African Union partnership
will effectively allow us to prevent and settle conflicts
in Africa and can significantly enhance the global
anti-crisis potential.
Russia actively participates in the provision of
comprehensive assistance to African continent in the
framework of existing international instruments, and on
a bilateral basis. Our country also makes contributions
to international programmes, including through the
International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the World
Health Organization, the World Food Programme and
the International Civil Defence Organization. At more
than $20 billion, we are a leader in writing off debts
of States in the region. The remaining debt obligations
are channelled towards helping the countries of the
continent through the debt-for-development scheme.
In that way, my country is tangibly contributing to
international efforts aimed at removing the economic
reasons for conflict in Africa.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous, Special Envoy
Menkerios, Ambassador Kamau and Ambassador
António for their briefings today, and I offer a special
thanks to Egypt for convening this meeting.
I would like to address four key features of the
African Union (AU)-United Nations partnership
today — mutual respect, financing, capacity-building
and prevention.
I turn first to mutual respect. Given that more than
80 per cent of United Nations troops are deployed in
Africa, we have a great deal to gain from enhanced
communication between the AU and the United
Nations. Given that African peacekeepers contribute
more than half of the United Nations troops involved
in peacekeeping on the African continent, it is both
pragmatic and right to seek out African views on
mandate formation, political mediation efforts and all
the tools we deploy as the Security Council in the service
of conflict resolution and conflict prevention. I would
note, however, that it would be simplistic to suggest
that the African view on any issue is a monolithic one
any more than the views inside the Security Council
are monolithic. But more communication and more
listening to one another, more mutual respect and more
supplementing of formal meetings with more informal
conversations and brainstorming will make us each and
together more effective.
20/57

24/05/2016

Secondly, financing is a hot topic in the Council
today. When it comes to discussing how to strengthen the
United Nations-AU partnership, there is understandably
a great deal of focus on how we can better support the
deployment of African-led peace support operations
to address urgent threats to peace and security. We
know that the United Nations will not always be able
or be best positioned to respond to a crisis. While the
Security Council continues to be responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, we
also know that the AU can be a particularly effective
partner in that pursuit, including when it comes to
conducting offensive military operations in complex
security situations where there is no peace to keep and
armed groups threaten the civilian population. There is
a clear need to improve the financial and operational
arrangements that undergird AU-fielded, United
Nations-authorized peacekeeping missions and that
will reflect our shared ownership and responsibilities.
We think there can be progress on this long stalled
issue. We hope that AU member States will fulfil
their commitment to finance 25 per cent of AU peace
operations while also developing a fiduciary framework
to govern the use of those funds and establishing
new approaches to mandating and overseeing those
missions with the Security Council to ensure that they
are effective and accountable. The proposals being
developed by AU High Representative Kaberuka could
be important steps in that direction. If we are able
to make progress, we will need to agree on common
approaches to mission mandating and planning
processes and on transparency and accountability
mechanisms. Those will enable the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council
(PSC) together to monitor and promote strict adherence
to international peacekeeping standards, which should
include, of course, full respect for human rights norms
and a zero-tolerance policy for sexual exploitation
and abuse. By demonstrating that peacekeepers who
commit abuses will be held to account, we strengthen
the legitimacy of peacekeeping where it counts most,
that is, with the civilians that peacekeepers are sworn
to protect.
Thirdly, on capacity-building, improving the
operational capacity of the relationship will also
require ongoing efforts to build the capabilities of the
AU, as envisaged in the African Peace and Security
Architecture road map. Greater AU capabilities
will translate into the AU delivering more effective
16-14510

24/05/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

peacekeeping missions. The United States has shown
its commitment to that effort. We have strengthened
AU command and control capabilities, supported
multinational exercises for brigades and trained more
than 250,000 peacekeepers since 2005. Two years
ago, President Obama also established the African
Peacekeeping Rapid Response Partnership, a major new
initiative to build the capacity of key African troopcontributing countries so that they can deploy more
rapidly to peacekeeping missions. That was something
that they had requested of the international community
many times.
Fourthly, and finally, prevention is the issue on
which all of us can agree in the abstract. Who can
be against prevention? But where the differences
often emerge inside each of our respective Councils
is when concrete cases — real countries and real
circumstances — emerge. Members of both the United
Nations Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council must get better at dealing with the
political drivers of conflict. That can be more politically
sensitive for neighbours than it is for countries that are
far removed, and we should not dance around that fact.
All of us must recognize that it is highly destabilizing
when political opponents are attacked, people’s rights
are violated, elections are highjacked and when
Constitutions are ignored. We have seen those kinds
of actions helping fuel conflict that then ends up on
both of our respective agendas. Conversely, those
States that prioritize investments in accountable and
inclusive institutions that deepen the rule of law, that
include women in decision-making processes and that
otherwise pursue improved governance and more open
societies are empirically far less likely to descend into
conflict and to eventually threaten regional peace and
security. Our partnership must advance those goals,
and Member States must be quick and unified in their
response when the roots of conflict begin to grow.
The situation in Burundi remains deeply perilous,
with more than 400 dead and 250,000 refugees to date,
the near collapse of the Burundian economy, rampant
insecurity and the constant threat of a real spiralling
into violence. The Security Council has often lagged
behind the PSC in responding to the crisis.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, five
days ago the Government issued an arrest warrant
for opposition leader Moïse Katumbi, soon after he
announced he would run for President in elections
scheduled for later this year. The Government has said

S/PV.7694

that the elections will likely be postponed and that
President Kabila Kabange, who is prohibited by the
Constitution from running for a third term, will remain
in office until they can be held. Civil society activists
have been arrested or detained for protesting peacefully.
Opposition leaders are planning nationwide protests
for Thursday. Congolese security forces have in the
past used repressive tactics, including deadly force, to
prevent Congolese citizens from exercising their right
to peaceful demonstration. This is a conflict-prevention
moment. We know it. We see it. We know from history.
We know from the present. It is imperative that we show
a united front in calling on President Kabila Kabange
to abide by the Constitution and step down when his
term ends.
Marshalling a unified political front is equally
important if conflict does break out. It is the sole way to
maintain collective positions and to support meaningful
actions. In South Sudan, the United Nations and the
AU have supported the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) efforts to pressure both sides.
Without those pressure points, without that leverage,
it is hard to imagine the formation of the transitional
Government that has occurred. The situation is
extremely fragile, and sustaining momentum in the
weeks and months ahead will require high-level
attention and a continued, unified IGAD, AU, United
Nations front.
By contrast, sadly, in the Sudan, the members of the
Security Council and the PSC have been embarrassingly
divided. We have failed even to successfully pressure
the Government of the Sudan into permitting the
delivery of supplies required by the soldiers and police
who make up the beleaguered mission. Hundreds of
containers of African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur and contingent-owned equipment
are languishing in Port Sudan and Darfur regional
airports, while attacks against the mission by militia
and other armed groups continue. Rather than hosting
indicted Sudanese leaders, United Nations and AU
member States should be exerting all the influence
possible to persuade Khartoum to change course. Even
if we could make progress on ensuring more predictable
funding for AU missions — something that I think we
all agree is a priority issue — it will mean little if we
cannot unite behind the delivery of food to peacekeepers
who are risking their lives on the front lines. If we are
to forge a more robust United Nations-AU relationship,

16-1451021/57

S/PV.7694

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

24/05/2016

we should seek more progress on those concrete cases
that affect millions of civilian lives in the here and now.

benefit from the two Councils’ synergy in carrying out
visits, in particular on the African continent.

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I very much thank all of today’s briefers.

We all know that three very important reviews were
carried out in 2015 and this year, and I will not cite them
all. But I would like to make several comments with
regard to them, particularly in the context of the highlevel review of resolution 1325 (2000). I would like first
to acknowledge the excellent work of the African Union
in reviewing the resolution by citing four fundamental
facts. First, one third of the countries that have a national
action plan for implementing resolution 1325 (2000) are
members of the African Union. Secondly, the African
Union has established a gender, peace and security
programme for the years 2015 to 2020. Thirdly, the
African Union has established the position of Special
Envoy on Women, Peace and Security, which is held by
Ms. Bineta Diop, who is carrying out excellent work.
Lastly, the African Union has developed initiatives
that the United Nations could also follow, such as the
compilation of a roster of women mediators that would
be of benefit to both the African Union and the United
Nations. Accordingly, I would like to propose three
concrete initiatives that would allow for improving our
cooperation within the framework of resolution 1325
(2000).

Much more than a decade ago, the African Union
began making significant efforts to confront all of the
challenges on the African continent, and those efforts
have meant that the African Union has become a very
crucial partner of the Security Council. It is therefore in
the interests of everyone to strengthen the capacities of
the African Union so that we can successfully address
all of those challenges. That is why the financial
agreements are particularly important, owing to which
we decided to fund 25 per cent of the costs of peace
operations for 2020. Over the past year, we have also
seen a series of proposals to strengthen collaboration
between the two Councils, the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union and the Security Council
of the United Nations. I would like to refer to three of
them in particular.
First, there are the annual informal consultations,
such as the one held yesterday. I believe that yesterday’s
consultations were exceptionally productive, and I
commend you, Sir, for them. I believe that we must
continue on the same path during future meetings,
focusing, however, on one or two issues so that all
the members of the Security Council and the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union can have a
deeper exchange of ideas.
Secondly, it has been said on more than one
occasion here that there needs to be greater channels
of communication between the presidency of the
Security Council and the African Union. I have to
acknowledge that when I presided the Security Council
in December 2015 I was not in contact with the Chair of
African Union Commission, and I was not aware of it.
However, I want to assure everyone that, during Spain’s
forthcoming presidency of the Council in December, I
think i will exchange ideas with the presidency of the
African Union, especially when we consider issues
involving Africa on the Security Council.
Thirdly, the other idea that has already been
brought up rather frequently involves the possibility
of carrying out joint visits by both Councils. I believe
that we missed a good opportunity on that score when
the Council travelled to Guinea-Bissau, because only
shortly thereafter the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union also made a visit. It is unfortunate not to
22/57

First, I believe that we could explore how the
African Union could participate in the meetings of
the new informal group of the Security Council on
women and peace and security when there are African
countries on the agenda. Secondly, the secretariats of
each organization should exchange information on how
the United Nations and African Union peace operations
could holistically address issues involving gender
in their activities on the ground. Thirdly, we need to
include women and peace and security issues on the
meeting agendas of both organizations.
I want to conclude by mentioning two areas for
potential cooperation between the Security Council
and the African Union, namely, climate change and
non-proliferation.
With regard to climate change, I want to underscore
that the African Union has recongnized that climate
change is a multiplier of threats to security in Africa.
In that regard, I would like to recall the joint initiative
of Spain and Egypt through which the Council would
analyze the impact of new factors on security in the
Sahel region.
16-14510

24/05/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

As to the matter of non-proliferation, as members
are aware, Spain chairs the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and has launched an important review of that
resolution. I would like once more to call attention to
the important partnership that we have with our African
counterparts in order to redouble our efforts and avoid
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
their diversion to to non-State actors.
I would like to conclude by aligning myself with
the statement that will be delivered shortly on behalf of
the European Union.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would
like to thank Egypt, in its capacity as President of the
Security Council, for having convened this important
open debate to discuss cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union in the areas of peace
and security, especially as it refers to the future of
the African Peace and Security Architecture in the
framework of the implementation of the provisions
set out in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, on regional arrangements.
Similarly, we appreciate the briefings made by the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Hervé Ladsous; the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to the African Union, Mr. Haile
Menkerios; Ambassador Téte António, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations;
and the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Ambassador Macharia Kamau.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela highly
values the role of regional entities in the peaceful
settlement and mediation of conflicts, given the
successful experience of Latin America and the
Caribbean through bodies such as the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States and the Union
of South American Nations. Our country also values​​
the close relationship it has with African countries, as
evidenced by the conclusion of the second Summit of
Heads of State and Government of South America and
Africa held on Margarita Island in 2009.
The efforts of the United Nations in Africa should
take place in a context that takes into account the
root causes of many of the conflicts that are currently
affecting that region, which date back to the colonialism
that affected the continent until the middle of the
twentieth century and which have led to territorial,

S/PV.7694

ethnic and religious divisions motivated by imperialist
interests. Despite those obstacles, the peoples and the
countries of Africa managed to achieve independence
following years of bloody wars of liberation, exemplified
by men such as Gamel Abdel Nasser, Ahmed Ben Bella,
Patrice Lumumba and Nelson Mandela, who played
decisive roles in those movements aimed at achieving
independence, justice, democracy and human rights.
Despite the trauma of colonialism, Africa has built
its own institutions and established its own structures
in the framework of the African Union, the best setting
in which to confront challenges in the areas of peace,
security and development facing the African continent.
The legitimacy of the African Union has allowed it to
become a point of reference in the resolution of its own
problems and challenges.
Given that the agenda of the Security Council
largely remains focused on addressing issues that
threaten peace and security on the African continent,
it is even more necessary to consolidate and strengthen
the strategic partnership between the two multilateral
forums at the operational, political and tactical levels,
and on the basis of mutual respect. In that regard,
my country recognizes the fundamental mediation
role that the African Union has been playing in the
peaceful resolution of conflicts in Africa within the
framework of the African Union’s Agenda 2063 and
the 2016-2020 road map for the African Peace and
Security Architecture. Likewise, we highlight the
initiative entitled “Silencing the Guns: Prerequisites
for Realizing a Conflict-Free Africa by the Year 2020”.
It is crucial that the Security Council allow the
African Union to play a more active role when it
comes time to take action on issues concerning that
region. Unfortunately, we have noted with concern the
Council’s tendency to apply measures under in Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations — instead of
giving priority to Chapters VI and VIII, which confer
a significant role to the peaceful settlement of disputes
and to regional arrangements — neglecting the need to
include the African Union in those processes.
Constant interference in the internal affairs
of African countries remains a critical factor
of destabilization and conflict on the continent.
Unfortunately, the national interests of some members
of the Council in relation to the countries and conflicts
in Africa has turned this organ into an element of
interference and pressure, as evidenced by the fact

16-1451023/57

S/PV.7694

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

that about 70 per cent of Council sanctions regimes are
applied to African countries.
Another example of that situation was the hasty
application of coercive measures under the prerogatives
of Chapter VII of the Charter in Libya in 2011. African
Union mediation efforts already in progress were
dismissed by the decision of the Council. Five years
later, we continue to suffer the serious consequences
of that unfortunate decision and the actions of
the international community in Libya — foreign
intervention — led to the institutional collapse of
the Libyan State, the destabilization of North Africa
and, among other things, contributed to the spread
of terrorism, violent extremism and illicit trafficking
in small arms and light weapons in the subregion,
phenomena that fuel many of today’s conflicts and
result in bloodshed for African peoples.
Similarly, it is paradoxical that, despite the African
Union’s position as a vital United Nations partner in
matters of peace and security, the assessments and
observations of our African brothers on certain issues,
including on the question of Western Sahara and the
migrant crisis, are not taken into account. It is worth
recalling that Venezuela abstained in the voting on
resolution 2240 (2015), concerning the migrant crisis,
adopted by the Security Council. We believe that the
resolution did not address the concerns of African
countries, which were the ones most affected by the
migrant crisis. The Observer for the African Union
was not even allowed to participate in the debate,
and Chapter VII of the Charter was cited to address a
problem that is multidimensional and from which the
African people continue to suffer.
Western Sahara provides another example of the lack
of inclusion and the policy of double standards used by
the Security Council on all African issues. The Council
has been unable to react to the operational weakening
of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara, and to the refusal of some members
to allow the representative of the African Union for
Western Sahara to address the Security Council. In that
regard, it should be recalled that resolution 690 (1991)
gives the African Union an important role in support of
the United Nations as a facilitator of the organization
and supervision of a referendum on self-determination
for the people of Western Sahara, the last existing
colony in Africa.
24/57

24/05/2016

As such, the relationship between the Security
Council and the United Nations and the African
Union Peace and Security Council must improve and
be strengthened. That was one of the main elements
considered in the context of the comprehensive review
of the question of peacekeeping operations in 2015. We
believe it necessary to continue making progress in the
consolidation and strengthening of those operations
and in the development of common and integrated
strategies to address emerging challenges in Africa,
based on mutual responsibilities and comparative
advantages between them, with a view to achieving
better coordination and synergy between the two
bodies. Hence, we hope for the timely conclusion of
a joint United Nations-African Union framework for
an enhanced partnership on peace and security, the
platform of which will guide the commitment of both
organizations before, during and after conflicts.
Moreover, we would like to highlight that during
our presidency of the Council in February we held an
open debate on peacebuilding (see S/Pv.7621), the result
of which was a confirmation of the synergies that should
exist between the two institutions in order to promote
peace and the development of countries emerging from
conflict and to prevent them from lapsing back into
such situations.
For Venezuela it is vital to prioritize the role that
can be played by regional and subregional organizations
in the peaceful and political resolution of conflicts
and in preventing them, and in the formulation of
coordinated maintenance and consolidation strategies
for peacekeeping and peacebuilding, since it is clear to
us that the Security Council on its own is not sufficient
to meet the peace and security challenges of the African
continent, and that the African Union has a recognized
authority and political legitimacy in the region. Hence,
the relationship between our distinct bodies should be
one of complementarity.
That is why Venezuela considers it imperative to
continue to strengthen the cooperation and strategic
partnership between the two bodies. That is the course
of action that would be most beneficial in addressing
shared challenges, such as addressing the structural
causes of conflicts that threaten peace and security
on the African continent, including poverty, foreign
interference, the exclusion of their people, as well as
addressing the great challenges facing the continent,
such as the spread of terrorism, violent extremism
and the migrant crisis, transnational organized crime,
16-14510

24/05/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

particularly in the Sahel region and the Horn of Africa,
and the resolution of latent conflicts, such as the
conflict of Western Sahara.
In conclusion, this open debate provides an
opportune moment to recall the legacy of former
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, who, in
2004, pointed out that at the time there was greater
fatigue concerning problems on the African content
than there were 5 or 10 years before then. The former
Secretary-General also asserted that the situation had
been much worse. Today, more than 12 years later, his
remarks remain fully valid. We therefore encourage
the international community to support in a decisive
and continuous manner the efforts to promote peace,
stability and economic and social development
of Africa.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Egypt’s initiative to convene today’s open
debate. With Africa Day just ahead of us on 25 May,
it is of great significance to discuss United NationsAfrican Union (AU) cooperation in peace and security.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Ladsous;
Ambassador Kamau, Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission; Ambassador Menkerios, Head of the
United Nations Office to the African Union; and
Ambassador António, Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations, for their briefings.
Ever since 2006, when the United Nations and the
AU started the Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme
for the AU, United Nations-AU peace and security
cooperation has been strengthened and produced
good results. The United Nations has deployed with
the Hybrid Operation in Darfur, provided logistical
support to the African Union Mission to Somalia,
enhanced efforts for a political settlement to such hotspot issues in Africa as those in South Sudan and Mali,
and supported post-conflict reconstruction in Sierra
Leone, Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire. The strengthened
United Nations-AU cooperation in peace and security
has played a positive role in maintaining peace and
stability on the African continent.
China would like to make four comments with
regard to future cooperation between the United
Nations and the AU in peace and security.
First, they must always adhere to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. The
United Nations is the core of the international collective

S/PV.7694

security mechanism, and the Security Council has the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. China supports further cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union,
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations. The Charter advocates equal
sovereignty, non-interference in the internal affairs of
other countries, and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Such ideas have played an important guiding role in the
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU.
The United Nations should further support the AU in
seeking the peaceful settlement of disputes through
dialogue, consultations, good offices and mediation on
the basis of respect for the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of all the countries.
Secondly, they must always adhere to the concept of
common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable
security. To find solutions to hot-spot issues in Africa,
it is important to consider the historical background
and current realities, and to take comprehensive
measures to achieve and promote security through
cooperation. China welcomes the African Peace and
Security Architecture road map for 2016 to 2020, which
prioritizes conflict prevention, crisis management and
post-conflict reconstruction. China hopes that the
United Nations will strengthen cooperation with the
AU and support the AU in implementing the Peace and
Security Architecture road map in order to achieve
win-win cooperation and common security.
Thirdly, they must enhance mutual coordination
and coherence and respect the ownership of the African
countries. When it comes to seeking solutions to the
hot-spot issues in Africa, the AU has rich experience
and enjoys unique geographical, historical and cultural
advantages. It can play an irreplaceable role. China
welcomes the work of the United Nations-African
Union Joint Task Force on Peace and Security in
recent years and the annual joint consultative meetings
between the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council. Such mechanisms can bring into full
play the comparative advantages of each organization
so that they can complement each other and promote
each other’s work thereby forming synergies.
China welcomes the AU’s adoption of the
Partnership on Africa’s Integration and Development
Agenda 2017-2027 at its Johannesburg Forum in 2015,
which can further promote the partnership between
the AU and the United Nations. China hopes that
both parties will fully utilize the relevant mechanism,

16-1451025/57

S/PV.7694

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

24/05/2016

strengthen coordination in seeking a political settlement
to hot-spot issues in Africa, and support the settlement
of African issues by Africans in the African way.
Meanwhile, it is important to draw on lessons learned
and experience in a timely manner and to further
explore flexible, pragmatic, positive and effective ways
of cooperating.

to support the AU in implementing its Agenda 2063.
We are ready to work with the international community
in further promoting United Nations-AU cooperation,
maintain peace and stability in Africa, build a new
kind of international relations centred on win-win
cooperation, and make joint efforts to build a future
that is more secure and better.

Fourthly, we must prioritize support for the AU
in enhancing its collective security mechanism. In the
field of peace and security, the AU faces difficulties
in the area of human and financial resources. It
therefore needs the continued support and assistance
of the international community. We welcome the AU
appointment of Mr. Kaberuka as High Representative
for the African Peace Fund. We hope that the United
Nations will provide more support to the AU collective
security mechanism, in particular in training,
institution-building and logistical and financial
support. We also hope that the United Nations will
further support the African Standby Force and the
African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crisis in
addressing regional terrorism and piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea so as to effectively increase the continent’s
overall collective security capacity.

Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal thanks the Egyptian presidency
for having taken the initiative to organize this
important debate on the theme “United NationsAfrican Union peace and security cooperation: Chapter
VIII application and the future of the African Peace
and Security Architecture”. We also commend you, Sir,
on the concept note (S/2016/428, annex) that you have
provided to guide our work. We also thank you briefers,
who insightful statements have helped to illuminate
our debate.

China attaches great importance to enhancing
peace and security cooperation between China and
Africa. To date, China has participated in 16 United
Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa. At present,
over 2,600 Chinese peacekeepers are deployed in
seven United Nations missions, including in Mali,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan,
Darfur and Liberia. China has also dispatched naval
convoys to Somali waters in the Gulf of Aden to assist
the countries of the region address piracy.
In December, at the Johannesburg Forum on
China-Africa Cooperation, President Xi Jinping of
China proposed 10 cooperation programmes, one of
which involved enhancing cooperation between China
and Africa in peace and security. President Xi Jinping
has declared that China will continue to participate
in United Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa,
provide the AU with $60 million in assistance, support
the African Standby Force and the African Capacity
for Immediate Response to Crisis, and help African
countries build their capacities in such areas as
national defence, counter-terrorism, the prevention of
explosions, and customs and immigation control. China
is ready to work with all African countries to actively
implement the outcome of the Johannesburg Forum and
26/57

This debate is timely and offers us a decisive
opportunity to deepen our reflection on the
implementation of the recommendations of the
reviews of the United Nations peace operations. One
of the most consensual of those recommendations is to
strengthen cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations, particularly the African Union,
given its special status as a strategic partner of the
United Nations.
In that regard, I am pleased to welcome the
positive development in the framework of cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
over the course of the past decade, in particular the
operationalization of the United Nations-African Union
Joint Task Force on Peace and Security. In addition,
since 2010, the United Nations has had a liaison office
at the African Union, while the finalization of a joint
framework for an enhanced partnership on peace and
security has been announced for the end of this year.
The Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council, which are currently holding the
tenth session of their annual joint consultations, have in
practice demonstrated a pragmatic approach by working
together in the area of peacekeeping operations, whether
it be in Somalia, Darfur, Guinea-Bissau, Central
Africa, Mali or in the early stages in Burundi. Those
are just some examples among many that demonstrate
the vitality of the partnership. However, we also need to
point out that the potential of this cooperation has not
been sufficiently explored, mainly because of several
16-14510

24/05/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

obstacles that need to be overcome in order to enable
the African Union to carry out its noble function of
tackling the challenges to peace and security on the
continent.
The disturbing trend of conflicts we are
witnessing with the emergence of new cross-cutting
and asymmetrical threats bring into question the very
foundations of our collective security system. They are
objective reasons to start thinking strategically about
strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union on matters of peace and
security. Of course, it is up to the Security Council,
first and foremost, given its primary responsibility
in maintaining international peace and security, to
respond to crises, but it is clear that it cannot handle
that heavy task alone.
It is therefore necessary, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, to
strengthen cooperation with regional organizations and
to encourage the development of regional responses
to crises. Regional organizations have the advantage
of being closer to the ground and they know the local
realities and the dynamics of conflict better and can help
identify the most appropriate intervention policies. In
that regard, as a strategic partner of the United Nations
in the area of peace and security, the African Union
has the skills and legal framework required to provide
a first response to crises. It also has demonstrated
its ability to conduct operations in support of peace,
particularly in Mali and Somalia, to name just those
two few examples.
The African Union remains a major player
in collective security that is trying to refine its
structures and consolidate in its area of responsibility.
In furtherance of that aim, the African Union has
already put inplace a Peace and Security Architecture
that provides a comprehensive framework aimed at
preventing, containing and managing conflicts across
the continent. The development and implementation of
the Architecture is, without a doubt, an illustration of
the unwavering commitment of the African Union to
tackle head-on issues linked to peace and security on
the continent. In the same vein, the African Standby
Force showed its full operational capacity following the
smooth conduct of the Amani Africa II exercise, which
was carried out in November 2015. We must also note
the adoption of the 2016-2020 road map, which aims,
among other things, to prevent and remove obstacles

S/PV.7694

to fully operationalizing the African Union Peace and
Security Architecture.
While evidence shows that the Peace and Security
Council and the mechanisms of the African Peace
and Security Architecture have been active in various
crises since 2004, including Burundi, Côte d’Ivoire,
the Comoros, Darfur and Somalia, their efforts were
often limited by various factors, including the nagging
problem of financing.
On the occasion of the tenth session of annual
consultations between the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union and the Security Council, and
as we prepare to celebrate the establishment of the
Organization of African Unity, which is today the
African Union, as well as given the major challenge
posed by the funding of the Peace and Security
Architecture, with its growing demand for resources,
in addition to logistical and operational constraints,
both bodies need to find a new funding mechanism
that is sustainable and predictable in order to meet the
challenges of peace and security in Africa and ensure
that the peace and security architecture in Africa is
operational.
In that connection, Senegal strongly supports
the recommendations contained in the report (see
S/2015/446) of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations relating to building the capacity
of the African Union in the areas of prevention and
peacekeeping. We look forward with great interest
to the implementation of the measures and initiatives
announced by Secretary-General in his report on the
future of peace operations (S/2015/682). We believe
that the presidential statement (S/PRST/2016/8) that
we have we just adopted is a very good document for
strengthening the partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations, but we must also
broaden our perspectives with regard to the relationship
between the African Union and the United Nations by
developing other synergies, in particular between the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1) and the African Union’s
Agenda 2063. Senegal believes that we cannot have
sustainable peace without inclusive and sustainable
development.
The President (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Egypt.

16-1451027/57

S/PV.7694

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The drafters of the Charter of the United Nations
revealed their forward-looking vision when they
included Chapter VIII, which provides the necessary
basis for the establishment of a partnership between
the United Nations, as the primary entity responsible
for maintaining international peace and security,
and regional and subregional organizations, which
play a crucial role in preventing, managing and
settling conflicts.
The African Union is proof of the comparative
advantages of regional organizations, including their
ability to have an in-depth understanding of a conflict’s
context and root causes. They are therefore capable of
playing vital roles in mediation and sponsoring the
political operations aimed at the peaceful settlement
of conflicts.
In addition, regional organizations are always
ready to deploy peacekeeping operations in the early
stages. The role played by the African Union and other
African subregional organizations in Somalia, Mali,
the Central African Republic and other countries is
the best proof that the continent is ready to assume the
heavy burden of bringing peace and security to African
countries. They are also upholding the principle of
African solutions to African problems.
Over the past decade, in cooperation with different
partners, at the forefront of which is the United Nations,
the African Union has gone a long way towards building
the components of the African Peace and Security
Architecture, both at regional and subregional levels. It
has also built the necessary capacities to operationalize
it. This is a full-fledged Architecture, which includes
prevention mechanisms, mediation, the management
and settlement of crises, as well as reconstruction and
development for peacebuilding and preventing postconflict countries from relapsing into violence. It is in
line with the African Union’s endeavours to ensure a
continent free from conflicts and in which everyone
enjoys peace and stability, which is also one of the main
objectives of the ambitious Vision Africa 2063.
The AU has developed a road map for 2016-2020 that
aims at enhancing coordination among all components
of the African Peace and Security Architecture and
the regional and subregional mechanisms. The road
map is designed to ensure their effective engagement
at the earliest signs of conflict, from the management
and settlement of conflicts and all the way to the
peacebuilding and reconstruction phases.
28/57

24/05/2016

In line with those important developments at the
level of Africa and in the broader context of the United
Nations, the three reviews — on the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture, peacekeeping operations
and the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security — came to encompass
all the changes in the nature and scope of conflicts and
international crises. The reviews have opened a new
chapter that will help to formulate a comprehensive
vision based on the concept of sustaining peace, which
in turn is based on the interaction among the different
security, political and development forces brought to
bear on putting an end to military conflicts, coming up
with effective solutions and addressing the root causes
of conflict.
Egypt believes that the reviews and the important
resulting recommendations present new and welcome
prospects for partnership between the United Nations
and the AU through a paradigm shift in the way we
deal with the challenges of peace and security. We
are moving from the current trend based on the
management of conflicts after they erupt, along with
the subsequent high humanitarian costs, destruction
of State infrastructure and the tearing of the fabric of
society, to a model that addresses conflicts in a more
comprehensive way, including through preventive
diplomacy mechanisms, by giving priority to political
solutions that seek to prevent, manage and settle
conflicts and by upholding the principle of national
ownership and leadership as the fundamental safeguard
for successful efforts aimed at building sustained peace.
In that context, Egypt affirms the importance of the
continuing United Nations support for capacity-building
in the African Union and in regional and subregional
organizations following the conclusion of the United
Nations Ten-Year Capacity Building Programme for
the AU in 2016 through the New Partnership for the
Development of Africa and the Framework for a
Renewed United Nations-African Union Partnership
on Africa’s Integration and Development Agenda 20172027. It is also crucial that the United Nations provide
the necessary flexible, sustainable and predictable
financing for all activities related to peace and security
for the AU, in particular those mandated by the
Security Council, taking into consideration the primary
responsibility of the United Nations in the maintenance
of international peace and security.
In conclusion, Egypt stresses that we have to
formulate more in-depth and inclusive partnerships at
16-14510

24/05/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

both the regional and international levels. That is the
ideal way to confront the contemporary forms that
security challenges are taking in today’s world, since
such challenges are highly complex, multidimensional
and plagued with intertwined root causes.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber. I
would appeal to speakers to deliver their statements at a
reasonable speed so that interpretation may be provided
accurately. I wish to inform all concerned that, given
the lengthy list of speakers, we will be carrying on this
open debate right through the lunch hour.
I now give the floor to Her Excellency Ms. Annika
Söder, State Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Sweden.
Ms. Söder (Sweden): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the Nordic countries — Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.
I would also like to thank the President for
convening this important open debate, and the briefers
for their contributions this morning.
I would like to say that, over the years, the United
Nations has shown that it is uniquely placed to support
efforts to prevent conflict and sustain peace. But we
acknowledge that, to maintain that role in an everchanging environment, the United Nations cannot do it
alone. Efforts to meet challenges to peace and security
in Africa will not be successful without the contextspecific knowledge, understanding and ability that rest
with regional and subregional organizations. I am of
course speaking here both of the African Union (AU)
and of the regional economic communities.
In a book published by Uppsala University that I
just read, the author asks whether regional organizations
are challengers or partners to the United Nations. My
response would be, “both, and both in a good way”.
While much progress has been made to enhance the
United Nations-African Union partnership over the
years, it is now essential that we move forward towards
the implementation of the measures needed to make the
partnership become sustainable and deliver concrete
results. Open debates are important, but there is also a

S/PV.7694

need to ensure that the Security Council systematically
integrates the knowledge that we have accumulated
into its daily work and that the regions are proactively
consulted.
I would like to take this opportunity to also pay
tribute to the sixth Secretary-General of the United
Nations, the late Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali. Some
of us remember that, already in 1992, his milestone
report An Agenda for Peace, stated that regional
action, paired with the efforts of the Security Council,
could contribute to a deeper sense of participation,
consensus and democratization in international affairs.
We consider those words to remain truly valid today,
and we, the Nordic countries, strongly believe that a
new United Nations commitment for peace also needs
to include a solid commitment to assisting African
regional and subregional organizations. I would briefly
like to highlight three areas that I believe are essential
features of an enhanced partnership between the United
Nations and the AU.
First, it almost goes without saying, but the
partnership should be mutually reinforcing.
Secondly, the partnership should not only focus
on the narrow peacekeeping aspects, but encompass
conflict prevention and inclusive peacebuilding — in
keeping with the recent resolutions on the United Nations
peacebuilding, which signal a much-needed change in
our mindset by establishing a new concept of sustaining
peace. We must not forget economic and social factors
in that respect.
Thirdly, the partnership should address the need
for predictable and sustainable funding arrangements
for regional peace operations. The Nordic countries
are deeply committed to ensuring thiat. In particular,
we commend the efforts of Donald Kaberuka, High
Representative of the AU Peace Fund.
A few weeks ago Sweden, together with the
Office of the Special Adviser on Africa and the AU
Commission, organized a high-level forum in New
York on the theme “The Africa we want in 2030, 2063
and beyond”. The forum confirmed that the continued
and intensified promotion of peace and security was
essential for creating a favourable environment for the
implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly
resolution 70/1).

16-1451029/57

S/PV.7694

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

As we now work to adapt and revitalize United
Nations structures to conform to the realities of today,
it is of key importance that the linkages between the
African Peace and Security Architecture and all the
relevant parts of the United Nations, including the
peacebuilding entities, be reinforced, and that this
constitutes a cornerstone of a strengthened United
Nations-African Union partnership.
Let me mention the Nordic countries’ continued
support for the AU’s peace efforts. As part of that,
our Nordic Defense Cooperation is already providing
support to the Eastern Africa Standby Force through
training events in national centres and programmes for
the contributing countries.
Let me compliment the efforts of the African
Union Mission in Somalia. I would mention women’s
role in peace in Liberia and, perhaps less known,
in Uganda recently. I also note Namibia’s role in
launching resolution 1325 (2000) as far back as 2000,
and I commend the ongoing efforts of the East African
Community, the Economic Community of West African
States and, not least, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, which has many issues on its agenda.
A stronger United Nations-AU partnership will
greatly contribute to reducing fragility and to fostering
political stability and effective governance, not only in
Africa but also in dealing with common challenges such
as piracy, terrorism and climate change. The Nordic
countries, out of the conviction that regional ownership
is a precondition for legitimacy, effectiveness and
success, will continue to support all those efforts. It is
time for progress and partnership. And it is time to push
for peace together.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor the representative of India.
Mr. Lal (India): We thank you, Mr. President, for
conducting this timely debate. The discussion has been
useful. In the interest of brevity, I will highlight some
parts of our statement, the complete version of which
will be available for circulation.
Maintaining peace and security across the world
continues to be a massive challenge. The nature of
conflict itself is changing. While the United Nations
continues to be heavily invested in peace and security
efforts, it is difficult for it to succeed on its own.
While the United Nations has engaged in
peacekeeping efforts in Africa since the 1960s, in the
30/57

24/05/2016

past couple of decades the African Union (AU) and
some regional groups — such as the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the Economic Community
of West African States and the Southern African
Development Community — have also undertaken
such efforts in several conflicts in Africa. At the
same time, cooperation and coordination between
the Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council has become institutionalized. The United
Nations-AU collaboration on peace and security has
been successful in many ways in the context of United
Nations collaboration with regional arrangements under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
AU peacekeeping efforts have formed the
precursor to, and the basis for, several United Nations
peacekeeping efforts, for instance in Liberia, Côte
d’Ivoire, Sierra Leone, Burundi, the Central African
Republic and Somalia.
Regional organizations can have several advantages
in dealing with crises in their respective regions. If
capable, they may become quick responders; they may
have a better understanding of the complexities of the
region; they may enjoy advantages of language and
intelligence, et cetera. They can also act as buffers until
the deployment of United Nations peacekeepers. Many
regional organizations, however, may also face serious
constraints of capacity, resources and conflicting
geopolitical interests. Priorities of the Security Council
and those of the regional organization could also differ
significantly on some occasions.
While the largest United Nations peacekeeping
deployments have been in Africa, their record of
success has been mixed, which is partly a reflection
of the complexities of geopolitics, political will and
the capacities and resources backing the peacekeeping
efforts. Important lessons can be drawn from analysing
the various missions.
The international community has recognized the
cross-cutting and interlinked nature of the factors
essential for peace with the adoption of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly
resolution 70/1) and with the AU Agenda 2063. The
importance of sustainable development, economic
growth and greater funding has also been recognized
in the twin resolutions adopted last month — General
Assembly resolution 70/262 and Security Council
resolution 2282 (2016) — on the peacebuilding
architecture and sustainable peace.
16-14510

24/05/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

India has always engaged actively on peace and
security issues, including in the Security Council. India
has been a member of the Peacebuilding Commission
since its inception, 10 years ago. India has also made
significant financial contributions to the Peacebuilding
Support Office. The Government of India has seconded
an officer to the United Nations office in the AU. Indian
peacekeepers have served in 22 missions in Africa
since the 1960s. Currently, Indian peacekeepers are
serving in eight United Nations peacekeeping missions
on the African continent. The first-ever female formed
police unit, provided by India and deployed in Liberia,
was highly successful. India has also made a financial
contribution to the operations of the African Union
Mission in Somalia. The Indian navy contributed to the
international efforts to fight the menace of piracy off
the coast of Somalia. India has also contributed to the
training and capacity-building of peacekeepers from
Africa.
India has long-standing, close links with Africa,
not only through its diaspora and trade and investment
relations but also by partnering with Africa, first during
the decolonization and anti-apartheid phases and then for
development cooperation. The tradition of South-South
solidarity was reinforced during the third India-Africa
Forum Summit, held last October. At the Summit, Prime
Minister Modi announced a significant enhancement of
the scale of our development partnership, which helps
strengthen the foundation for peaceful and prosperous
nations. Prime Minister Modi also announced support
for the African Union’s peacekeeping efforts, including
through the training of trainers in India and in Africa.
India, along with the United States, will organize a
United Nations peacekeeping course for our African
partners in July and August of this year.
In addition to pursuing very substantive
development partnerships with our friends in Africa,
India stands ready to contribute to any future
peacekeeping operations that may be required to
maintain peace and security.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today’s open debate. We also appreciate
the insightful briefings we received this morning.
Regional organizations can be instrumental in
addressing issues of international peace and security,
in particular those pertaining to their own region.

S/PV.7694

After all, the challenges and issues of a region are
best understood by the people of that region. Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations serves as an
acknowledgement of that fact. In fact, Article 52 of the
Charter encourages regional organizations to play their
roles in the pacific settlement of disputes.At the same
time, under Article 53 regional organizations rely upon
authorization by the Security Council for enforcement
actions, barring some exceptions. Therefore, in the
area of international peace and security, the Charter
of the United Nations envisages an interdependent
relationship and close coordination between regional
organizations and the United Nations.
The Security Council’s visit to Africa last week and
its informal consultations with the African Union Peace
and Security Council yesterday manifest its continuing
commitment to cooperation and collaboration with
regional players on issues of peace and security in
Africa.
United Nations-African Union (AU) peace and
security cooperation has evolved over the years
and seeks strengthened responses and reactions to
challenges in the face of increasing conflicts in the
African continent. With over 80 per cent of United
Nations peacekeeping missions based in Africa, it is
imperative that the United Nations and the AU maintain
close cooperation for a deeper understanding of the
nature of conflicts, which in turn can deliver effective
responses. We believe that the complexity of the
emerging threats to peace and security has increased
the need for a better understanding of the nature of
threats and a greater degree of responsiveness.
The AU forms a critical link between its subregions
and the United Nations. That link can be utilized and
reinforced through a strategic partnership between the
two organizations.
We know that effective conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding require rapid and
appropriate responses and effective strategies, with
matching financial, human and logistical support.
That puts greater demands on African peacekeeping
missions. New African troop-contributing and
police-contributing countries must therefore be assisted
in strengthening their capacities and resources. Their
voices and those of other troop-contributing countries
must also be taken on board in developing mandates.
As one of the largest troop-contributing countries,
Pakistan is ready to explore avenues of cooperation

16-1451031/57

S/PV.7694

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

with the AU, to assist in capacity-building and to help
individual African countries. Pakistan has a longstanding commitment to United Nations peacekeeping.
Currently, we contribute over 7,000 personnel, the
overwhelming majority of whom are deployed in
Africa. We are proud of our role in some of the notable
successes of peacekeeping in Sierra Leone and Liberia.
We have observed that non-permanent members of
the Council from Africa use their presidency to highlight
regional priorities in the Council. Last year, Nigeria
organized a debate on the role of regional organizations
(see S/PV.7505), while Egypt has gone a step further by
focusing the debate on the African Union itself. That
is what is called responsiveness and responsibility to
the region and to the countries that have supported
one’s tenure in the Council through the election
process. That is what we believe must be strengthened
in the Council — democracy, representativeness and
accountability. Pakistan therefore supports expanding
the number of African seats on the Council on a basis of
periodic elections and a fixed rotation. We believe that
will boost United Nations-African Union cooperation on
matters of international peace and security, particularly
those concerning the African region itself.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): We commend
the Egyptian presidency of the Council for initiating
and convening today’s open debate. As a Member
Observer of the African Union (AU), Kazakhstan is
deeply committed to strengthening the African Peace
and Security Architecture and welcomes cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union in
the area of peace and security. My delegation will do
everything in its power to support Africa in implementing
the recommendations of the three related 2015 United
Nations reviews — of peacekeeping operations, the
peacebuilding architecture and resolution 1325 (2000)
on women and peace and security.
Kazakhstan believes that in Africa we have to
expand the concept of peace and stability from security
that is State-centred to security that is people-oriented,
and from military security to non-military, in order
to encompass a broad concept of human security that
includes food, water and energy for all. Such a concept
calls for greater cooperation with a wide range of
organizations and regional groups in order to achieve
the objectives of State-building, establishing the rule
32/57

24/05/2016

of law and good governance, protecting civilians,
disarming combatants and reforming the security and
justice sectors. They should be based on inclusive
political processes, all of which shape our mandates
and how we implement them.
Implementing resolution 2282 (2016) on the review
of the peacebuilding architecture in Africa will require
greater internal coherence among the United Nations
and its agencies and country teams on the ground and
with regional and subregional structures, as well as
international financial institutions and regional banks.
It implies closer collaboration between the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council,
their special representatives and the special political
missions and peacekeeping operations of the United
Nations. We must take into account the need for a
regular flow of funding to AU missions. Peacebuilding
must involve conflict prevention and resolution from
the very start rather than beginning in the post-conflict
phase. The emphasis should be on building peace rather
than enforcing security.
In support of Africa, Kazakhstan has signed a thirdparty cost-sharing agreement with the United Nations
Development Programme with a view to implementing a
partnership for sustainable development between Africa
and Kazakhstan, aimed at benefiting 45 countries in
the region by sharing institutional experiences and best
practices. We consider it essential to address security
issues and maintain lasting peace by developing a more
comprehensive continental strategy that is put together
by all stakeholders, including civil society. If we are to
achieve the aspirations for Africa’s Agenda 2063, we
have to think in terms of stronger military, diplomatic
and development partnerships that can capitalize on
every kind of cooperation — North-South, SouthSouth and triangular — so as to support the efforts of
the United Nations, the Security Council and the AU
through their various resolutions on peace and security.
No peace can be complete without the dimension
of women and peace and security, and Kazakhstan
will spare no effort to fully implement resolution 1325
(2000) and, most importantly, the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution
70/1) in the region. In that regard, food, water and
energy security are essential to peace and stability and,
together with nuclear security, form the four pillars
supporting Kazakhstan’s bid for a non-permanent seat
on the Security Council. At the Fourth Nuclear Security
Summit in Washington, D.C., President Nazarbayev of
16-14510

24/05/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Kazakhstan drew the attention of world leaders to his
very significant document “Manifesto. The World. The
Twenty-first Century”. He has proposed formulating
a 2045 global strategic initiative plan, whose primary
goal would be to eliminate the root causes of wars and
conflicts by the time of the centenary of the United
Nations, in 2045. During his address to the General
Assembly in September (see A/70/PV.13), he also called
for investing 1 per cent of Member States’ defence
budgets in the special United Nations Sustainable
Development Goals Fund.
Addressing Africa’s issues requires taking bold
and daring measures under the auspices of the United
Nations and the AU, together with the European Union.
We therefore call on all delegations to support these
forward-looking approaches, together with the other
existing processes of the Sendai Framework, the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda, the 2030 Agenda and the Paris
Climate Change Agreement. We must invest more in
sustainable development, and we will join the States
of Africa and the international community in making
Africa conflict-free.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM).
I would first like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on Egypt’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I would also like to express our
appreciation to you for holding today’s open debate and
for the briefings provided earlier this morning.
The Non-Aligned Movement welcomes the
enhanced relationship and cooperation of the United
Nations with regional and subregional organizations,
in particular the African Union (AU), in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
NAM has always commended the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the East African Community and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development for their indispensable roles
and contributions to peace and security in various parts
of Africa. We encourage making the political process a
priority, while emphasizing the importance of focusing

S/PV.7694

on development assistance in regions affected by war,
since peace and development are mutually reinforcing.
NAM supports the continued efforts to strengthen
African peacekeeping capabilities and emphasizes the
importance of implementing the Ten Year Capacity
Building Programme for the African Union and the
joint action plan for United Nations support to the
African Union in peacekeeping in the short, medium
and long term and in all relevant areas. NAM has also
recommended enhancing the effective partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
in order to improve the planning, deployment and
management of African peacekeeping operations.
At this juncture, I would like to reiterate NAM’s
principled position on peacekeeping by stressing that
the establishment of any peacekeeping operation, or
the extension of the mandates of existing operations,
should strictly comply with the purposes and principles
of the Charter and the principles that have evolved
to govern such operations and have become basic to
them — that is, the consent of the parties, the non-use
of force except in self-defence, and impartiality. NAM
stresses that respect for the principles of the sovereign
equality, political independence and territorial integrity
of every State, and of non-intervention in matters that
fall essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of
States, should also be upheld in that regard.
The leaders of the African Union expressed their
determination to achieve the goal of a conflict-free
Africa through the framework of the African Peace
and Security Architecture, which is now a key pillar of
the AU’s visionary Agenda 2063. The African Union
has established its own thematic priorities and has
developed two road maps to help the Peace and Security
Architecture reach its stated objectives. Finally, NAM
hopes that today’s open debate can help to identify
the partnership opportunities between the various
pillars involved in the maintenance of international
peace and security, and to generate new momentum
for strengthening peace and security cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union, in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Plasai (Thailand): Let me first express my
delegation’s appreciation to the Egyptian presidency for
convening today’s open debate and to all the briefers
for their respective remarks.

16-1451033/57

S/PV.7694

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

I wish to align myself with the statement just
delivered by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The world is now faced with peace and security
challenges that are more diverse and complex than
ever before. That is particularly true in the context of
Africa. The three major peace and security reviews in
2015 called for deepened and strengthened partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
(AU), as well as its regional economic communities and
regional mechanisms, with a view to better utilizing the
comparative advantage of regional actors in addressing
such challenges. Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations is a recognition that certain situations
could be more appropriately dealt with by regional
actions. At the same time, it also provides a basis
for operationalizing the partnership and cooperation
between the United Nations and regional arrangements.
In that regard, we welcome the adoption today of
presidential statement S/PRST/2016/8.
We recognize the valuable contribution of the
African Union to the maintenance of peace and security
in Africa, in particular through the African Peace and
Security Architecture (APSA). The new APSA road
map 2016-2020 is an aspirational document aimed at
taking a more holistic approach that gives primacy to
conflict prevention, political solutions and sustaining
peace. In our view, the experiences in the following
areas of United Nations-AU partnership should feature
prominently in the future direction of APSA:
The first is peace operations. From supporting
the African Union Mission in Somalia to the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
there is a wealth of lessons and best practices that can
be drawn from the United Nations-AU cooperation in
peace operations.
The second is peacebuilding. Africa is at the
heart of United Nations peacebuilding efforts. Last
month, the General Assembly and the Security
Council adopted parallel resolutions (70/262 and 2282
(2016), respectively) on the review of peacebuilding,
emphasizing the role of the AU.
The third is women, peace and security. Taking
forward the aspirations of resolution 1325 (2000), the
African Union Gender, Peace and Security Programme
(2015-2020) is designed to achieve the increased
participation of African women in the peace process
34/57

24/05/2016

and to enhance the protection of women in conflict and
post-conflict situations.
The fourth is counter-terrorism. The atrocities
committed by Boko Haram are a stark reminder that
Africa, too, is affected by terrorism. Responding to
such threats requires the concerted effort of countries
of the region. Earlier this month, the Council, in its
presidential statement S/PRST/2016/7, commended
such efforts in the fight against Boko Haram.
As part of our contribution to the debate, we
would like to suggest the following as the possible way
forward in advancing the United Nations-AU peace and
security cooperation:
First, the United Nations undertook three major
reviews of the peace and security architecture in 2015.
That process continues this year with the upcoming
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. One important consideration for the AU
is whether reviews of or adjustments to the APSA
mechanisms should be undertaken to align them with
the outcome of the aforementioned United Nations
review processes.
Secondly, the United Nations-AU partnership should
be geared towards conflict prevention and laying a firm
foundation for sustainable peace. This means addressing
the root causes of conflicts, including socioeconomic
disparities, social injustice and marginalization, as well
as ensuring capacity-building and strengthening State
institutions. Resources are required to realize these
objectives. The AU should be supported with adequate
and predictable funding, especially when acting under
the authorization of the Security Council. At the same
time, as we are mindful of the limited resources within
the United Nations system, other avenues of funding
partnerships — including intergovernmental assistance,
international and regional financial institutions, and
domestic resource mobilization — should also be
explored. In this regard, we recognize the generous
contributions made by several countries in support of
peace and security in Africa.
Thirdly, in order to ensure coherence and
complementarity among different United Nations
agencies and partnership mechanisms on Africa, we
see an important strategic and coordinating role for
the United Nations Office to the African Union and
the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa. The two
Offices should work closely with the AU Commission
to generate renewed momentum for strengthening
16-14510

24/05/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

peace and security in Africa, in particular in
developing a joint United Nations-AU framework for
enhanced partnership in peace and security. We share
the assessment contained in the concept note before
us (S/2016/428, annex) that this joint United NationsAU framework will transform the United Nations-AU
collaboration into a more holistic partnership capable
of comprehensively responding to the contemporary
peace and security challenges in Africa.
To conclude, I wish to reiterate that African
problems require African solutions, and that the United
Nations can play a role in this regard. Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations gives us a framework
for the Organization to cooperate with regional
arrangements. We should take this forward and turn
such cooperation into a true partnership, especially
in the context of Africa. Only by pooling together our
resolve and resources can we realize the full potential
of the African Peace and Security Architecture.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I thank Egypt for
organizing today’s debate. It is extremely timely and
relevant.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union, and wishes to
add the following remarks in its national capacity.
Last week, we hosted in Rome the first-ever
ministerial conference between Italy and Africa.
With 36 ministers from African countries and 54
delegations, the conference aimed at renewing Italy’s
natural partnership with Africa. Being a natural bridge
towards Africa, in Rome we proposed a sustainability
compact between Italy and Africa and between
Europe and Africa. The compact would address the
following issues.
The sustainability of peace and security, first and
foremost to avoid conflicts and relapse into conflicts
and to achieve the goal of a conflict-free Africa;
socioeconomic sustainability to seize the immense
opportunities the continent provides; and sustainability
in managing migration, building upon the migration
compact that Italy has proposed to the European
Union to promote a strategic approach. In doing so,
Italy is moved by the idea that the solution to today’s
challenges — terrorism, climate change, sustainable
development, migration — can be found in Africa and

S/PV.7694

with the contribution of our African partners. Italy is
committed to finding common solutions because we
share the same concerns and fate as our African partners.
Faced with such challenges, the United Nations
should act as an enabler for peace and work towards
a more effective multilateralism as the only viable
solution to today’s borderless challenges. In this context,
the role of the African Union (AU) and a strengthened
cooperation with the United Nations under Chapter
VIII of the Charter are pivotal, as advocated by the
three review processes carried out last year in the field
of peace and security. A common theme of the reviews
is the need for the United Nations to build stronger
partnerships with regional and subregional actors.
Such a partnership is pivotal because it ensures
a more solid platform for the implementation of the
African Peace and Security Architecture. First and
foremost, it promotes greater ownership through the
principle of subsidiarity, actively involving in fmding
solutions those organizations and countries that better
understand the root causes of the problems. Secondly,
it underscores the importance of conflict prevention,
early warning and preventive diplomacy by promoting
a paradigm shift from the current focus on conflict
management towards a more holistic approach that gives
primacy to political solutions. Thirdly, it underpins
the concept of sustaining peace, encompassing all
cycles of conflict, which is key to long-term, stable
and durable peace in Africa, a continent still hosting
the vast majority of United Nations peacekeepers and
at the centre of United Nations peacebuilding efforts.
Moreover, it promotes a fine tuning between the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1) and the African Agenda
2063. Their implementation is essential to addressing
the root causes of conflicts and to promoting an holistic
approach to peace and security.
Of course, the partnership between the United
Nations and the AU needs to be effective and smooth
in order to address matters of common interest in a
pragmatic and cooperative fashion. The joint United
Nations-AU framework for an enhanced partnership in
peace and security can represent a blueprint for early and
continuous engagement between the two organizations
before, during and after conflicts, with a view to
finding political solutions to crises. Among the ways
to ensure an effective partnership, I wish to underscore
the importance of securing predictable, sustainable
and flexible resources for operations; promoting better

16-1451035/57

S/PV.7694

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

coordination and interaction between tUnited Nations
and AU envoys; involving more women and youth in
conflict-prevention and peacebuilding initiatives;
cooperating in electoral assistance, in particular this
year, when Africa will hold more than 20 elections;
addressing the root causes and socioeconomic causes
of terrorism and violent extremism in Africa; and
focusing on capacity-building and institution-building
to sustain peace.
In terms of the sustainable funding for African
Union operations, let me recall the findings of the
Prodi report of 2008 (see S/2008/813), which proposed
concrete recommendations to address the issue. In that
respect, we welcome the recent appointment of the
former President of the African Development Bank,
Mr. Donald Kaberuka, as the African Union High
Representative to the Peace Fund. It is an important sign
of the AU commitment to tackle financial challenges.
We believe in a stronger United Nations-AU
relationship, because Italy works with the African Union
and appreciates the value it can add. Our approach
is based on finding political solutions by involving
African partners, rather than military interventions.
Last week in Vienna, we sought to do so in the case
of Libya, by also inviting the African countries on the
southern border of that country.
Italy is committed to support the structures and
initiatives of the African Union Commission, in
particular its Peace and Security Department. We will
continue to offer such support within the partnerships
established by the African Union with the European
Union and the United Nations and by relying on bilateral
instruments, such as the Italian-African Peace Facility,
which has been operational since 2007 and represents
a clear example of sustainable and predictable funding.
Through the Facility, Italy has supported the African
Union Mission in Somalia, the African Union Highlevel Implementation Panel for the Sudan, the African
Union Panel of the Wise and the Tana High-level
Forum on Security in Africa. We will contribute to
the further operationalization of the African Peace and
Security Architecture and through new joint initiatives
especially focused on the Horn of Africa. We reaffirm
our willingness to continue to cooperate on African
crisis scenarios and to promote effective cooperation
among the AU, African subregional organizations and
other international partners.
36/57

24/05/2016

If elected, that is the approach that Italy will bring
to the Security Council starting next year.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Menkveld (Netherlands): I align myself with
the statement to be delivered later today by the observer
of the European Union (EU).
I thank the Egyptian presidency for its excellent
and detailed concept note (S/2016/428, annex) on this
pivotal subject.
In this short statement, I would like to address
the three main phases of the continuum of conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and sustaining peace.
On conflict prevention, we need to get better. Let
me highlight mediation in particular. We must learn
from successes, but also from cases that did not bring
about the desired results because responsibilities
and strategies were not well enough coordinated and
undermined mediation efforts. The United Nations
and the African Union (AU) have strengthened their
mediation systems. The AU regularly deploys special
envoys and negotiators. The Department of Political
Affairs (DPA), too, has become more effective, and
its work is in high demand. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands has increased its contribution to DPA by
25 per cent, which brings it to $1.25 million a year.
We finance the Clingendael Mediation Facility,
which trains groups of senior AU African women
mediators together with the Department of International
Relations and Cooperation, UN-Women and the AU.
The women are also supported to develop a sustainable
network, gain access to resources and increase their
own expertise and skills set, thereby strengthening the
position of women in peace processes.
On peacekeeping, the growing role played by the
AU in crisis situations on the African continent is
encouraging and inspiring, thanks to the African Peace
and Security Architecture. When missions are rehatted,
the process is arduous. More institutionalized and
practical cooperation between the AU and the United
Nations could improve that process. In the words of the
Secretary-General, we need
“to move away from improvisation in how we work
together.” (S/2015/582, para. 30)
On sustaining peace, the post-conflict phase
requires an integrated approach with a coherent and
16-14510

24/05/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

cooperative attitude towards African initiatives from
both the United Nations and the EU. An example of
increased EU-United Nations-AU collaboration on
security sector reform (SSR) serves to illustrate that.
The three organizations jointly worked on strategies
and experiences and plans to jointly boost SSR efforts
in the Central African Republic, Guinea-Bissau and
Madagascar. We are proud to contribute and stand
ready to support similar joint SSR-efforts in Mali and
Somalia. Such efforts should keep in mind long-term
reconstruction and development needs, in line with the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1) and the AU Agenda 2063 for
African development.
In conclusion, a new form of cooperation between
the AU and the United Nations must be worked out in
every phase of the continuum. In that regard, a permanent
African presence on the Security Council may not be
without merit. We hope that the joint AU-United Nations
framework for an enhanced partnership will succeed
in institutionalizing the strategic partnership between
both organizations, thereby creating the conditions for
an equal partnership between the AU and the United
Nations with a common understanding of threats to
international peace and security. The presence of
ambassadors from the AU Peace and Security Council in
the Chamber today is a great step in that direction. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands, a partner of the Council
for peace, justice and development, is committed to
supporting such cooperation.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Sobral Duarte (Brazil): Regional and
subregional organizations in Africa are increasingly
contributing to complement the work of the United
Nations in maintaining peace and security on the
African continent, pursuant to Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. Among the organizations
on the continent, the African Union (AU) is the most
representative, with 54 members, as well as one of the
oldest. The AU is also one of the regional organizations
with which the United Nations maintains the most
diversified and frequent contacts and cooperation.
Since 2002, the African Peace and Security
Architecture (APSA) has been developing a platform
for the prevention, management and resolution of
crises and conflicts, as well as for post-conflict
reconstruction and development. The APSA road map

S/PV.7694

for the period 2016-2020, launched in April, provides a
renewed strategic direction for the promotion of peace
and security in Africa. Over the past 10 years, we have
witnessed important institutional advances that have
set the stage for enhanced cooperation between the
United Nations and the AU.
The three recent reviews on peacekeeping
operations, on the peacebuilding architecture and
on women and peace and security provided us with
a singular opportunity to discuss peace and security
in Africa. In that regard, allow me to highlight the
adoption, on 27 April, of the landmark General
Assembly resolution 70/262 and resolution 2282 (2016),
on the review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. Those three reviews on peace and security
emphasized prevention and the political solution of
conflicts through dialogue and diplomacy. In that
regard, we underline that prevention must not only be
carried out with full respect for international law and
international humanitarian law, but must also give due
consideration to the views of the leadership and the
organizations of a given region.
Let me refer to two past cases in Africa, where if a
prevention-oriented approach had been adopted, results
could have been different: the genocide in Rwanda in
1994 and the military intervention in Libya in 2011.
In Rwanda, early warnings were given on several
occasions, including by the then Force Commander of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda,
Roméo Dallaire, but those fell on deaf ears. The
error was therefore one of omission. In the case of
Libya, had the ad hoc working group, created by the
African Union and composed of five Heads of State,
been given the political space to engage in finding a
way forward, perhaps an ill-fated intervention could
have been avoided and the Sahel region would be more
stable today.
In discussing the United Nations-AU partnership,
one should not avoid the question of adequate means
for the implementation of increasingly complex tasks.
Peacekeeping mandates must be accompanied by the
necessary resources. By the same token, regional actors
should spare no effort to progressively bring their
troops up to United Nations standards of performance.
According to the report of the High-level Panel on
Illicit Financial Flows from Africa, chaired by former
President of South Africa Thabo Mbeki, it is estimated
that Africa has lost $1 trillion over the past five decades
owing to illicit financial flows — a concept that includes

16-1451037/57

S/PV.7694

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

criminal activities, such as tax evasion, smuggling,
bribery and corruption. That sum is equivalent to nearly
all the official development assistance received by
Africa during that time. According to the same report,
illicit financial flows in Africa are increasing and now
amount to $50 billion a year.
As one of its main recommendations, the Panel
called for the African Union to elaborate a global
governance framework to determine the conditions
under which assets are frozen, managed and repatriated.
That could present an opportunity to discuss the idea of
using part of those resources to predictably fund peace
and security efforts, including peacebuilding on the
African continent. Let the Council bear in mind that
the last approved annual budget of the United Nations
for all peacekeeping operations was $8.27 billion
dollars, which is only 16.5 per cent of what Africa
loses annually through illicit financial outflows. We
should also consider the challenges posed by the illegal
exploitation of natural resources that not only fuels
conflict, including by financing armed groups, but also
has a devastating impact on sustainable development.
Again, from a perspective of enhancing prevention,
a more active role should be given to the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) regarding cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union, on the one
hand, and between the PBC and the Security Council,
on the other. Today, all six countries on the agenda of
the PBC are in Africa. The diversified membership of
the Commission, currently chaired by Kenya, allows
for discussions with a broad range of views.
Allow me finally to refer to a crisis that has
remained without a satisfactory solution after
two decades and would greatly benefit from a
prevention-centred and holistic approach to conflict, as
well as from enhanced cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union. In 2007, a study by the
International Rescue Committee concluded that the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo had
directly or indirectly claimed the lives of 5.4 million
people. Although the exact figure remains a matter of
debate, that conflict must be placed among the great
human cataclysms of our time. As one scholar on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has written, “The
mortality figures are so immense that they become
absurd, almost meaningless”. Today, almost one decade
after that study, the country continues to face enormous
challenges. According to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, there are 7.5 million people in
38/57

24/05/2016

need of humanitarian help and protection. That is 9 per
cent of the population.
Conflicts could have been avoided if we had
focused more on prevention. Strengthening the
partnership between the United Nations and the AU and
taking full advantage of the African Peace and Security
Architecture are indispensable steps. Developing a
better understanding of how illicit financial flows
impact areas subject to conflict is also essential.
Africa is a continent of great human and natural
wealth. Africans from all parts of the continent have
demonstrated leadership and pragmatism, as well as the
ability to inspire and innovate, from Nelson Mandela to
Kofi Annan.
Brazil will continue to work closely with African
countries within the multilateral and regional
structures at our disposal in the promotion of peace and
development, drawing upon our fraternal bonds.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Ms. Wilson (Australia): I thank you, Sir, for having
convened this important meeting today.
The scale, nature and compounding impact of today’s
global peace and security challenges are immense and
seriously straining the resources and capacity of the
United Nations to respond. Those issues have been felt
most acutely by a number of African countries caught in
cycles of violence, crisis and relapse. More than half of
the world’s armed conflicts are taking place in Africa,
causing significant suffering and displacement. The
majority of United Nations peacekeeping missions are
deployed in Africa, and conflicts there dominate the
Council’s agenda. While the United Nations is rightly
at the centre of global efforts to maintain international
peace and security, it cannot and should not do it alone.
Strategic and operational partnerships between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, in line with Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, are essential to preventing
crises,
strengthening
international
responses,
increasing coherence and complementarity of efforts,
and achieving sustainable peace. Indeed, the need for
closer strategic cooperation and partnership between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations was a consistent finding across the
recent reviews on United Nations peace operations,
peacebuilding architecture and resolution 1325 (2000)
16-14510

24/05/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

on women and peace and security, with the role of the
African Union (AU) particularly emphasized. The
outcome of the peacebuilding review built further
on those findings, specifically encouraging regular
exchanges, joint initiatives and information-sharing
between the United Nations and the African Union.
Australia strongly supports those efforts.
The United Nations has long understood that
addressing the root causes of conflict is fundamental
to finding durable solutions. Local and regional actors,
including organizations like the African Union and
its subregional economic communities, are often
well placed to sound the early warning siren to the
international community of emerging threats to peace.
It is critical to make the most of the comparative
advantages between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations. Further strengthening
the partnership between the AU and the United Nations
is one of the most important opportunities to do that.
Great strides have been made over recent years
to enhance United Nations-AU cooperation. Australia
welcomes growing African leadership in maintaining
peace and security in the region. But more can be
done. Australia calls for all parties to continue to work
together in those efforts, particularly to formalize
early engagement to enhance communication and
information-sharing;
undertake
joint
analysis,
coordinated threat assessments and joint early warning
assessment missions to ensure common understanding;
strengthen operational and policy coherence between
the organizations; improve links between the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council; and
better facilitate transitions between regional and United
Nations peace support operations, when required.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mminele (South Africa): I thank you, Mr
President, and the Egyptian delegation for convening
this timely open debate on United Nations-African
Union peace and security cooperation.
South Africa aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the representative of the African Union
(AU) and by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
International peace and security in an increasingly
globalized world are contingent on ensuring the stability
and prosperity of the broader international community.

S/PV.7694

In that regard, we wish to reaffirm the primacy of the
Security Council in the maintenance of international
peace and security. In doing so, we should be cognizant
of the fact that security matters on the African
continent constitute the largest share of the work of the
Security Council. Therefore, we should aim to deepen
cooperation with regional organizations pursuant to
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
The relationship between the United Nations and
the African Union is central to the implementation and
the realization of a fuller understanding of the potential
of Chapter VIII. We should recognize that the African
Peace and Security Architecture has continued to play
a vital role in the resolution of conflict on the continent
since its inception, and is the central framework
through which Chapter VIII engagement with the AU
on peace and security matters should take place. To
give effect to Chapter VIII of the Charter, there must
be greater strategic political coherence between the
two organizations in the resolution, prevention and
management of conflicts in Africa. In that respect,
the relationship between the Security Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council is of
particular significance.
Resolution 2033 (2012), adopted during South
Africa’s presidency of the Security Council in January
2012, recognizes that regional organizations are well
placed to understand the nuances and complexities
of conflicts. Furthermore, their proximity to the
conflicts provides advantages in directly influencing
the prevention and resolution of those conflicts. The
complementary role of the United Nations and the AU
in the resolution of conflicts and the maintenance of
peace and security on the African continent has thus
been affirmed by the Council.
In spite of the adoption of resolution 2033 (2012) and
the practical manifestation of cooperation, we believe
that much still needs to be done to further enhance
that relationship as a matter of utmost necessity for the
sustainable resolution of conflicts on the continent. We
are disappointed that the array of strategies available
for ensuring greater strategic coherence through
regular, timely and effective consultations have not
been exploited by the Council.
To that end, we must develop a more effective
relationship between the Security Council and the AU
Peace and Security Council that extends beyond just
their joint annual consultative meetings. That would

16-1451039/57

S/PV.7694

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

also entail more regular consultation and coordination
between the two Councils. In order to strengthen
and sustain the vital relationship between the two
organizations in addressing African conflicts, the
interactions need to be consistent, and we should avoid
a practice whereby the United Nations is selective
in its approach and where the relationship is merely
utilized in times of political convenience. We have
seen situations where the significant role of the AU was
ignored in the cases of African conflict situations, such
as in Libya and Western Sahara, disregarding notions
of comparative advantage and prolonging both those
conflicts on the African continent and their negative
impact on global security.
In Libya, for example, the failure of the Security
Council to support the African Union in pursuing its
political solution to the crisis has resulted in a power
vacuum in that country. The military solution that was
opted for has resulted in instability, the rise of terrorist
groups and large numbers of migrants fleeing the
conflict, resulting in a serious humanitarian challenge
for the region and beyond. The lesson we should draw
from the Libyan experience is that greater political
coherence and a common vision between the AU Peace
and Security Council and the Security Council are
critical to the resolution of African conflicts.
The issue of capacity-building and sustainable
resource allocation remains a fundamental challenge. In
the past decade, the African continent has demonstrated
sufficient political will and commitment to ridding the
continent of all conflicts and wars. There have been
gains in the full operationalization of the African Peace
and Security Architecture, which are illustrated by the
developments in bringing the African Standby Force
and its Rapid Deployment Capability to realization.
However, we believe that it is the responsibility of the
United Nations to provide predictable, sustainable and
flexible financing to AU peace support operations,
especially in those that are undertaken on behalf of the
Security Council, and with a United Nations mandate.
We must acknowledge that, notwithstanding the
Security Council’s responsibility in that regard, AU
member States are making greater efforts to assume
greater responsibility on those matters. In that regard,
we note that African troop- contributing countries have
committed and sacrificed their troops in lethal firstresponse situations.
40/57

24/05/2016

The mutually reinforcing relationship between
the United Nations and the AU should extend beyond
the period of conflict and to critical areas, such as
peacebuilding, post-conflict reconstruction and
development. The nexus between peace, security
and development underscores the imperative of
peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction and
development in post-conflict settings.
In conclusion, the United Nations and regional
organizations, such as the AU, have their respective
comparative advantage. As the Secretary-General
highlighted, our strategic partnerships need to be
enhanced through closer collaboration and cooperation
resulting in joint actions to address global peace
and security.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Romania.
Mr. Jinga (Romania) (spoke in French): I thank
the Egyptian presidency for organizing this open
debate on cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union. I also welcome the adoption this
morning of presidential statement S/PRST/2016/8.
Romania fully aligns itself with the statement that
will be delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I shall deliver a statement in my national capacity.
At the outset, allow me to express my sincere
condolences to the families of the five Blue Helmets
from Chad who lost their lives in a terrorist attack on the
same day that we were paying tribute at United Nations
Headquarters to the 129 peacekeeping troops who were
killed in 2015. That impressive number reminds us once
again of our shared responsibility to act in favour of
peace and security throughout the world so that their
ultimate sacrifice will not have been in vain .
A few months ago, we marked the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1631 (2005), the first on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations. As a sponsor of that
document, Romania is pleased to note that the initiative
proved to be far-sighted, because partnerships with
regional organizations have been found to be very
useful in promoting peace and security by all the
evaluation processes carried out by the United Nations.
No other region of the world takes up so much
of the Security Council’s work as Africa. More than
60 per cent of the Council’s activities are related to
African issues. Africa also hosts more peacekeeping or
16-14510

24/05/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.7694

peace support operations than any other continent. It
is therefore rightly important to enhance cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union and
to develop partnerships between the two organizations
in many areas. Indeed, the African Union (AU) has
become a major player and has assumed its leadership
role in peacekeeping and security on the continent,
requiring ongoing efforts to institutionalize the
cooperation mechanisms between the United Nations
and the AU in all areas related to peace and security in
Africa. In that regard, deeper political, operational and
financial cooperation is necessary, including through
ongoing exchange of information and experience.

In recognizing the paramount importance that the
humanitarian dimension occupies in the United Nations
efforts, Romania aligns itself with the Kigali Principles
on the Protection of Civilians in peacekeeping
operations. In this joint effort, conflict prevention must
play a key role in our response to crises. The concept of
sustaining peace, as defined in resolution 2286 (2016),
which was adopted last month by the General Assembly
(see resolution 70/262) and the Security Council, puts
prevention at the heart of our work. We are therefore
pleased that the African Peace and Security Architecture
road map for 2016-2020 identifies the prevention of
conflicts as a central priority.

Romania is actively engaged in efforts to stabilize
countries in Africa affected by conflict. Over the course
of 25 years of continuous participation in peacekeeping
operations, Romania has deployed more than 10,000
troops under the United Nations flag. At present,
Romania is participating in 10 peacekeeping operations
and more than 90 per cent of its forces are deployed
in African countries. Furthermore, Romania is the first
country among European troop- and police-contributing
countries in United Nations missions. Our contribution
will increase in 2016 in terms of the capacity of our
military and police personnel.

In conclusion, Romania believes that African
solutions must be found to African crises. In this
perspective, we encourage closer cooperation to ensure
the harmonious implementation of the agenda 2063
adopted by the African Union’s Assembly and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1).

Following the request of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, Romania has affirmed its
willingness to increase the number of military observers
and officers it provides and has increased the military
capacity it provides to the United Nations Missions
in Mali and the Central African Republic, which was
announced at the Summit on peacekeeping operations,
which took place last September.
I am pleased to inform the Council that the
Romanian authorities are ready to deploy an additional
17 officers to three peacekeeping missions in Africa:
the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan, the United Nations Mission in Liberia and
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, and a formed police unit
of 140 gendarmes has been made operational and added
to the United Nations forces. In addition, Romania has
invested in predeployment training in United Nations
missions. In terms of the training school for Romanian
gendarmes, we have developed for more than 10
years international advanced courses to train police
and gendarmerie in French. The course also provides
training for French speakers from the African continent.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Bonser (Canada) (spoke in French): We thank
the Egyptian presidency for the opportunity to speak on
the important issues of peace and security cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
(AU).
(spoke in English)
In the decade since the signing of the 2006
Declaration on Enhancing UN-AU Cooperation, both
organizations have made important strides on a variety
of peace and security issues. From close cooperation
on peace operations, to the establishment of the United
Nations liaison office to the African Union, to annual
consultations between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council, the United
Nations and the AU have increasingly taken steps to
work more closely to promote peace and security in
Africa. Canada is encouraged by this progress.
(spoke in French)
But there is still much work to be done. Terrorism,
organized crime and armed conflict pose threats to
global, regional and national peace and security. As a
result of the evolving threats to international peace and
security, the responsibilities shouldered by the African
Union and the regional economic communities have
increased tremendously. As partners, we must ensure

16-1451041/57

S/PV.7694

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

that our support for these African-led efforts evolve
and rise to meet this challenge.
(spoke in English)
Now, more than ever, it is imperative that the
United Nations and the AU continue to foster a stronger
and deeper partnership, as recommended in the 2015
United Nations high-level reviews on peace operations,
peacebuilding, and women and peace and security.
Canada commends the United Nations liaison office
at the African Union and the AU Peace and Security
Department for developing a Joint United NationsAU framework for an enhanced partnership in peace
and security. We strongly support the objective to
deepen United Nations and AU collaboration across
the conflict cycle, from conflict prevention, to conflict
management and resolution, and ultimately to postconflict reconstruction.
In this regard, Canada welcomes the development of
the new African Peace and Security Architecture road
map and encourages continued cooperation between
the United Nations and the AU in implementing this
vision. We recognize the inextricable links between
peace and security and good governance, we also
encourage the AU and the United Nations to further
enhance their cooperation in operationalizing the
African Governance Architecture, complementing the
efforts of the Architecture’s road map to move towards
a more holistic approach to conflict.
Canada remains committed to working closely
with African member States at the United Nations and
to strengthening the relationship between the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council. This is an important step to realizing our
collective vision for sustainable peace in Africa.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ethiopia.
Ms. Hailu (Ethiopia): Let me join others in
thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate
on the United Nations-African Union peace and security
cooperation. I also wish to express appreciation to all
the briefers for their presentations this morning.
Ethiopia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union (AU) has certainly evolved and
42/57

24/05/2016

expanded over the years to become one of the most
important and strategic partnerships in the area of
peace and security. I believe there are two reasons that
shaped this important development.
First, the United Nations has come to recognize
that it needs the effective partnership with others
in addressing the enormous and complex peace and
security challenges that the world is facing in the twentyfirst century. Secondly, this need by the United Nations
for partnership has been complemented by Africa’s
determination to take charge of matters related to peace
and security on the continent, which culminated with
the establishment of the African Union and its Peace
and Security Architecture. These developments were
indeed born out of the bitter experiences of the 1990s
and the utter failure of the international community
to come to Africa’s rescue, especially during the
horrendous genocide in Rwanda.
Over the past decade and more, the African Union
and its various regional mechanisms have been much
more proactive in responding to crisis situations in the
continent. This ranges from the conduct of good offices’
functions through the appointment of special envoys
to prevent the escalation of conflicts, to the fielding
of mediation teams to achieve a political solution and
the deployment of peace support operations to stabilize
conflict situations. On the other hand, the United
Nations has been providing political backstopping,
financial and logistical support, and capacity-building
assistance to the African Union for the promotion and
maintenance of peace and security in Africa.
Accordingly, a division of labour has emerged
between the two organizations based on their respective
comparative advantages where the African Union and
its regional mechanisms act as first responders to
crisis situations in Africa, whereas the United Nations
provides multidimensional support and later takes
over in the peace consolidation phase. This dynamic
partnership has indeed been proven to be very effective.
As we have seen on a number of occasions, where there
is synergy and coherence between the United Nations
and the AU across the spectrum of peace operations,
there will be tangible impact on the ground.
Nevertheless, this partnership is not without its
challenges and there are indeed a number of strategic
and operational issues that need to be seriously
addressed. This can only be done if the partnership
is institutionalized taking into account the principle
16-14510

24/05/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

of shared responsibility to ensure the necessary
predictability and flexibility in effectively responding
to crisis situations in Africa. It is indeed appropriate
and logical that this is done so since the African Union
and its regional mechanisms are operating on the basis
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
This is also what the peace operations review has
rightly recommended and the United Nations should
seize this opportunity to take important measures along
this direction. Of course, we are aware of the process
currently under way to develop a joint framework for
enhanced cooperation and partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union in the promotion
and maintenance of peace and security in Africa and
we look forward to the timely conclusion of these
important discussions.
The relationship between the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council is
indeed central to the strategic partnership between the
two organizations. The three African members of the
Security Council are the linchpin in this regard. Time
and again, we have seen that the coordination of the
three African members is critical not only in terms of
advancing the African perspective, which demands
that a clear message is conveyed, but also in promoting
better coordination in and enhancement of relations
between the two Councils.
It is indeed encouraging to be able to take note of
the regular interaction between the two Councils. But,
undoubtedly, there is room for improvement in the way
these interactions take place so that they become more
effective in delivering the desired results. What the
challenges we are facing today require from the two
Councils is that they transcend forms and maintain a
frank and more substantive dialogue in order to ensure
convergence at the strategic level in dealing with
matters of peace and security in Africa.
In this context, consideration of the views and
concerns of the African Union will greatly enhance
the effectiveness of cooperation and ensure African
ownership and priority-setting on the issues of peace
and security affecting the continent. We therefore very
much hope that the strategic partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union will evolve
accordingly and that the Security Council will play a
meaningful role in this regard.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.

S/PV.7694

Mr. Mitra (Bangladesh): We thank the Egyptian
presidency of the Security Council for organizing
today’s open debate. We also thank the distinguished
briefers for sharing their insights and recommendations.
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
envisioned strategic partnerships with regional
arrangements as a critical element in the maintenance
of international peace and security at a time when such
arrangements were largely non-existent or at a nascent
stage. Due to a number of factors, the dynamics of
regional cooperation have evolved in the last 70 years,
but they have done so in a more mature and pragmatic
manner in some contexts than in others. It is to the
credit of the States members of the African Union
(AU) that they have been able to forge a robust regional
cooperation mechanism with the aim of managing
the challenges they face and embracing the abundant
opportunities that have presented themselves. The
African Peace and Security Architecture is a sure
signpost in that direction.
The United Nations and the African Union have
already built a sound platform for engagement and
cooperation in the peace and security sphere. The
experience garnered in the last 10 years has resulted
in the formation of a number of arrangements that
have been instrumental in enhancing synergy in the
two organizations’ peace and security efforts. The
recent reviews of United Nations peace operations,
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture and the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) have further
affirmed this strategic direction, based on evidence
and analysis.
There are indeed certain challenges inherent in the
existing cooperation arrangements between the United
Nations and the African Union. One of the fundamental
concerns over burden-sharing in financing remains
open for further dialogue. As we see it, in this regard,
a flexible yet predictable approach will be crucial in
response to specific situations, without our necessarily
opting for a straitjacket arrangement that could prove to
be self-defeating in certain cases.
Bangladesh has always been a strong proponent of
regional cooperation and integration, within our own
region and beyond. Within our means, we stand ready
to further contribute to United Nations-African Union
cooperation in peace and security and development. In
this respect, I wish now to draw the Security Council’s

16-1451043/57

S/PV.7694

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

attention to five possible areas in which we can enhance
our contribution.
First, as a committed troop- and police-contributing
country, we shall continue to maintain our forces and
stand-by capabilities so that we can rapidly respond to
United Nations peacekeeping deployments in Africa
and elsewhere. We are willing to provide any possible
technical assistance to African stand-by forces and
transition peacekeeping missions, as appropriate. We
shall continue to offer training to African peacekeepers,
building on the encouraging response we have received
over the years.
Secondly, we have readily responded to opportunities
for our troops and police to serve as early peacebuilders
in places where they have left their footprints. In order
to draw on and share the lessons and experience we
have acquired in socioeconomic development, crisis
management and institution-building, our Government
has decided to establish a peacebuilding centre for
conducting specialized training and research on
sustaining peace. In this process, we look forward
to building an effective interface with relevant AU
initiatives, such as the AU centre for post-conflict
reconstruction and development.
Thirdly, as the traditional spokesperson for the
least developed countries, Bangladesh has remained
at the forefront of the promotion of the interests of
most African countries, including those in or emerging
from conflicts. We wish to further deepen our trade,
investment and development cooperation with African
nations, on the basis of our complementarities and
comparative advantages.
Fourthly, we see merit in further engagement
with Africa to learn from on another’s experience in
promoting the role of women in peace, security and
development. As we see a paradigm shift in our society’s
attitudes towards the role of women in the public
sphere, including in conflict prevention and resolution,
we believe we have much to contribute to the evolving
conversation on the contributions of women and girls as
active change agents in their respective communities.
Fifthly and finally, we see criminal justice and
accountability as a critical element in promoting
national reconciliation in post-conflict societies. In
Bangladesh, through much trial and tribulation, we
have been working on developing a national criminal
justice system. We would be welcome the opportunity
to share our experience with interested countries in
44/57

24/05/2016

Africa and beyond with a view to helping them to
strengthen their national judicial systems, in particular
to account for mass atrocity crimes committed during
wars and armed conflicts.
In conclusion, my delegation aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I would like
to express our sincere appreciation to the Egyptian
presidency of the Security Council for convening
today’s important meeting.
I also offer my thanks to the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, the Permanent
Observer of the African Union (AU) to the United
Nations, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to the African Union, and the Permanent
Representative of Kenya for their respective briefings.
Indonesia also associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran, who spoke on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
Struggling against colonialism and other obstacles
to development, African nations have had to navigate
a difficult path. Overturning apartheid, the gradual
building of institutions and the launch of policies for
peace and progress were no small achievements. Not
surprisingly, their enterprise as a whole has resulted
in annual economic growth greater than 5 per cent for
over 15 years. Nevertheless, like many other developing
countries, including my own, Africa is still confronted
with many challenges from poverty to natural disasters
and from pandemics to terrorism, as well as issues
related to refugees and transnational crimes. I would
stress once more that these challenges do not belong
solely and exclusively to Africa. Indeed, many other
regions on other continents also face these challenges,
requiring a similar serious, concerted undertaking by
the United Nations and the international community.
Encouragingly, various debates at the United
Nations, including the high-level thematic debate on
peace and security that took place earlier this month,
reflect widespread general agreement and enthusiasm
for the key messages that came out of the recent three
major reviews — of United Nations peace operations,
16-14510

24/05/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

the United Nations peacebuilding architecture and the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security. In keeping with that spirit,
Indonesia urges all concerned Member States and
the United Nations system to intensify their focus
on conflict prevention, integration and partnerships,
with a view to resolving conflicts peacefully. In so
doing, it is important to ensure that credible political
solutions be the drivers in the design of peacemaking
and peacekeeping initiatives and that nationally owned
comprehensive efforts in the areas of peace and security,
development and human rights be adequately supported
politically and sustained financially.
A robust regional partnership is what the African
countries have envisioned for themselves. The African
Union together with its mechanisms, in just 14 years,
has shown an impressive depth and solidity. We applaud
all of the members of the AU for enabling it to play
an increasing role in social, political, economic and
security issues.
The African leaders’ declaration on achieving a
conflict-free Africa is both commendable and a key
pillar of the AU’s visionary Agenda 2063. Many African
mediators and peacekeepers have already performed
admirably in challenging situations. We believe in
the importance of the role of regional organizations
in preserving peace and stability, as they are the ones
that fully understand their respective regions and
their cultures.
As a longstanding friend of Africa and an observer
in the African Union, Indonesia supports the five
thematic priorities of the AU’s new road map for the
period 2016-2020 in the framework of the African
Peace and Security Architecture. Those efforts
need the full support of the United Nations and the
international community.
Similarly, in our region Vision 2020 of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations describes a
group of nations that is outward looking and lives
in peace, stability and prosperity in a partnership of
dynamic development and in a community of caring
societies. It has contributed greatly to peacefully
managing disputes, thereby assuring our region’s
collective well-being.
Since the convening of the Asia-Africa Conference
in Bandung more than six decades ago, where the first
generation of Asian and African leaders resolved to
chart their nations’ destinies based on new solidarity

S/PV.7694

and vigour, Indonesia has attached high importance
to its relations with Africa. The comprehensive way
forward elaborated at last year’s Asia-Africa Summit,
in a declaration on reinvigorating the new Asia-Africa
strategic partnership, outlines important steps aimed
at bolstering the AU in achieving its aims. Among
other things, the 2015 Bandung message calls for
strengthening the roles and capacities of regional and
subregional organizations in the two continents in
areas of peacekeeping, post-conflict reconstruction
and peacebuilding, through enhanced regional, SouthSouth and triangular cooperation and in accordance
with the principles of impartiality, the consent of the
parties and national ownership and leadership.
Indonesia will continue its unwavering support
to African countries. Our bilateral cooperation and
training programmes in civilian capacity-building
and other fields will expand further. Currently, 1,537
Indonesian troops and police are participating in eight
United Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa.
The Indonesian National Defense Forces Peacekeeping
Centre, which has already imparted training in
multidimensional peacekeeping and peacebuilding to
personnel from a number of African countries, will
continue to do so.
In conclusion, Africa is facing interconnected
challenges in fully realizing its potential, thereby
requiring an interconnected undertaking among Africa,
the United Nations and the international community.
As a longstanding friend of Africa that has supported
the freedom of its nations since the Asia-Africa
Conference of 1955, Indonesia remains committed to
supporting Africa in achieving its vision of enduring
peace and prosperity.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Sana (Rwanda): At the outset, I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, and your delegation for convening
this important meeting.
A discussion of this nature provides an opportunity
to reflect on ways of reinforcing cooperation and
partnership in areas of common interests. In the
context of the African Union (AU) and the continent’s
regional economic communities, such partnership
has been leading to positive outcomes, owing mostly
to the advantages of local knowledge, proximity and
the ability to mobilize and respond quickly. African
issues constitute more than two thirds of the Security

16-1451045/57

S/PV.7694

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Council’s agenda, and that has been the case for many
years. That percentage clearly shows that the African
Union needs a stronger United Nations and that the
United Nations needs a stronger African Union. We
commend the many instances where both organizations
have cooperated on initiatives to bring peace to conflict
areas, such as in the Sudan and Darfur, Somalia and
Mali.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, United
Nations and AU envoys, together with those of the
European Union and the United States, worked
very closely to bring together regional countries in
implementing the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of Congo
and the Region. In the Central African Republic, the
cooperation demonstrated in searching for a solution
to the sectarian conflict showed the importance of
planning together and sharing situational analyses.
We believe that continued productive burden-sharing
between the two bodies could be the key in addressing
many of the problems facing our continent.
Frank and open communication is the foundation
for any successful, productive partnership, especially
in cases of complex joint endeavours, such as
United Nations-authorized military interventions,
peacekeeping,
peacebuilding
and
post-conflict
reconstruction activities. We believe that efforts to
improve strategic cooperation should emphasize ways
by which both bodies could have more regular and
substantive interactions with executive representatives
of their respective organizations on matters directly
linked to peace and security in Africa. One joint
annual consultative meeting is simply not enough.
More to the point, are the format and decisions of such
consultations sufficient? How substantive are they?
What kind of follow-up mechanism exists to ensure their
implementation? Such a practice would be an important
step forward and might produce other innovative styles
of interventions, including in dealing with complex
cases while taking into account the genesis of the issue
within a regional perspective.
Joint communiqués have been issued, and the
Security Council has adopted relevant resolutions and
presidential statements that underscore the importance
of developing effective partnerships between the
United Nations and regional organizations, in
particular the African Union. I would like to recall that,
during Rwanda’s presidency in July 2014, the Council
adopted resolution 2167 (2014), which calls for the
46/57

24/05/2016

strengthening of regional partnerships in peacekeeping.
At the same time, at the initiative of Chad, the Security
Council adopted a presidential statement in December
2014 (S/PRST/2014/27) that expresses its resolve
to strengthen coordination and capitalize on the
comparative advantages of two organizations.
The challenge we have today is to instil positive
evolution towards that kind of partnership — to move
from an ad hoc partnership to a more structured and
strategic framework of partnership. As partners,
the AU Peace and Security Council and the Security
Council must work towards the same purpose
in complementarity, based on their comparative
advantages, including knowing when it is critical to
prevent a conflict, or to rapidly deploy troops to avert
the igniting of a large-scale conflict and save lives.
There is a need to enhance our coordination, develop
more efficient communications in matters of peace and
security in Africa and hold timely consultations on
matters. Where appropriate, the two Councils should
undertake joint field missions.
In addition, we need to further address the challenges
related to financial resources and technical capacity,
which often compromise the goals and ambitions
of many regional and subregional organizations,
particularly the African Union. My delegation reiterates
its call for enhancing the predictability, sustainability
and flexibility in the financing of regional organizations
in peace and security related efforts. In that regard,
we call for sustained support to the newly established
African Union Peace Fund, led by Mr. Kaberuka, which
was put in place to provide the necessary resources for
peace support missions and other operational activities
related to peace and security. It is also our view that
regional organizations should be encouraged to assume
ownership of their initiatives as much as possible and
strive towards self-reliance. As a partner, the United
Nations should seek to actively assist the capacitybuilding of such organizations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Djibouti.
Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti): At the outset, Djibouti
would like to express its gratitude to the delegation
of the Arab Republic of Egypt for its leadership in
organizing this important debate of the Security Council
on the theme “United Nations-African Union peace and
security cooperation: Chapter VIII application and the
future of the African Peace and Security Architecture”.
16-14510

24/05/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

We would also like to thank the presidency for the
concept note (S/2016/428, annex) drafted in preparation
for this meeting, which helps frame the issues and
sharpen our focus on key achievements as well as on
the serious deficiencies that need to be remedied. We
would also like to express our appreciation for this
morning’s very useful briefings.
Djibouti aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
sets out the international consensus on global-regional
relationships. United Nations support in managing
conflicts in Africa has become increasingly robust over
the past 25 years, rising from two United Nations-led
peacekeeping operations in 1990 to 15 in 2015. The
missions in Africa constitute the majority of United
Nations peacekeeping missions worldwide and have
served as an important proving ground for United
Nations engagement in managing conflict. What
started largely as improvisation, to quote a former
United Nations official, has evolved tremendously,
and the African Union Peace and Security Council has
proved a reliable partner on that journey.
As the concept note (S/2016/428, annex) rightly
points out, and as echoed by many speakers today,
the changing nature of conflict on the continent and
the operational questions it raises add another layer
of complexity to the cohesiveness of our global links,
which have often been seriously tested in the past. How
do we engage with non-State actors that do not respect
humanitarian law? How do we deal with the increase in
illegal activities and violent insurgencies? How do we
ensure that the peacekeeping institutions, the regional
economic communities, the African Union and the
United Nations do indeed see their relationships as
partnerships rather than a competition for which goes
first and which leads in which process? Drawing on
lessons learned and building on the pertinent views of
many stakeholders and on the outcome of today’s open
debate, we should identify concrete ways for further
strengthening an integrated worldwide system for
cooperative action, as envisioned in Chapter VIII of
the Charter.

S/PV.7694

Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
including through recommendations on strengthening
conflict prevention capabilities and mediation. It also
recommended emphasizing the importance of political
solutions and joint cooperation on such solutions
in order to ensure that the resulting broad range of
partners would enable potential crises to be detected
well in advance.
The forthcoming signing of the framework
document for the 10-year strategic partnership document
on peace and security between the United Nations and
the African Union; Agenda 2063; and the campaign
for “Silencing the guns in Africa by 2020”, combined
with the annual joint consultations since 2007 between
the Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council constitute a major institutional
framework for cooperation between the two entities.
We have noted with satisfaction the implementation
of this framework for cooperation with the United
Nations through the creation of several regional and
subregional organization liaison offices and the recent
signing, in Djibouti in November 2015, of a partnership
framework between the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and the United Nations. Thanks to such
mechanisms, cooperation at the inter-organizational
level should be another resource to take advantage
of. Such tools should inevitably result in developing
shared strategies founded on joint assessments, solid
decision-making mechanisms based on consultation
and information-sharing, and follow-up arrangements
that enable cooperation on planning and operations
throughout the conflict cycle. Only with productive
partnerships can we improve collective security.

(spoke in French)

The deployment of Blue Helmets, 50 per cent of
them Africans, in a number of peacekeeping operations
in various parts of the continent clearly demonstrates
the commitment of African Member States and of the
African Union and its regional components and member
States to contribute, in complementarity with the United
Nations, to collective security as it was envisaged by
the Charter. The examples of cooperation with the
African Union are many and varied — the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
the joint missions in the Central African Republic and
Mali, as well as the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), are illustrations of that partnership.

In 2015, the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) considered
it essential to improve cooperation between the United

Since its deployment in 2007, AMISOM, with
its 22,000 soldiers and police, has contributed to a
significant improvement in the security situation

16-1451047/57

S/PV.7694

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

in Somalia. While Somalia remains fragile owing
to the continued existence of areas of insecurity, a
great deal of progress still remains to be made on the
humanitarian front. In order to provide AMISOM with
logistical support, and in keeping with carrying out its
mandate effectively, the United Nations established the
United Nations Support Office for the African Union
Mission in Somalia, aimed at strengthening AMISOM’s
limited operational and financial capacity. However,
despite that support, the lack of force multipliers, such
as helicopters, has been no help at all to the African
force’s task on the ground. To that we have to add the
upcoming 20 per cent cut in funding from the European
Union, which will have a severe effect on the Mission
and risks becoming a serious setback to everything that
has been and still remains to be achieved.
It is urgent that we find fertile ground for increased
synergies, a harmonious African Union-United Nations
partnership for preventing, mediating and managing
violent conflicts and providing opportunities for more
joint efforts to increase resource mobilization. In that
regard, greater flexibility in interpreting Chapter VIII
of the Charter would significantly reduce such problems
in matters related to international peace and security.
Seventy per cent of the world’s crises are
concentrated in Africa, and the Security Council devotes
two thirds of its deliberations to them. It is therefore
vital to the continent’s security, and to international
peace and security generally, that we identify longterm solutions. To achieve that, we cannot economize
on the importance of regular, collective reflection,
particularly through holding regular meetings of the
United Nations-African Union Joint Task Force on
Peace and Security.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): Portugal welcomes
your initiative in organizing today’s open debate,
Mr. President, and giving Member States an opportunity
to express their views on such an important topic.
Portugal fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union, and I would
like to add a few words in my national capacity.
The declaration adopted by the African Union (AU)
at its 2013 Summit set the ambitious goal of a conflictfree continent by the end of 2020. That is now a key
pillar of the AU’s Agenda 2063 and the road map for
48/57

24/05/2016

the African Peace and Security Architecture. We all
agree that it is not an easy task, but it should not be
impossible to achieve. The strengthening of the United
Nations-AU strategic partnership, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
particularly through strengthened dialogue and welldesigned cooperation between the Security Council and
the Peace and Security Council of the AU, is crucial to
helping to achieve that ambitious goal. We believe that
closer and more fruitful cooperation between those two
bodies will make a difference in bringing about a more
sensible approach to peace and security in Africa and a
more efficient response to major security threats, such
as transnational organized crime and terrorism, which
will be key to preventing conflicts in the future.
The recently concluded reviews of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture and peacekeeping
operations, and of the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, clearly
emphasize that. They also explain why the role of
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in conflict prevention
and conflict situations, and in post-conflict-affected
countries, is so fundamental. Regional and subregional
organizations enjoy additional legitimacy that channels
regional and national ownership. They can also keep
a closer eye on and have a better understanding of
situations of common concern and in need of attention
on the ground. They are, and must be, on the front line
of action and responsibility, and the United Nations
must partner with them closely.
With regard to conflict prevention, mediation
activities and peacekeeping operations in Africa,
cooperation and coordination between the United
Nations and the AU, and between both those
organizations and other international actors, must be
shaped in a way that is conducive to early assessments
of challenges and to better-tailored responses. As we
know, those are more likely to succeed by ensuring
sustainable solutions to conflicts and properly
addressing their root causes. At this point, I would once
again like to stress that establishing mechanisms aimed
at ensuring the involvement and active participation of
women in preventing conflicts and supporting peace
and in post-conflict processes in Africa is very critical.
In our view, the women and peace and security agenda
should always be at the centre of United NationsAfrican Union cooperation in the maintenance of peace
and security.
16-14510

24/05/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

We believe that the promotion of regional integration
in Africa can also greatly contribute to sustaining peace.
Further advances in that regard, with good coordination
between regional economic communities and the AU
Peace and Security Council, are welcome and should be
encouraged. One area of particular importance when it
comes to African conflict-afflicted countries is security
sector reform. It deserves our consistent attention and
requires joint efforts to consolidate and disseminate the
lessons learned and the best practices for promoting
and sustaining the rule of law and respect for human
rights, as well as development, which must play a
central role. We recognize that the African Peace and
Security Architecture provides the African continent
with a valid structure and suitable mechanisms to
support peace. However, we are aware of the persistent
challenges, notably in ensuring true national ownership
of the peacebuilding framework and strengthening the
capabilities of African countries.
We are all aware that these processes require strong
political will and leadership, alongside the consistent
support of the international community. When it comes
to international support to sustain peace, there is
clearly room for improvement, including by stepping up
efforts and providing training and adequate equipment.
If we want peace to be sustainable, we must be ready
to grant consistent attention and the required means as
long as necessary. The sustainability and predictability
of resources are deeply interlinked as preconditions
for effectiveness. In that regard, deepening the
partnerships between the United Nations, the AU,
regional economic communities, international financial
institutions and regional development banks to ensure
the diversification of funding sources for peacebuilding
activities is, in our opinion, the way to go.

S/PV.7694

kind of partnership. The dialogue and institutional
cooperation in the context of the Joint Africa-European
Union Strategy have so far led to concrete, positive
results not only in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts, but also in sustaining peace and in postconflict reconstruction. They have also proven to be
relevant in the operationalization of the African Peace
and Security Architecture. The trilateral cooperation,
based on the broad common ground shared by the
United Nations, the AU and the European Union has
also proven to be quite valuable and should continue to
be promoted and further strengthened.
In conclusion, Portugal, bilaterally and as a member
of the European Union and of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, has been a consistent
supporter of those efforts and will definitely continue
to be.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): Turkey aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union. I will speak in my national capacity.
At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this useful meeting. Today,
the international community is facing increasingly
complex challenges to peace and security that are
outpacing the current capacity of the United Nations.
The United Nations has administrative and budgetary
constraints, in addition to structural problems in
addressing those global challenges.

We also welcome and encourage the further
development of the synergies of the African Peace
and Security Architecture, closely linking action
on peace and security initiatives with democracy,
good governance and human rights, in line with the
principles expressed in the Constitutive Act of the
African Union. The United Nations and the AU should
therefore combine their respective efforts and further
optimize the use of the instruments at their disposal.

The recent peace and security reviews have
confirmed that partnerships and cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations are key factors
for the success of the United Nations. The report of the
Secretary-General on cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations on mediation (A/70/328)
also underlines the need for enhanced partnerships.
It also calls for strengthening the existing strategic
mechanisms between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU), especially in the field of peace
operations and in finding lasting political solutions to
the continent’s problems.

I would simply recall the Joint Africa-European
Union Strategy, launched in 2007 in Lisbon, based on
comprehensive joint interests and values, including
respect for human rights, freedoms, equality, solidarity,
justice and democracy, which remains a very unique

While discussing the ways to achieve peace and
stability in Africa, we must emphasize the role of the
continent’s own peace and security arrangements. In that
context, the African Peace and Security Architecture
(APSA) embraces a comprehensive agenda for peace

16-1451049/57

S/PV.7694

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

and security in the continent. We believe that the APSA
road map for 2016-2020 will contribute to achieving
the goals of the African Union initiative Silencing the
Guns. We also believe that APSA will contribute to
the realization of the goals within the African Union
Agenda 2063 in the long run as well. Furthermore,
covering cross-cutting issues — such as gender
and youth mainstreaming in peace and security, the
possible consequences of climate change and natural
resource management on conflict, and migration
flows — highlight the significance of the road map.
Efficient early warning systems are fundamental
for Africa. To that end, We are pleased to see that
APSA and its two key components, the African Standby
Force and the Continental Early Warning System, have
been put into operation. We likewise welcome the
appointment of the new High Representative for the
African Peace Fund, Mr. Donald Kaberuka. As part of
APSA, it is important to maintain coordination among
the partners, regional mechanisms and the African
Union so that, in particular, the partners can receive
updated information regarding the process of the
implementation of the road map.
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
provides the legal framework for the United Nations to
enter into regional arrangements in the maintenance of
international peace and security. We are glad to observe
the positive trend in the past decade on the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union to
find solutions to ongoing conflicts in Africa on the
basis of such a legal framework.
In 2011 and 2012, the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission released
their respective reports on how to enhance relations
between the two organizations. In that regard, progress
in implementing the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the future of peace operations
(S/2015/682), which includes work on developing a
joint United Nations-African Union framework for an
enhanced partnership in peace and security, is crucial.
The establishment of the United Nations-African Union
Joint Task Force on Peace and Security in September
2010 was perhaps the most practical step at improving
bilateral cooperation.
Turkey encourages the expansion of the United
Nations-African Union partnership so as to include
areas such as institutional capacity-building, security
sector reform, the protection of civilians, human rights,
50/57

24/05/2016

gender mainstreaming and combating organized crime.
Turkey also contributes bilaterally to peace and security
in Africa. In the second Africa-Turkey Summit, held in
Malabo in November 2014, we reiterated our desire to
continue cooperation in all fields of peace and security
through the exchange of expertise, information and
training programmes. The Joint Implementation Plan
of Africa-Turkey Partnership, adopted at the Summit,
outlines the way ahead to further strengthen our
comprehensive collaboration.
Peace and security are an important pillar of that
cooperation. Since 2008, when Turkey became one of
the strategic partners of the continent, we have been
providing financial assistance to the African Union.
Turkey also allocated resources to the East African
Standby Force activities from its annual contributions
for the years 2015-2016. We are also working on
providing further support to the African Capacity for
Immediate Response to Crisis .
Turkey takes part in the United Nations missions
deployed in the continent. We are currently providing
personnel and contributing financially to seven of
the nine existing peacekeeping missions in Africa.
Moreover, Turkey also takes part in five out of six
country-specific configurations of the Peacebuilding
Commission. Turkey has been chairing the Horn of
Africa Working Group within the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, with the EU. Within
the framework of the peacebuilding and State-building
efforts in Somalia, Turkey is co-chairing the Security
Sector Working Group with the United States.
Moreover, Turkey contributed $2 million in total to the
African Union Mission in Somalia in 2009 and 2012 to
ensure the improvement of the security environment in
Somalia and an effective fight against Al-Shabaab.
Turkey will continue to do its utmost to contribute
to peace and security in Africa. We will also
constructively participate in international and regional
initiatives to that end.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Bosah (Nigeria): On behalf of my delegation,
I wish to thank the delegation of Egypt for having
organized this open debate. We also wish to thank
the briefers for their perspectives on the subject
under discussion.
16-14510

24/05/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security is
a growing trend. It has been demonstrated time and
again that regional and subregional organizations
can contribute their usually proximate understanding
of local and regional conflicts and their root causes
to a mutually beneficial partnership with the United
Nations. Over the years, many regional and subregional
organizations have taken advantage of the provisions
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
which provides the platform through which the United
Nations and regional organizations could work together
to prevent, manage and resolve crises and develop
strategies to effectively engage in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding.
While the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security resides
with the Security Council, regional actions lighten the
burden of the Council and provide an added layer of
legitimacy to multilateralism. Indeed, regional efforts
enhance the prospects for inclusivity and consensus in
addressing the increasing challenges to global peace
and security. Threats, such as extremist ideologies,
terrorism, the illicit transfer and proliferation of small
arms and light weapons, humanitarian disasters,
human trafficking, environmental hazards, drug
trafficking, the criminal use of cybertechnology and
global pandemics, among others, are critical factors
that have profoundly shaped international security in
modern times. Those security challenges tend to be
transnational in character and are often beyond the
capacity of any one country to resolve. That makes the
collaboration between the United Nations and regional
organizations all the more pertinent.
It is significant to underline the importance of the
cooperation that exists between the United Nations and
the African Union (AU). In 2006, both organizations
reached an agreement on the Ten-Year CapacityBuilding Programme for the AU that provides the main
framework for United Nations assistance to the AU.
Under the Programme, the United Nations has supported
the African Union in areas such as capacity-building for
mediation, electoral assistance and technical assistance
to the African Union Peace and Security Council.
The United Nations and the African Union have also
worked for the maintenance of peace and security
through collaboration in peacekeeping operations
on the African continent. The Security Council and

S/PV.7694

the African Union Peace and Security Council have,
through their annual consultations, held discussions on
issues of common interest, especially conflict situations
in Africa. Those consultations are mutually beneficial
because they allow for close coordination of the actions
of the African Union and the United Nations in matters
of peace and security. We believe that the process
could benefit from a strengthening of the policy-level
coordination between the two organizations.
While those developments are encouraging, the
opportunities and challenges remain critical points for
ensuring a more functional and effective cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and regional
arrangements. Such cooperation and collaboration must
be premised on a clear division of labour that recognizes
the relative advantage of each organization. We believe
that more work needs to be done on how the United
Nations can better support arrangements for further
cooperation and coordination with the African Union
on Chapter VIII arrangements in addressing common
security challenges. Such arrangements would also
serve to deepen and broaden dialogue and cooperation
between the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union.
In concluding, I wish to call attention to the fact
that in the face of the increasing gap between the
demand for the involvement of the United Nations in
conflict situations, on the one hand, and the United
Nations ability to respond effectively, on the other,
regional organizations become even more compelling
as enablers of peace. That is why we believe that
greater consideration should be accorded to expanding
and enhancing regional approaches to the pursuit of
international peace and security. Regional approaches,
in essence, represent a critical bridge between the
national and global dimensions of conflict. It is a
bridge that we must continue to build, no matter how
challenging that may appear to be.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the pleasure to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its 28 member
States. The following countries align themselves with
this statement: Albania, Montenegro, Serbia, Turkey,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, which are
all candidate countries to join the European Union; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process

16-1451051/57

S/PV.7694

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Georgia, Republic of Moldova and Ukraine.
Allow me to thank you, Sir, for having taken
this initiative and the good concept note (S/2016/428,
annex).
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
explicitly recognizes and encourages the role of regional
arrangements in peace and security and strengthening
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
organizations. We very much welcome and support
the expansion and intensification of United NationsAfrican Union (AU) peace and security cooperation
over the past 10 years since the launch of the Framework
for the Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme for
the AU in 2006. For its part, the European Union has
always been committed to effective multilateralism
and to intensifying its cooperation with the United
Nations and regional organizations, in particular the
African Union.
We have also invested in strong triangular
cooperation among the EU, the AU and the United
Nations to face immediate challenges and build
capacities in a comprehensive and long-term
perspective. The added value of that cooperation is
clearly illustrated by the results of our joint efforts
in Somalia, Mali and the Central African Republic,
as well as in other parts of Africa. We welcome the
recommendations of the United Nations reviews on
peace operations, the peacebuilding architecture and
resolution 1325 (2000), and expect that follow-up work
will include concrete steps to enhance the overall
effectiveness of the global security architecture, in
full recognition of the role of regional organizations
and the AU-United Nations partnership. The EU also
promotes the improvement of engagement of the United
Nations and regional organizations with civil society in
peacebuilding, conflict prevention and mediation.
Improved cooperation and coordination with and
among regional organizations is indeed a priority.
We are pleased, in that regard, with the long-standing
and fruitful partnership that we have developed with
the African Union. We strongly support the African
aspiration and commitment to ensuring peace, security
and stability on the continent, in the framework of the
African Peace and Security Architecture, in order to
improve the African capacity to prevent or respond
to crises, we are committed to operationalize the
multidimensional African Standby Force and recognize
52/57

24/05/2016

the African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises
as a transitional and complementary tool to the African
Standby Force for further enhancing the AU capacity
to respond rapidly to crises and reinforce the support to
the Continental Early Warning System.
Consultations were held last year to identify
common priorities for capacity-building support for
2016 to 2018. The EU also funded a command and
control coordination information system designed to
manage AU-led peace support operations, which will
be fully operational in 2017.
We also welcome the progress that has been made
to date in enhancing the capacity of the African Union
to manage crises on the continent. We value the positive
role that the African Union has played in the context of
several electoral crises on the continent and in recalling
very clearly the principles of the African Charter on
Democracy, Elections and Good Governance. In that
context, we especially welcome and appreciate the
intense participation of African countries in peace
support operations on the continent — be it in United
Nations missions or hybrid or African Union-led
missions. Every day, like many others from around the
world, those peacekeepers are putting their lives at risk
to fight insurgents, protect civilians and try to prepare
the ground for peace. They deserve our support, and the
EU has been providing just that.
Within the framework of the EU’s comprehensive
approach to tackling conflicts and its causes, and
building on the experiences of our Common Security
and Defence Policy missions and operations, such as
those in Mali, the Niger, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Somalia and the Central African Republic,
the EU is committed to working in close collaboration
with Africa in the framework of the African Peace
and Security Architecture, in support of African-led
peace operations and, more generally, with African
efforts in such areas as security sector reform,
border management, peacebuilding or post-conflict
reconstruction or reconciliation, through the provision
of advice, mentoring and training.
The EU and its African partners have laid the
foundation for cooperation on a number of security
challenges with several regions in Africa — for
instance, in the Sahel, the Gulf of Guinea and the Horn
of Africa. They all address security threats and forms
of organized crime, including trafficking in arms,
drugs and persons and the issue of piracy.
16-14510

24/05/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

On an institutional level, the EU Political and
Security Committee and AU Peace and Security
Councils hold an annual joint meeting and retreat,
where the two Councils have an opportunity to engage
in constructive dialogue on issues of mutual interest.
Regular contacts between the Chairs of the EU and
Councils also contribute to deepening the political
dialogue between the two bodies, which also undertook
a joint field visit to Mali last year. In that regard, we
welcome the regular meetings between the Council and
the AU Peace and Security Council.
The EU has provided substantial financial support
for African peace operations. In the 10 years since
2004, the EU has provided nearly €2 billion to AU-led
peace operations through its African Peace Facility,
by which, among others, we support the efforts of the
African Union Mission in Somalia against Al-Shabaab,
and the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism in
South Sudan led by the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD), as well as the multinational
joint task force against Boko Haram and the Economic
Community of West African States Security mission in
Guinea-Bissau.
Other EU instruments and programmes are
increasingly involved in that area, in particular the
eleventh European Development Fund Regional
Indicative Programme and the instrument contributing
to stability and peace, which supports regional mediation
efforts by IGAD in South Sudan and the East African
Community in Burundi. The EU’s emergency response
mechanism is used to support early civilian and/or
military interventions such as ceasefire monitoring and
verification mechanisms. It recently helped fund the
deployment of AU human rights and military observers
in Burundi.
In July 2015, EU member States addressed the
sustainability challenges of the African Peace Facility.
They agreed on an increase to the African Peace Facility
envelope from €750 million to €900 million. A further
agreement was reached recently for €710 million to
ensure funding for the African Peace Facility for
the period 2016-2018. At the same time, the EU also
realized that it was necessary to gradually reorient our
support towards more practical, physical capacities such
as logistics and deployment, and decided to reorient
the African Peace Facility to that effect. That will not
suffice, however. Some of the new threats, such as the
fight against terrorist groups, will require significant
resources and take time. The situation warrants urgent

S/PV.7694

additional support from African and non-African
partners and the United Nations to effectively support
African-led peace support operations.
The African Peace and Security Architecture is
an African-owned process. Long-term sustainability
and African ownership are intrinsically linked. The
heavy dependence by the AU and African regional
organizations on international partners and on EU
funds limits African ownership and the establishment
of lasting African capacities to address Africa’s
peace and security issues. The recent appointment of
the highly respected former President of the African
Development Bank, Mr. Donald Kaberuka, as AU High
Representative to the AU Peace Fund is an important sign
of the AU’s commitment to tackle financial challenges.
Mr. Kaberuka visited Brussels last week, where he
exchanged views about his plans for the implementation
of financial commitments made by AU leaders at recent
AU summits and about his deliberations on setting up
the AU Peace Fund with sustainable and predictable
financing. We look forward to further cooperation with
Mr. Kaberuka in that regard.
In conclusion, we remain strongly committed to
an ever-stronger partnership with the AU, as well as
increased triangular cooperation among the EU, AU
and the United Nations, in order to fully achieve the
establishment of lasting African peace and security
capacities in full respect of African ownership.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Buffin (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the President of the Security Council for
taking the initiative to organize this debate, which
allows us to address the important issue of cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union on
peace and security. I would also like to express my
gratitude for the briefings.
Belgium fully endorses the statement just made
on behalf of the European Union. I wish to add the
following remarks in my national capacity.
Today’s debate is important because it is on the
African continent that cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations is the most developed.
At the same time, it is there that such cooperation is
the most necessary, in view of the numerous challenges
to peace and security that arise there. This debate is
also important because it makes it possible to recall the

16-1451053/57

S/PV.7694

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

added value of regional organizations in resolving and
preventing conflict thanks to their knowledge of the
terrain, the protagonists and mindsets, not to mention
their interest in promoting stability in their immediate
environment. In short, there is a complementarity
of action between the United Nations and regional
organizations that should be strengthened, in particular
in view of finding African solutions to African
problems. I should like to make the following comments
on the specific issue of cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union on peace and security.
First, in recent years we have noted the development
of a growing and varied partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union. That partnership has
resulted in very concrete results, such as the takeover
of an African Union mission by a United Nations
mission, in Mali and in the Central African Republic,
and the logistical support provided by the African
Union Mission in Somalia, to name just a two. Those
developments are encouraging insofar as they reflect
an increasing interaction and a shared vision of
peacekeeping.
Furthermore, I believe that there is another area
of operation to explore with regard to peacekeeping
technical capabilities. The Department of Field Support
has developed unequalled know-how in that area,
especially in organizational and logistical matters.
In that regard, the African Union might benefit from
a transfer of knowledge for the development of its
security architecture.
As a State member of the European Union
(EU), Belgium is, moreover, in favour of pursuing
a relationship of tripartite cooperation among the
European Union, the United Nations and the African
Union. I recall that the European Union has played
a pioneering role in the area of cooperation with
the African Union. To this day, it remains the main
financial contributor to the peacekeeping operations
of the African Union. The tried-and-tested European
Union African Peace Facility should be maintained.
For all that, the search for a lasting solution to the
issue of financing for African Union peacekeeping
operations must continue. In that regard, we welcome
the commitment undertaken by States members of the
African Union at the January 2015 Summit to shoulder
25 per cent of the cost of those operations by the end of
the decade.
54/57

24/05/2016

In practical terms, deepening cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union that
Belgium would wish to see could advance through the
implementation of some simple and practical measures.
In terms of information exchange, for example, we
would suggest that United Nations representatives
and special envoys be regularly invited to speak
before the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union. Conversely, the various envoys and facilitators
of the African Union should also appear regularly to
express their views before the Security Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission when crisis situations
or matters of mutual interest so require. That would
promote the direct exchange of information and good
practices and more consistent analyses.
Another area in which the importance of close
cooperation between the two organizations is crucial
is support for electoral processes. Elections are an area
of activity where the African Union and the United
Nations must work together in a concerted effort of
mediation and conflict prevention. The 2007 African
Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance
could be a useful reference point in that regard.
In that regard, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo provides us with a specific situation where the
African Union is working to launch a dialogue between
the opposition and the Government in order to shape
the electoral process, and could benefit from significant
support from the United Nations. In Burundi, too, the
good understanding between the United Nations and
the African Union, via coordinated action between
their respective special envoys, is essential to support
subregional mediation. A complementary approach
could be adopted, as necessary, between the observers
of African Union, who are already deployed in the
country, and the future United Nations police mission.
Furthermore, the United Nations has mediation
expertise that can be very useful in such situations and
should be shared with the African Union.
In conclusion, Belgium welcomes the initiatives of
the African Union aimed at implementing resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. I am
thinking specifically of the appointment in January
2014 of Ms. Bineta Diop as Special Envoy for Women,
Peace and Security by the President of the African
Union Commission. I also note the launch in June 2014
of the five-year Gender, Peace and Security programme,
which was designed to increase the participation
of women in promoting peace and security, while
16-14510

24/05/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.7694

enhancing their protection in conflict and post-conflict
situations in Africa.

Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme for the African
Union”.

There is a complementarity of action and clear
common goals between the African Union and the
United Nations in working for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Political, operational
and logistical cooperation is possible. It is therefore our
wish that our debate today helps to lay a new milestone
on the path of strengthening the partnership between
those two organizations with a view to ending the too
many conflicts that still plague Africa and its peoples.

With respect to promoting cooperation between the
United Nations and the AU in the maintenance of peace
and security in Africa and the need for the peaceful
settlement of disputes, that should top the list of our
priorities, including mediation on border issues, early
warning and logistical capacity-building. We look
forward to further close coordination, particularly with
regard to the support provided by the United Nations
to the Framework for the Ten-Year Capacity Building
Programme for the Africa Union and the fields of
peacebuilding and peacekeeping. The financing of
regional peacekeeping operations continues to occupy
a central role with regard to defining and organizing
relations between the two organizations.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I should like
to congratulate Egypt once again on its accession to the
presidency of the Security Council, and thank you, Sir,
for organizing this open debate on the theme “United
Nations-African Union peace and security cooperation:
Chapter VIII application and the future of the African
Peace and Security Architecture”.
The founding fathers of the United Nations were
eager to include in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations provisions to support the efforts of
regional and subregional organizations in the field of
peace and security because they fully understood that
world peace is indivisible. They also understood that
the establishment of effective partnerships between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations on questions relating to the maintenance
of international peace and security is also indispensable.
To that end, the recommendations of the joint
African Union-United Nations panel established under
resolution 1809 (2008) adopted recommendations
on modalities for support to African Union (AU)
peacekeeping operations. The first part of the panel’s
report (see S/2008/813) stressed the importance of
enhancing the strategic relations between the AU and
the United Nations and operationalizing channels of
joint action between the AU Peace and Security Council
and the Security Council in genuine partnership and
direct coordination, including in decision-making and
shared responsibilities pursuant to the mandates of the
two organizations. That is why the relationship between
the AU and the United Nations has been strong and
extensive. The two organizations have made progress in
supporting their mutual relations, according to opinions
expressed in the 2006 Declaration entitled “Enhancing
United Nations-AU Cooperation: Framework for the

With regard to peacekeeping, the delegation of the
Sudan would like to underscore the cooperation between
the Secretariat and the AU Commission in the context
of the United Nations African Union Mission in Darfur
(UNAMID). Such cooperation has proven useful since
the previous African Union Mission in Sudan operation
became a joint operation between the two organizations
on 31 December 2007 under resolution 1769 (2007). The
Mission has become an example of cooperation between
the AU and the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. In that regard, we
recall the joint report submitted by the SecretaryGeneral and the Chairperson of the AU Commission
on the hybrid operation in Darfur (see S/2007/307)
in June 2007. The report stressed that UNAMID had
an exclusively African nature and component, while
the United Nations provided financial, technical and
logistical support, including technical advice in various
fields. The Mission thereby symbolizes cooperation
between the two organizations.
The time has come to implement a road map for
the drawdown of UNAMID, especially since we have
already turned the page on the conflict and the situation
in the five states has normalized. Internally displaced
persons in different parts of Darfur have returned to
their homes and started living their lives normally.
In addition, more than 100,000 returnees returned to
their homes after the roads between Jebel Marra and
other major areas in Darfur and in the Sudan had been
secured.
Moreover, we would like to point out that primary
school students recently sat for exams under stable

16-1451055/57

S/PV.7694

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

and secure conditions for the first time in 13 years.
Council members probably followed the administrative
referendum in Darfur on the implementation of the
provisions of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
and how the referendum was carried out in a free and
transparent manner. The results, which were declared
on 23 April, all supported the maintenance of the status
quo, that is, the choice of the states, by a majority of
97.72 per cent.
I would also like to cite yet another example that
demonstrates the successful cooperation between the
African Union and the Organization through regional
mediation mechanism, such as the High-Level Panel
on Illicit Financial Flows from Africa, headed by
Mr. Thabo Mbeki, which plays an important role in the
maintenance and promotion of peace in the Sudan and
between the Sudan and South Sudan. Such constructive
cooperation must be promoted, and the mechanisms
must be given time to resolve the pending issues
between the two countries.
I would like to stress that the Government of the
Sudan endorsed and signed the road map prepared by
the high-level mechanism to promote the comprehensive
peace process in the Sudan, while the opposition
continues to obdurately refuse to sign it. We therefore
call on the Council to bring pressure to bear on those
who have so far refused to sign the road map so that
everybody can concentrate their efforts on building and
reconstruction.
Lastly, my country would like to welcome
presidential
statement
S/PRST/2016/8,
which
underscores the increased contribution of regional and
subregional organizations in complementing the role
of international organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security and in enhancing the
capacity of national legal systems to undertake their role
in the area of accountability. I would like to reiterate
the statements made by previous speakers that regional
and subregional organizations have a comparative
advantage in achieving peace and security because they
are familiar with the local cultures of conflict areas. We
also pay tribute to the Security Council and appeal to
it to give such organizations time to find the necessary
solutions.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
56/57

24/05/2016

Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic
Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Egypt on taking
the initiative of organizing this meeting. I would also
like to congratulate the various speakers who spoke
before me for their very valuable briefings. I welcome
this opportunity afforded to me and I welcome the
willingness and determination of the Security Council
to establish strong cooperation and partnership between
the United Nations and regional organizations in order
to contribute to international peace and security. My
country particularly welcomes this approach and
the efforts made by the African Union, in particular
because we know that the African continent has been
for many years the most unstable continent and the
most inclined to conflicts.
Allow me to refer to some of the statements made
by some Member States of the Security Council in
referring to the situation in my country and alleged that
the Head of State intends to remain in office. First of
all, in that regard, in numerous of our statements to the
Security Council we have made it clear that the Head
of State respects his country’s Constitution and will not
modify it as has been done elsewhere.
With regard to the organization of elections, my
country has also insisted here in the Chamber on
many occasions that the elections will be held but that
they must take place under proper conditions in order
to maintain peace and security, which the Congolese
people, who have suffered so greatly from wars, greatly
value. Those who love the Democratic Republic of the
Congo must understand that and help us to that end.
Furthermore, my country is surprised by the
double-standard positions that have been taken by some
members of the Security Council. The world, which
is listening to Council members and observing them
as they conduct their deliberations in the Chamber,
are surprised by the positions taken by some Council
members with regard to some States while they indulge
other States. That could jeopardize the credibility of the
good decisions that the Council normally takes.
With regard to human rights violations, as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of my country said to the
Security Council, by making both the National Human
Rights Commission and the human rights liaison entity
operational, my country has resolutely indicated its
firm and ongoing determination to protect the rights of
all its citizens, even the foreigners living on its territory.
16-14510

24/05/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The political space in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is the most open in the entire region, and
will remain so. That can be seen in the existence of
approximately than 400 political parties as well as in
the hundreds of private radio and television stations,
which are allowed to freely determine their editorial
positions, many of which reflect those of well-known
political players who are members of the opposition.
The media is constitutionally controlled by the High
Audiovisual and Communication Council, which
supports democracy and which includes representatives
from the media in all their diversity.
It has also been clearly shown that, unlike in other
countries where if one opposes the Government one
must leave the country, practically all political leaders
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo live in the
country and engage in political activity. They can come
and go from the territory without any restrictions on
their movements owing to their opinions.
That having been said, as in any State governed by
the rule of law, where the primacy of law and the equality
of all before the law are fundamental principles, public
freedoms are to be exercised in conformity with the law
and the need to maintain public order. As guarantor of

S/PV.7694

the freedoms and rights of all, the State is obligated
to uphold these principles, consistent with the adage
that holds that the rights of one end where the rights
of others begin. An individual’s rights and freedoms
do not permit the individual to flout with impunity the
legal system designed to protect the rights and safety
of all.
Accordingly, when necessary, as in any State
governed by the rule of law, the courts intervene, acting
with complete independence, to punish those who
commit crimes. Membership in the political opposition,
the political majority, civil society or the police or
the military does not release a perpetrator from legal
responsibility for committing a crime. For a country
like ours, whose people have suffered greatly from the
impunity of those who enjoy privileges derived from
their social status or standing, softness in this area does
not help to strengthen democracy, but rather serves to
undermine it. The same applies when serious human
rights violations and crimes against humanity are not
prosecuted.
My country believed it was necessary to bring
those points to the Council’s attention.
The meeting rose at 3.30 p.m.

16-1451057/57
