United Nations

S/PV.4877 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-eighth year

4877

th meeting
Tuesday, 9 December 2003, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Tafrov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Bulgaria)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Manuel
Mr. Tidjani
Mr. Andereya Latorre
Mr. Cheng Jingye
Mrs. D’Achon
Mr. Von Bieberstein
Mr. Touré
Mrs. Arce de Jeannet
Mr. Khalid
Mrs. Golovnya
Ms. Menéndez
Mr. Atieh
Mr. Lake
Mr. Olson

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

03-64820 (E)

*
0
3
6
4
8
2
0
*

S/PV.4877 (Resumption 1)

The meeting was resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President (spoke in French): I would remind
representatives that, in order to optimize the use of our
time, I will not individually invite speakers to take
seats at the table. When a speaker is taking the floor,
the Conference Officer will seat the next speaker on the
list at the Council table.
The first speaker on my list is the Permanent
Representative of Japan, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): I would like to welcome
the decision of the Security Council to convene this
open debate on the issue of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, which is of great concern to all
Member States. I wish to commend the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) for its
work in updating the aide-memoire as well as the road
map on protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Let me also take advantage of this opportunity to
welcome the press statement by the President of the
Security Council — you yourself — issued yesterday
on the condemnation of the attacks in Iraq on foreign
and Iraqi nationals and on international and coalition
personnel, including two fellow Japanese diplomats.
Japan shares the conviction that, under any and
all circumstances, civilians should be protected from
becoming the targets of deliberate attacks. Attacks on
vulnerable civilians, who have no means of defending
themselves — especially children and women — are
disgraceful, barbaric and cowardly acts. They also
destroy the basic fabric of society, generate enmity and
mutual distrust, and do irreparable harm to any
opportunity
for
rehabilitating
post-conflict
communities. Every attack against civilians must be
strongly condemned and the perpetrators brought to
justice in accordance with international law.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is an
area where a human security approach is also
indispensable. As the report of the Commission on
Human Security points out, human security should be
placed on the security agenda, and humanitarian action
should be strengthened; these are two important
policies, which must be enhanced. Japan is determined
to cooperate closely with the various stakeholders to
promote human security in this field.
The aide-memoire is an important tool; it helps to
guide us in our consideration of protection issues.

2

Threats to civilians are so diverse and complex that we
may find it difficult to focus our efforts. However, we
must not become confused in the face of seemingly
complicated situations. Let me try to draw a clearer
picture of the challenges we face and the tasks ahead of
us with respect to the protection of civilians by
discussing the sources, types and duration of threats to
civilians in armed conflict.
First, let me turn to the sources of threats and
ways to address them. In recent times, while the
number of armed conflicts taking the form of
traditional wars between sovereign States is down, we
have, however, witnessed an alarming increase in
armed conflicts within national borders, or sometimes
across national borders, between Governments and
rebel groups or among non-State parties. Such armed
conflicts often take place because of bitter enmity
based on such factors as tribal, ethnic or religious
differences. In such cases, the hostilities are usually
extremely intense, and a large number of civilians tend
to fall victim to them.
Protecting civilians in the midst of armed conflict
under such circumstances requires the engagement of
those groups that have taken up arms. In many cases,
only neutral players such as special representatives of
the Secretary-General or the Emergency Relief
Coordinator can accomplish this. These are among the
few agents who are in a position to communicate
directly with armed groups to remind them of the
necessity of protecting civilians and of their direct
responsibility under international humanitarian law to
do so.
Such involvement is sometimes looked upon with
suspicion, as it is considered interference in internal
affairs. However, it should not be viewed as a
challenge to national sovereignty, especially when
national authorities have failed, or have a limited
capacity, to protect civilians. In reality, such a direct
dialogue should be seen as an effort to complement
national sovereignty.
Secondly, let me turn to the types of threats that
exist. It is not sufficient simply to protect civilians
from physical harm; their human dignity must also be
protected. Vulnerable civilians cannot recover their
dignity if they are left in extremely poor conditions as
a result of armed conflict. They need to engage in their
livelihoods free from fear of extreme poverty,
starvation or deadly disease. They need to be

S/PV.4877 (Resumption 1)

empowered in order to become constructive actors in
their communities. Humanitarian and rehabilitation
assistance plays an important role in addressing such
needs.
Without proper arrangements to secure access to
people in need and to ensure the safety of aid workers,
however, such workers will be unable to perform their
roles. Thus it is vital, through the concerted efforts of
the international community, including direct dialogue
with armed groups, to ensure that such arrangements
are made. We should redouble our efforts to discuss the
expansion of the scope of protection, under a clear
definition, of the existing Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel.
Thirdly, on the duration of threats, we must bear
in mind that civilians often continue to be in danger
even after major battles have ended. We should not be
misled by the rather artificial demarcation between
conflict and post-conflict situations. So-called postconflict situations often remain precarious and highly
likely to revert to conflict situations in the absence of
deliberate measures and attention.
The restoration of social stability is indispensable
to the lasting protection of civilians. To that end, it is
of the utmost importance to collect and destroy
firearms that have been widely circulated throughout a
society, and to demobilize ex-combatants and then
rehabilitate them and reintegrate them into society as
normal citizens — what is called the disarmament,
demobilization,
reintegration
and
rehabilitation
(DDRR) process. The reconstruction of an impartial
and dependable police force and of other law
enforcement
systems
is
indispensable,
too.
Furthermore, it is also important to put an end to
impunity for those responsible for serious violations of
international humanitarian, human rights and criminal
law, in order to achieve real national reconciliation and
rebirth.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
task that requires close coordination and cooperation
among various organs of the United Nations system as
well as with Member States and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). In this context, it might be
worthwhile for the Security Council and the Economic
and Social Council to convene a joint meeting to
address the issue. Coordination among the relevant
departments of the Secretariat should also be
strengthened and continuously reviewed. We welcome

in this context what has been done to improve
coordination between the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and OCHA better to reflect the
points made in the aide-memoire. Due attention should
be paid to the aide-memoire at every stage of planning
a response to a complex emergency situation.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is
not a new agenda item, but, as the road map
demonstrates, there are still many tasks to be carried
out. We must not forget that most civilian casualties
have occurred in the course of emergencies that have
been prolonged but have failed to attract much
international attention. Japan welcomes further
discussion, which will help us better to position
ourselves to meet the wide range of challenges we face
in addressing the question of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Helg (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland welcomes this debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, and we are grateful to
Mr. Egeland for his very promising contribution. I
should like also to thank the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for the useful
update of the aide-memoire and of the road map.
The new aide-memoire further takes into account
the specific needs of women and children, as well as
those of internally displaced persons. The new version
of the road map facilitates the implementation of
recommendations, thanks to the addition of a list of
measures already taken, as well as of opportunities for
action. We also welcome the attribution of concrete
sets
of
responsibilities
for
the
various
recommendations. It now remains for us to ensure that
these instruments are implemented and fleshed out by,
for example, integrating the relevant provisions of
Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) on the
protection of United Nations personnel in conflict
zones.
During
the
twenty-eighth
International
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, which
recently concluded in Geneva, States discussed, under
the general theme of human dignity, many aspects
relating to the protection of civilians in situations of
armed conflict or of disaster. The concept of human
security creates a link between the humanitarian needs
and the overall security needs of individuals. As a

3

S/PV.4877 (Resumption 1)

member of the Human Security Network, Switzerland
encourages the Security Council to endorse this
multidimensional concept as a way of protecting
human dignity and improving the well-being of
vulnerable people.
The Red Cross Conference also adopted a
Declaration and Agenda for humanitarian action. We
invite the Security Council to take note of the
important outcome of that Conference — the fruit of a
unique exchange between States and civil society.
Respect for international humanitarian law and
the principles of the rule of law, as well as the proper
functioning of national and international justice, are
key factors for the increased protection of civilians.
International humanitarian law has been called into
question on a number of occasions, following the
emergence of new forms of conflict. The major
challenge, however, remains to ensure that its
principles
are
scrupulously
and
unfailingly
implemented in all armed conflict situations by all
parties to conflict, including non-State armed groups.
Switzerland strongly encourages the use of all
available instruments, notably the International
Criminal Court and the International Humanitarian
Fact-Finding Commission, the latter of which was
created on the basis of the First Protocol Additional to
the Geneva Conventions. These mechanisms are
fortifications against the weakening of international
humanitarian law.
As the Depositary of the Geneva Conventions and
their Additional Protocols, Switzerland calls upon all
parties to those Conventions that have not already done
so to ratify the Protocols and to consider lifting the
reservations made in that respect.
Switzerland also welcomes the recent conclusions
of the meeting of the States parties to the 1980
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons relating
to Protocol V concerning post-conflict measures on
explosive remnants of war. Switzerland encourages
States to ratify that Protocol, which gives us reason to
hope that explosive remnants of war will be removed
and eliminated as quickly as possible after the end of
hostilities and that protection of civilian populations
will thereby be permanently improved.
The obligation to guarantee safe and unhindered
access for humanitarian actors and to people in need of
protection and assistance is another important element.

4

This is the responsibility of both States and non-State
groups. It is also up to the Security Council to demand
from all the actors involved, whether political, military
or economic, greater diligence in providing protection
for humanitarians. In this context, Switzerland calls for
the effective implementation of the 2003 Oslo
Guidelines on the Use of Military and Civil Defence
Assets To Support United Nations Humanitarian
Activities in Complex Emergencies.
Finally, the fact that humanitarian workers have
become the target of deliberate attacks and the victims
of kidnappings, assault and threats is absolutely
unacceptable. Such acts make impossible, or have a
serious negative impact on, the work of humanitarian
organizations in support of the victims.
It is imperative to put an end to impunity through
national legislation and international law in the light of
the relevant provisions of the 1998 Rome Statute. In
order to improve the safety of United Nations
humanitarian workers, it is also necessary to draw on
the lessons set out in the report of the Independent
Panel on the Safety and Security of United Nations
Personnel in Iraq. We welcome the measures taken by
the Secretary-General to follow up on the
recommendations of the experts.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming that,
because of its commitment to human security,
Switzerland has significantly helped to promote and
develop a culture of protection. We are thinking in
particular about civilians in armed conflicts who have
been left off political agendas, in areas often neglected
by the media. We must protect the people in those
conflicts in particular.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Rowe (Sierra Leone): My delegation
appreciates the opportunity that you, Mr. President, and
the other members of the Council, have afforded us to
make a modest contribution to this new debate on the
important issue of the safety of civilians in armed
conflict. At the outset, we acknowledge and commend
the efforts of the United Nations system, in particular
the Office of the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian
Affairs
and
Emergency
Relief
Coordinator, in accentuating the benefits of developing
a culture of protection in the international community.
The Organization as a whole has come up with
guidelines and principles, including the aide-memoire

S/PV.4877 (Resumption 1)

adopted by the Security Council last year, and various
recommendations made by the Secretary-General
himself, for alleviating the plight of civilians in areas
of armed conflict. We would also like to express our
thanks to Under-Secretary-General Egeland for his
comprehensive briefing this morning, and for the
updated version of the aide-memoire, as well as the 10point platform for future collective action on this
matter, which is of serious concern to all States.
As long as armed conflicts continue, incessantly,
to take their toll on innocent people in various parts of
the world, between and within States, and as long as
some parties to such conflicts continue to ignore the
basic principles of international humanitarian and
human rights law, the Security Council must continue
to undertake periodic reviews and in-depth assessments
of measures that have been devised to ensure the
effective protection of civilians in armed conflict.
First, we know that the tactics employed in
deliberate acts of violence against civilians are
changing rapidly. Secondly, as the Secretary-General
reminded us recently, many of the political and legal
instruments at our disposal for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict are outdated. These periodic
assessments by the Security Council should serve as a
reminder of the need to adapt and update the
appropriate instruments and guidelines to meet the new
challenges posed by both State and non-State actors in
areas of armed conflict.
The Sierra Leone experience, covering more than
a decade of rebel atrocities, is a chapter by itself in
what has become a voluminous record of lessons
learned in the area of civilian protection in armed
conflict in the post-world-war period. We understand,
for instance, that the aide-memoire, which the
Secretary-General once described as the centrepiece of
a strategy for civilian protection, was usefully applied
to the situation in Sierra Leone. My delegation believes
that the authors of the document must also have learned
from our experience in the difficult task of defending
our people against the ruthless rebel attacks on the
civilian population over a 10-year period. Indeed, the
machinery established to address impunity — namely
the Special Court — is itself unique in the annals of
current and emerging international humanitarian law.
Whether or not this hybrid court concept could be
applied in other situations is debatable. Meanwhile, we
are confident that its effectiveness as an instrument of
protection will be realized in due course.

In reviewing and updating the aide-memoire,
especially in the context of peacekeeping mandates of
the Security Council, my delegation would like to draw
attention to two elements pertaining to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict.
First, we strongly believe that emphasis should be
placed not merely on the obligation and responsibility
to protect, but also on the capacity to provide
protection. That applies to virtually all the internal and
cross-border armed conflicts that have been raging, for
example in our part of the world, the West African
subregion.
Often the capacity of Governments, including the
Government of Sierra Leone, to comply with
obligations of protection under relevant international
humanitarian law in the face of rebel atrocities
perpetrated with the support of external elements is
extremely — extremely — limited. We welcome the
assistance provided by the international community to
facilitate humanitarian emergency assistance to areas
where the population was caught in so-called rebelcontrolled areas.
Imagine the number of innocent civilians that
could have been saved in Sierra Leone if, for instance,
the democratically elected Government of Sierra Leone
had had the capacity to respond to and avert rebel
atrocities, including amputation, rape and many of the
crimes now before the Special Court. Imagine the
number of innocent lives that could have been
protected and saved in the beleaguered city of
Monrovia, next door to Sierra Leone, a few months ago
if the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) had had the capacity to respond rapidly —
and I emphasize the word rapidly — to the serious
humanitarian crisis that was evolving in that city. By
capacity we mean not just the humanitarian or physical
or monetary capacity, but also the moral and political
capacity to avert humanitarian crises and protect
innocent civilians.
It may be recalled that it was not until August
2000, and long after the rebels had begun their heinous
crimes, that the Security Council, in resolution 1313
(2000), authorized the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) “within its capabilities and
areas of deployment, to afford protection to civilians
under threat of imminent physical violence”. The
dilemma was that while it was the responsibility of the
Government to afford protection to its citizens, its

5

S/PV.4877 (Resumption 1)

capabilities for doing so throughout the country were
limited.
What inference do we draw from this in trying to
develop the so-called culture of protection? We realize
that those who are called upon or deployed to provide
protection to civilians are themselves becoming targets
of armed attacks. That is a challenge the Security
Council must meet as part of its responsibility in
developing the culture of protection.
The second element I would like to emphasize is
this. We can establish legal instruments, develop
appropriate guidelines and principles and establish
special courts and tribunals. We can also continue to
take concrete measures to separate civilians and armed
elements in conflict situations and then give special
attention to the specific needs of vulnerable
populations such as women, the aged and children. We
can facilitate the stabilization and rehabilitation of
communities through disarmament, demobilization and
resettlement programmes. All this can be done in the
context of protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Those are all laudable measures, and no one should
underestimate them. However, we must admit that all
those actions are essentially reactive. They have been
devised in response to conflicts.
In the view of my delegation the most effective
and lasting means of protection that States and the
international community can afford to civilians lies in
the prevention of armed conflict. A culture of
protection is inextricably linked with a culture of
prevention. This morning we heard representatives
from Guinea, Chile, China, Angola, Cameroon and
Pakistan all make references to the idea of prevention
of conflicts.
In this regard, we recall the various
recommendations of the Secretary-General for conflict
prevention, including the 10 principles that he suggests
should guide the Organization’s approach to conflict
prevention. We also recall the latest comprehensive
General Assembly resolution on the prevention of
armed conflict, resolution 57/337 of 3 July 2003. We
therefore call on the Security Council to take those
recommendations into account in its review and
consideration of future activities pertaining to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Given the international dimension of most armed
conflicts in the world today, and realizing the complex
and deep-rooted causes of those conflicts, we believe

6

that the Security Council should assume a greater role
in the peaceful settlement of disputes. As a result, it
would be averting war, as well as the humanitarian
consequences of armed conflict.
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Undoubtedly the Security Council’s continued
consideration of the issue of providing protection to
civilians in armed conflict is a reflection of the
recognition by the United Nations that the performance
of the international community in that regard still
needs further commitment, will and diligent collective
work.
The Egyptian delegation would like to single out
certain elements that we believe are important aspects
of the issue under consideration today.
First, in the past few years and in a number of
resolutions and presidential statements, the Security
Council has been able to determine the elements and
requirements for dealing with this issue in light of the
provisions
of
international
law,
international
humanitarian law and the principles of the United
Nations Charter. However, we find hotbeds of armed
conflict in the world today that give rise to alarming
reports of an increase in violations and crimes against
unarmed civilians, increasing numbers of victims and
displaced persons, acts of destruction and the
plundering of natural resources and cultural artifacts
and heritage. All that reflects the continued inability of
the international community to firmly and effectively
stand against such violations, which are prohibited by
international humanitarian law.
Indications and statistics of civilian victims on
both the Palestinian and the Israeli sides, the number of
houses that have been demolished, the lands that have
been bulldozed in the occupied Palestinian territories
and in many parts of Africa comprise irrefutable proof
of that inability on the part of the international
community.
We therefore believe that the most serious lack
facing the world today is the lack of the collective
international will that is supposed to be demonstrated
by the United Nations in dealing with areas where there
is the most suffering due to armed conflicts and their
consequences for the lives and futures of all types of
civilians.
Secondly, in spite
recognizing that there

of the importance of
have been important

S/PV.4877 (Resumption 1)

developments in expanding the mandate of United
Nations peacekeeping operations to cover broader
issues, including protecting civilians in armed conflicts
and securing unhindered access by humanitarian
assistance to them, we must also recognize that the
training and deploying of the personnel in those
operations are always done in accordance with the
rhythm and commitment of each individual situation
and in accordance with a very complex equation based
on elements that can be attributed to intertwined
political, security and economic interests.
In most cases, Security Council intervention to
protect civilians in remote areas or to assist them in
overcoming their particular dilemmas or crises comes
too late or else is not commensurate with the security
and emergency humanitarian assistance needs of the
civilians in those areas. Perhaps the serious
humanitarian situations that we witness daily in the
international media and that are reflected in the reports
of United Nations agencies and bodies — in the
occupied Palestinian territories, Somalia, Burundi,
Guinea-Bissau and other countries — are all examples
of the imbalance in the international community’s
vision of dealing with threats to international peace and
security, on the one hand, and the concept of providing
protection to civilians living under foreign occupation
or in armed conflicts, on the other.
Thirdly, it is necessary to understand that the
concept of providing protection to civilians in armed
conflict should not stop with the end of military
operations. The comprehensive concept of such
protection should extend into post-conflict peacebuilding, which should include the humanitarian, social
and development dimensions that are linked to
rehabilitation and reconstruction. The legacy of armed
conflicts in terms of their destruction of the social and
economic infrastructure of their societies represents the
most serious threat to the lives and future of civilians.
Peace, in its security and political dimensions, will
remain fragile and vulnerable if not complemented by
focused and comprehensive development programmes
and plans.
Fourthly, and finally, focusing on providing
protection to civilians in armed conflict should not
compromise the cornerstones of the Charter of the
United Nations, represented by the principles of
political independence and sovereignty of regional
States and their responsibility for their citizens and
their jurisdiction over their own territories. It is

absolutely necessary to balance the right of civilians to
protection with the right of each State to sovereignty.
The international community’s treatment of and respect
for one of those rights should not be at the expense of
the other. In that regard, in dealing with the issue of
protecting civilians in armed conflict, the international
community should be committed to and guided by the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
those of international law.
Mr. Giraldo (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by congratulating you,
Mr. President, on taking over the Presidency of the
Security Council this month. I would also like to thank
Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for the outstanding presentation
he has given us on the topic we are discussing at
today’s Council meeting.
A year ago, in her statement to the Council, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia highlighted
the worsening situation of armed conflicts, in which 90
per cent of the victims are civilians, along with
terrorism and the ensuing humanitarian tragedies such
as those we witnessed in Rwanda and Srebrenica,
demonstrate that contemporary conflicts deliberately
target unarmed civilians. She also decried, in parallel
with the Secretary-General’s report at that time, the
illegal financing of conflicts and terrorism by means of
trade in illicit drugs, kidnapping and extortion —
criminal activities that target helpless civilians. That is
why, in supporting the inclusion in the aide-memoire
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict of a
chapter on the illicit exploitation and trade in natural
resources, we wish to state our conviction that any
consideration of that topic must include due
consideration of criminal activities such as trade in
illicit drugs, kidnapping and extortion.
Colombia supports those ideas because they
reflect elements that underpin the democratic security
policy promoted by President Alvaro Uribe Vélez since
August 2002. That policy is not designed to give more
power to the State for its own sake, but to prepare the
State to better protect the civilian population in all
areas and, most especially, from the dangers inherent in
armed conflict, and in order to secure the rights and
freedoms of all its citizens throughout the national
territory. That policy seeks to restore the rule of law
and the capacity to deter violent agents by
strengthening the legitimate armed forces of the State.
That policy maintains an open door to political

7

S/PV.4877 (Resumption 1)

negotiation with illegal armed groups, as long as they
suspend hostilities and respect the ceasefire.
During President Uribe’s first year in office, the
democratic security policy that has been applied to
uproot terrorism is now producing its first results, and I
should like to cite just a few figures. There is now a
police presence in every municipality of the country,
including 170 where there were no police before. The
homicide rate has dropped 22 per cent; massacres by
35 per cent; kidnapping 34.7 per cent; illegal
roadblocks by 49 per cent; and the number of internally
displaced persons has diminished by 66 per cent. All of
that has been achieved while respecting the law, which
is evidenced by the fact that the only complaints of
human rights violations are as a result of individual
initiatives on the part of some agents of the State —
whose cases are being investigated and prosecuted, as
necessary — have dropped by 95 per cent. Those
meaningful advances in the protection of our citizens
have elicited the support of the Colombian people,
which is supporting the Government and actively
cooperating with the authorities in restoring the rule of
law and in isolating violent agents.
If we are to continue our efforts to overcome
terrorism in strict respect for the law, however, we need
greater powers in keeping with the law. Currently, the
Government is seeking a constitutional amendment to
enable the public forces, in cases of terrorism, to bring
specialized staff to bear in order to arrest, search and
intercept suspects. Those measures are to contain
democratic safeguards, such as the necessary
intervention of an independent prosecutor in the hours
following such action, and with the proviso that the
Attorney-General’s office be informed, as well as the
Congress — which is important for political control of
operations. The powers proposed are much less
extensive than those currently found in the democracies
of developed countries that are not confronting a
domestic conflict or terrorist threat of the magnitude
Colombia faces.
Finally, the democratic security policy has filled
in certain administrative gaps, making it possible to
disarm and demobilize 1,000 members of illegal armed
groups. Presently there is a law before the Congress to
make that process viable on the basis of justice,
reparation and reconciliation. The reintegration of
those former combatants in civilian life will require
additional efforts and the support of the national and
international community.

8

A chapter of the aide-memoire that requires
special attention and care concerns humanitarian
assistance and the access of humanitarian organizations
to the victims of conflict and the vulnerable population.
We believe that it is fundamental for the dialogue
between the receptor State and the international
community to be based on General Assembly
resolution 46/182, which recognizes the basic
principles of neutrality and impartiality in the provision
of humanitarian assistance, as well as the requirement
of consent from the receiving State for the provision of
such assistance. As it is incumbent upon the receiving
State to guarantee the security of humanitarian staff,
humanitarian organizations must be subject to
restricted access in zones of conflict where the security
of the humanitarian staff cannot be reasonably assured.
To initiate unauthorized dialogues with illegal
armed groups in order to obtain access implies a
twofold risk. On the one hand, it endangers the security
of humanitarian personnel since many of these armed
groups do not respect international humanitarian law,
and there is also the risk of engaging in political
negotiations, which is the prerogative of the
Government and which is not consonant with the basic
principles of neutrality, impartiality and transparency
for humanitarian work. In addition, this places on an
equal footing authorities arising from a democratic
decision with illegal armed organizations that flaunt
their rifles as a token of their claimed rights. These are
organizations that can violate their undertakings with
impunity and which, at least in my country, have
demonstrated that they do not respect the immunities
that treaties and civilized actors grant to the personnel
and property of the United Nations.
We welcome any path that leads to lessening the
suffering of the civilian population within armed
conflict. But the optimum, the irreplaceable, the
definitive way of protecting the entire population is
just to put an end to these conflicts. I know this is a
truism, but it is sometimes forgotten, and it is our duty
to promote, demand and support any procedure that
will lead to the end of these conflicts.
In the case of democracy in Colombia, it is also
necessary to support policies that seek to strengthen
institutional mechanisms, and to start by giving the
armed forces that serve and uphold law and justice
sufficient capacity, acting as they do within the
universal principles of respect of human rights and rule

S/PV.4877 (Resumption 1)

of national law. If they are not so trained and
empowered, conflicts provoked by illegal armed actors
will drag on and on, will worsen, will deteriorate, will
mutate, will turn against civilians, will resort to savage
terrorism, and will fund it by exploiting illicit
resources, and, losing sight of their political dimension,
become a criminal lifestyle based on illegal and
abundant resources. These are precisely the elements,
in illegal armed groups, that make them degenerate into
tools of death against women, children and helpless,
peaceful civilians.
Allow me to conclude by emphasizing that, when
confronted with violence and terrorism, as the Charter
says, we must “reaffirm faith in fundamental human
rights, in the dignity and worth of the human
person ...”. The United Nations must preserve the
dignity of each and everyone, the right to life and the
right to live without fear. These are universal public
goods, which, as our Minister for Foreign Affairs said a
year ago in this room, can only be preserved by the
community and with the collaboration of all its
members. This is the domain of our shared
responsibility.
Mr. Kim Sam-Hoon (Republic of Korea): I
would like to express my delegation’s appreciation to
you for convening this open meeting of the Security
Council on such an important issue. From the
increasing wave of civil conflicts in the 1990s to the
critical surge of terrorism today, we are living in an age
in which the protection of civilians has moved to the
top of the security agenda. It is therefore most
appropriate that the Security Council periodically takes
up this item.
The delegation of the Republic of Korea cannot
but begin by paying tribute to the United Nations staff
and international humanitarian personnel who have
worked tirelessly to alleviate the sufferings of civilian
populations in armed conflict. This year has proved to
be a particularly tragic one. In Afghanistan and Iraq,
many of them paid the ultimate sacrifice with their
lives. The brutal attack perpetrated on United Nations
headquarters in Baghdad on 19 August 2003 shocked
the international community. And just last week, four
Korean workers were senselessly attacked in Northern
Iraq — two of them died — during their mission to
repair electric transmission towers. We strongly
condemn these horrendous acts of terror against
civilians.

The civilian or non-combatant casualties in armed
conflict have dramatically increased in recent decades,
particularly due to the changing nature of conflicts
from inter-State to intrastate wars fought more often by
militias and armed groups than by national armies. The
statistics depict a grim picture. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, over 3 million deaths have been
recorded. Over the past year alone, the displacement of
persons in Uganda has increased from 600,000 to 1.3
million, and in Angola, more than a third of its
population has been displaced in two decades of
conflict. In the case of Afghanistan, a quarter of a
century of strife has left millions in abject poverty.
Given its primary responsibility in maintaining
international peace and security, the Security Council
has a leading role to play in protecting civilians in
conflicts. Alarmed by the deepening plight of civilians
in armed conflicts, the Republic of Korea brought the
matter to the Council’s attention by conducting an open
debate on “the protection of humanitarian assistance to
refugees and others in conflict situations” during its
presidency of the Security Council in May 1997. Since
then we have been closely following the developments
on this subject.
In our view, the adoption of Security Council
resolutions 1265 (1999) and 1296 (2000) reaffirmed its
commitment to protecting the civilian population in
their greatest hour of need. While the Council has, inter
alia, emphasized the need to protect civilians on a caseby-case basis, taking into account the particular
circumstances, its aide-memoire of March 2002 has
served as a practical guide to transforming what the
Secretary-General has termed the “culture of
protection”, into a reality. We believe that the aidememoire should be updated regularly to keep abreast
with current developments.
The protection of civilians is a highly complex
and intractable question, but is a matter of priority to
the international community. We must ensure that
humanitarian tragedies, such as in Rwanda and
Srebrenica, never take place again. Given the lessons
painfully learned, the United Nations has succeeded in
its interventions in the Balkans, East Timor and Sierra
Leone. But there is no time for complacency. We
believe that the international community must play an
important part in situations where sovereign States are
unable or unwilling to protect their own people. In
today’s world of interdependence, catastrophic
humanitarian conditions in failed States can spread far

9

S/PV.4877 (Resumption 1)

beyond their borders. We are of the view that the
Security Council bears significant responsibility and
authority in dealing with massive humanitarian
atrocities. As the sole international institution to
authorize ultimate use of force by States, the Security
Council must not be discouraged from using all
persuasive and coercive instruments at its disposal.
We are encouraged by the visits of the Security
Council missions to areas of conflict where the civilian
sectors have suffered enormously in the cycle of
conflict. The firsthand information gained by the
missions can significantly contribute to developing a
more effective framework for civilian protection. In
this regard, the Security Council missions to Central
Africa, West Africa and Afghanistan were welcome
developments.
We also view ending the culture of impunity to be
vital to assuring the safety of civilians. The
establishment of the International Criminal Court, as
well as the ad hoc international criminal tribunals for
the former Yugoslavia, Rwanda and Sierra Leone, has
constituted a crucial step forward in affirming the
principle of accountability. In this regard, we also note
that the breakdown of law and order contributes to an
atmosphere of despair and desperation that easily
becomes a breeding ground for terrorists.
We fully support the concerted endeavours of the
United Nations and its partners to sustain international
attention on this subject. We commend their initiatives,
such as the holding of workshops to address the
challenges from a regional perspective. Such forums
have proved to be most useful in disseminating the
aide-memoire framework and mainstreaming its
provisions into national, regional and international
decision-making processes.
Civilians in conflict and post-conflict areas must
also be protected from exploitation and abuse by
international workers and peacekeeping forces. The six
core principles in the Plan of Action on Protection
from Sexual Exploitation and Abuse in Humanitarian
Crises, adopted by the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee in July 2002, have now been incorporated
into the codes of conduct and staff rules applicable to
United Nations civilian personnel. We are encouraged
to note that peacekeeping missions such as the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone and the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic

10

Republic of the Congo are also adopting them as their
rules.
In deliberating on various aspects of this
important subject, my delegation would like to
underscore that the primary responsibility for the safety
of civilians rests with the parties to a conflict, whether
State or non-State actors. While international
engagement can be instrumental, a peaceful outcome
can only be realized if all concerned parties fully
understand and uphold their obligations and commit
themselves to renouncing violence against innocent
people.
Finally, in light of the related issues also on the
Council’s agenda, including child soldiers and gender
issues in conflict situations, we believe that the
successful implementation of protection strategies
hinges on the development of a comprehensive and
integrated approach. As reflected in our deliberations,
there has been much progress in recent years. Yet, more
needs to be done. We can best measure the degree of
our success by the lives of innocent people saved
through judicious and decisive action. At the same
time, in the longer term, we should continue our
endeavours to promote a culture of protection by
generating respect, tolerance and understanding among
peoples.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Strømmen (Norway): I thank UnderSecretary-General Egeland for a very useful briefing
this morning.
Civilians have become the principal victims of
war, especially in internal armed conflicts. While
armed conflicts have always put civilians at risk, now
they are at the very centre of conflicts, as targets and as
objects of abuse and exploitation. Our response to this
development must be comprehensive and needs to
involve many different actors. In order to respond
effectively, there are a number of things that must be in
place.
Protection of civilians must be made an
overriding principle for international involvement in
conflict areas. For the Security Council, this means that
United Nations peacekeeping operations must be given
strong mandates and adequate resources to protect
civilians. The Security Council must systematically
apply the resolutions that have already been adopted on

S/PV.4877 (Resumption 1)

the protection of civilians when adopting new
mandates and reviewing existing ones. The newly
updated aide-memoire of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the road map
are, indeed, very useful tools to this end. By building
on these adopted texts, the Council can continue to
spearhead the formulation of United Nations policy and
inspire the comprehensive response from the United
Nations system needed to provide efficient protection
for civilians in armed conflict.
Respect for international humanitarian law must
be reinforced as it is part of the bedrock of the
international legal order. Governments cannot interpret
these binding rules as relative norms that can be set
aside as new patterns of conflict develop. International
humanitarian law also applies in present-day conflicts.
We all know how media coverage affects our
perception of humanitarian crises. Once international
focus is turned away from a humanitarian crisis, the
sense of urgency lessens and funding is less readily
available. We must counteract this effect through
responsible donorship. Humanitarian assistance should
be based on needs, not on media coverage or other
political priorities alone. Unfortunately, humanitarian
aid has in many instances turned out to be a long-term
challenge. In appreciation of this fact, the Norwegian
Government continues to provide assistance to several
areas that are no longer in the headlines. The notion of
forgotten conflicts is an insult to those who are
exposed to our neglect.
Access to internally displaced and other
vulnerable populations continues to be a major
problem. Humanitarian organizations are too often left
alone to negotiate access with the authorities or armed
groups that see humanitarian aid not as impartial
emergency relief but as a strategic means to an end.
The international community needs to use its influence
to secure access for humanitarian aid behind the lines
of fire. In extreme cases, United Nations-mandated
troops may be required to create a secure environment.
Humanitarian actors must be allowed to carry out
their work. My Government is outraged by the
instances in which humanitarian actors have been
deliberately targeted. We need to engage in a broad
political dialogue in order to strengthen the legitimacy,
integrity and security of humanitarian action.

they operate on the ground, in order to ensure
legitimacy and local support. We must avoid a situation
in which security arrangements for humanitarian
personnel create a greater distance between aid workers
and the local population.
Secondly, the international humanitarian dialogue
must be revitalized and broadened. As donor
Governments, we must be open to consultation and
coordination that cut across traditional divisions. Major
host countries of refugees, other countries in conflictridden regions and traditional and new donor countries
alike should be more closely involved in cooperation
on how to prevent humanitarian suffering and ensure
access and opportunity to alleviate humanitarian
suffering.
Thirdly, as part of this dialogue, we need a more
thorough analysis and discussion of how humanitarian
agencies and military or peacekeeping forces can best
interact to increase security and access to vulnerable
groups without compromising the humanitarian
agencies.
Our inability to assist civilian victims of conflict
represents a challenge to the legitimacy of all efforts to
promote international peace and security. We are
therefore encouraged by the Council’s continued focus
on these matters. We also appreciate the strengthened
cooperation between the United Nations and other
agencies. Norway has taken an interest in the issue of
protection of civilians in armed conflict for quite some
time. We shall continue to work actively to assist
policy formulation in cooperation with the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and other
interested Member States in the support group for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Amirbayov (Azerbaijan): I would like to
congratulate Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, on his assumption of his important tasks
and wish him every success in that responsible
position. I would also like to join previous speakers in
expressing our gratitude to the Bulgarian presidency of
the Security Council for convening this meeting on an
agenda item that is of particular interest to all Member
States.

Several questions need to be addressed: first,
international agencies should take a closer look at how

11

S/PV.4877 (Resumption 1)

Previous discussions of the problem, which
resulted in the adoption of the aide-memoire and the
consequent review of its implementation, have
underlined the importance of developing a
comprehensive approach to the protection of civilians.
One has to recognize that this set of principles has
made it easier for us to further explore the United
Nations capacity to safeguard civilians, who are the
primary victims of violence during armed conflict.
We agree with the observations made earlier by
several speakers that the primary concerns in situations
of armed conflict arise from our limited capacity to
ensure timely and immediate access and delivery of
humanitarian assistance to civilian populations; address
the emergency needs of refugees and internally
displaced persons, including women and children;
provide security for humanitarian personnel acting in
the field; and in general guarantee that parties to a
conflict comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law. Regrettably, those
fundamental principles are not always respected in
situations of armed conflict. We are still witnessing the
fact that combatants in armed conflict often inflict
irreparable damage on civilians.
We concur with the comments made earlier that
we cannot wait for the resolution of armed conflicts in
order to protect civilians and that we must act rapidly
to prevent further violence. However, one also should
not forget that the settlement of an armed conflict is the
best option for ensuring that those who were targeted
with systematic violence will not be physically abused
again. Therefore, in our view, the issue of the
protection of civilians is multidimensional in nature
and must be considered in combination with all
possible interlinkages to the processes of prevention
and resolution of armed conflicts.
We believe that civilian populations in armed
conflicts would be much better protected if the Security
Council and its
member
States, displaying
determination and consistency, were to ensure the
appropriate reaction of the international community to
civilian emergencies created as the result of hostilities
and armed conflicts. It is with a certain degree of
disappointment that we sometimes witness a lack of
will on the part of the Council to ensure the
implementation of the resolutions it has adopted on the
settlement of some armed conflicts, as well as to deal
on a case-by-case basis with the reality of those
hostilities and their impact on civilian populations.

12

However, we are still optimistic and firmly
believe that the Security Council has a key role to play
in ensuring that civilians are duly protected and that the
implementation of its resolutions on the settlement of
certain armed conflicts, even if active combat activities
have not been registered in recent years, is undertaken
in a more vigorous and discernible manner. Here, I
cannot but fully endorse the view expressed earlier by
the Norwegian representative, who said that the notion
of forgotten conflicts is an insult to those who are
exposed to international neglect.
Another major preoccupation is linked to the
magnitude and forms of violence committed against
civilian populations in situations of armed conflict. We
are concerned that such violent manifestations have
drastically increased in recent years, whereas women
and children constitute the most deliberately targeted
victims.
While fully understanding the fact that the
primary responsibility for the protection of civilians
rests with the Governments concerned, we have to
admit that, on territories which are outside the control
of legitimate authorities, the States concerned are not
the only ones that should be blamed for the impunity of
and failure to prosecute those responsible for crimes
against civilians committed on those territories.
Despite the fact that some armed conflicts have been
regionalized and even internationalized, we have to
admit that some contemporary armed conflicts involve
Member States that are keen to support illegally
functioning non-State actors on the territory of other
sovereign States, fuelling violence and hostilities on
ethnic, religious and national grounds.
In this regard, the anxiety and apprehension of
the affected country should be heard and duly
considered by the Council’s members. The input of
those States that have been affected by armed conflicts,
but that, at the same time, are not members of the
Council, could contribute to identifying the elements
that are peculiar to that very country and might not be
noticed by the Council itself. Such an exchange of
experience would serve the interests of all sides
involved in shaping a better United Nations response
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
As a country subjected to the aggression of a
neighbouring State and concerned with the nonimplementation
of
relevant
Security
Council
resolutions related to that situation, Azerbaijan believes

S/PV.4877 (Resumption 1)

that the revised version of the aide-memoire, which is
aimed at bringing the culture of protection into reality,
can prevail only if it takes due note of the lessons
learned from all the armed conflicts of which the
Security Council has been seized in its work.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Laurin (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
welcomes this open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We thank the UnderSecretary-General for his impassioned statement and
for the updated aide-memoire and the road map.
Mr. Egeland rightly focused on the need for more
consistent and deliberate action. Indeed, if the Council
is serious about protecting civilians, it must translate
rhetorical commitments to international humanitarian
law, human rights and refugee law into action at the
country level. The Council must continue to be
proactive in monitoring the implementation of its
protection-related commitments in the countries under
its consideration. It should draw on lessons and be
prepared to rethink its strategic approaches when they
are at cross-purposes with its responsibilities for
protecting civilians. The Council should deliver.
Canada fully endorses the 10-point platform laid
out by the Emergency Relief Coordinator and the use
of the aide-memoire and the road map to buttress those
efforts. Given the current international environment,
those tools are essential in helping guide the efforts of
the Council and other actors.
A good framework exists. Over the past four
years, the Council has developed a comprehensive
agenda to strengthen civilian protection. Resolutions
1265 (1999) and 1296 (2000) — along with those on
conflict prevention, women, peace and security,
children and armed conflict, the safety of humanitarian
workers, impunity, and the exploitation of natural
resources — lay out a clear set of mutually reinforcing
Council commitments.
And yet, while the resolutions may provide a
framework for Council action, they equally provide a
benchmark for holding the Council accountable for
inaction. Canada welcomes the inclusion of protection
components in recent peace operations, including those
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Côte
d’Ivoire. We recall that, when peace operations are
given such responsibilities, they must also be given

unambiguous mandates and adequate financial and
human resources to facilitate civilian protection. For
example, we also know that the effective presence of
child-protection advisers in the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) has had a positive impact on the
lives of children. We know from other peace operations
that the inclusion of gender advisers is essential in
order to adequately address the specific protection
needs of women and girls.
The Council must continue to devote attention to
civilian protection issues in its field missions, as was
recently the case with the missions to Afghanistan and
West Africa. As part of those missions, the Council
should seek to meet directly and regularly with affected
populations in order to better understand their
perspective. Council missions are indispensable
opportunities to urge parties to a conflict to permit safe
and unimpeded access by aid workers to those in need,
to ensure that there is no impunity for genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity and to ensure that
United Nations missions are vigilant in their efforts to
protect civilians from gender-based violence and to
implement strategies to meet the needs of displaced
populations.
We applaud the Council’s efforts to develop
more-targeted sanctions regimes that, among other
things, focus on arms embargoes, the seizure of assets,
bans on travel and restricting the trade in certain
commodities. For those efforts to produce results, the
potential humanitarian impact of sanctions on civilian
populations should be more clearly identified so that it
can be minimized.
(spoke in English)
The Council has recognized that the illicit
exploitation of natural resources perpetuates violent
conflicts that undermine the safety and well-being of
civilians. The recent report of the Panel of Experts on
the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other
Forms of Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo demonstrates once again the risks that natural
resources can pose to sustainable peace. The Council
must continue to undertake effective monitoring,
including the use of panels of experts. It must also
continue to encourage full participation in international
mechanisms to address illicit exploitation, such as the
Kimberly Process on conflict diamonds.

13

S/PV.4877 (Resumption 1)

Finally, the Council’s efforts to protect civilians
must not simply be restorative, but preventative as
well. In that respect, the Council should show greater
willingness to draw on United Nations human rights
mechanisms for early warning, promote preventative
deployment and diplomatic initiatives and urge
adherence to, and respect for, international legal
instruments. It must also be vigilant. In the immediate
post-conflict environment, even where a peace
agreement exists, civilians may remain at risk.
To succeed, this initiative must be viewed as a
shared commitment. It requires more than the Council.
Let me affirm Canada’s strong support for this agenda.
We have been pleased to work with the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and others on a
variety of related initiatives this past year, and we will
continue to do so. But all Member States have a role to
play. Regional organizations have a role to play. Nongovernmental actors, including the private sector, have
a role to play. Above all, parties to armed conflicts
must take responsibility and must be held accountable
for
protecting
war-affected
populations.
The
International Criminal Court (ICC) is a key instrument
in ensuring that accountability. We again urge the
Council to do all it can to support the ICC in this
vitally important work.
To the Secretariat and United Nations agencies I
say: be bold. Previous resolutions have given you the
authority to bring to the attention of Member States
circumstances that demand their attention so that
civilians may be protected. In your reporting, provide
the Council and other appropriate bodies with concrete
advice and recommendations based on monitoring of
the situation so that they have guidance. Help the field
use the road map that you have developed.
Let us be clear on the consequences of not
fulfilling our objectives. The suffering of individual
civilians caught up in various conflict zones will
persist — whether those civilians are displaced,
separated from their families, missing or exploited. The
protection of civilians is not a North-South issue. It
should not be marginalized because it is sensitive, or
not implemented because of a lack of tools.
In closing, Canada joins other delegations in
calling on the Council to adopt the revised aidememoire and to endorse the road map as a
complementary tool for effective follow-up on the
protection of civilians agenda. We have a genuine

14

chance to ensure that civilian survival is higher than at
any time in the past. We must seize the opportunity.
The President (spoke in French): We have heard
the last speaker inscribed on my list.
I now give the floor to Mr. Egeland to respond to
comments made during today’s discussion.
Mr. Egeland (spoke in French): Allow me, first
of all, to express my most sincere condolences to the
Government and citizens of the Russian Federation for
the fearsome suicide attack that occurred this morning
in Moscow.
I would like to express my great gratitude to the
members of the Security Council for their sustained
interest in the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
I am very encouraged by the ongoing interest
demonstrated by the Council during this meeting. A
number of members emphasized the central role played
by the protection of civilians in the Council’s activities,
and we are extremely grateful. I am also very touched
by the Council’s unanimous support for the road map
and the aide-memoire.
I note the concern expressed by the representative
of France, as well as a number of other representatives.
I share that concern about the politicization of
humanitarian access. As many speakers have stated,
access is essential in the protection of civilians.
(spoke in Spanish)
As this was my first opportunity to hear the
opinions and ideas of the members of the Security
Council, I am very grateful to the Council for the
advice members have offered for my future work in
turning principles into reality for vulnerable
populations in areas of conflict on several continents.
Allow me to comment on a few of the topics raised in
this important debate.
The representatives of Spain, Chile and Mexico,
among others, focused on the need to create a culture
of protection and concrete mechanisms to protect
women and children in particular. Those speakers
underscored the seriousness of sexual violence against
women and children. As I said in the briefing, that is
one of our most urgent priorities. We require the
Council’s ongoing valuable support in that regard.
Mexico, as well as other members, also spoke of
the need to consistently and comprehensively address
disarmament,
demobilization,
reintegration
and

S/PV.4877 (Resumption 1)

repatriation or resettlement and the trafficking in small
arms from a regional perspective. That is another
important area in which we hope to work in close
cooperation with the Security Council.
(spoke in English)
I am grateful to representatives who gave
perspectives on advocacy in respect of access by and
security of humanitarian workers. I wholeheartedly
agree that that must be addressed far more
systematically in all our operations. It is important that
we convey the right message to all parties to a conflict
and reinforce our impartiality and neutrality. I will be
taking this forward with my colleagues within the
Secretariat and in the humanitarian agencies. I’ve also
taken note of your concern that we continue to develop
across the United Nations system a clear, coordinated
approach to the delivery of effective protection of
civilians, as urged most recently by Canada, Norway
and others. We also welcome the call for robust action
at the national, regional and international levels against
those who break the rules and attack humanitarian
personnel.
My Office will also give more thought as to how
we can respond to the suggestion made by the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom and
others about developing a framework that establishes
indicators
of
compliance
with
international
humanitarian refugee and human rights law. By the
next report, I hope that we will be able to outline
concrete elements of an information system to provide
systematic reporting to the Council on the effectiveness
of the current protection of civilians framework, both
institutionally and in specific field situations.

We will further consider how to address to the
next Secretary-General’s report the suggestion by
Pakistan for regular and specific information on the
scale, the locations and allocated responsibilities in
areas where protection of civilians is a major concern. I
welcome the support that I heard for integrating
protection of civilians into Security Council
peacekeeping mandates. This makes an important
difference to our work on the ground.
Finally, while the role of the United Nations is
unquestionably important for the protection of
civilians, I am grateful to the representative of China
and others for reminding us that it is the Member States
of the United Nations and the parties to conflicts that
bear the primary responsibility. Many statements in the
Council today have called for robust implementation
and resourcing of measures to strengthen the protection
of civilians on the ground by all parties to conflicts.
With that in mind, I am extremely grateful to members
of the Security Council for their solid support of the
proposed 10-point platform for action that I outlined
this morning. Your leadership on this is vital, and we
look forward to close collaboration with you, as we
work together to move forward with the protection of
civilians agenda in very concrete ways.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Egeland for his additional comments, which were
very interesting.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m.

15
