S/PV.5859 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5859th meeting
Tuesday, 25 March 2008, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin/Mr. Dolgov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Kenes
Mr. Somdah
Mr. Li Kexin
Mr. Weisleder
Mr. Skračić
Mr. Kassianides
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Mubarak
Mr. Arias
Mr. Laher
Mr. Bayley
Ms. Phee
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-28224 (E)

*0828224*

S/PV.5859 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President (spoke in Russian): I wish to
remind all speakers that, as I indicated at the morning
meeting and in accordance with the understanding
reached among members of the Council, they should
limit their statements to no more than five minutes in
order to expedite the Council’s work. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
their texts in writing and to deliver a condensed
version when speaking in the Chamber.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Lebanon, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, for your wise
stewardship of the Council during this month of March
and to extend my deepest appreciation to the
Permanent Representative of Panama for his skilful
leadership of the Council during the previous month. I
also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
important introductory remarks and Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
statement. Once again, it underscored the tremendous
challenges that lie ahead.
At the Annapolis Conference, all parties
committed themselves anew to the Road Map, with the
goal of reaching an agreement on statehood for the
Palestinian people before the end of the current year.
And what does Phase 1 of the Road Map, which was
endorsed by this Council, call for? All present here
know that it calls upon Israel to “immediately
dismantle settlement outposts erected since March
2001” and “to freeze all settlement activity (including
natural growth ...)”.
But what has happened since Annapolis?
In December 2007, Israel disclosed a plan to
build 307 houses in the occupied territories, in Abu
Ghuneim Mountain, a vicinity of East Jerusalem which
it calls Har Homa. That decision came only a few days
after the resumption of peace talks with the Palestinian
President, Mahmoud Abbas, at Annapolis. On
12 February 2008, Israel announced plans to build
more than 1100 apartments in occupied East Jerusalem.
On 17 March the Israeli Prime Minister, Ehud Olmert,
left no room for doubt about his Government’s
intentions, stating that Israel would not stop building
on occupied land in and around Jerusalem.

2

On this matter, we cannot but commend
Mr. Robert Serry, the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, who, in
his briefing to this body on 26 February, reiterated the
principle that continued settlement activity is illegal
anywhere in the occupied territory and is an obstacle to
peace. He underlined the fact that settlement activity is
“among the biggest factors undermining confidence in
the Annapolis process and prospects for a viable
Palestinian State”. (S/PV.5846, p. 3)
We do not intend to disregard the fact that the
Road Map in its same Phase 1 calls upon the
Palestinians “for an immediate and unconditional
ceasefire to end armed activity and all acts of violence
against Israelis anywhere”. However, could anyone, in
good faith, reasonably imagine that the Palestinians
could fully conform to such expectations while Israel
continues to subject Gaza to an immoral siege and its
civilian population to a deliberate policy of collective
punishment? This is not to mention the daily raids and
incursions it carries out in both Gaza and the West
Bank.
These realities, no matter how painful, should not
allow despair to prevail. The process initiated by the
United States at Annapolis must not be left to erode.
Hence, we cannot but support the efforts to hold a
second international meeting in Moscow to help
achieve a comprehensive and just peace based on
United Nations resolutions, the terms of reference of
the Madri Peace Conference, the principle of land for
peace and the provisions of the Arab Peace Initiative.
Turning to Lebanon, in particular to its south, it is
essential to move from the precarious situation of the
cessation of hostilities to that of a permanent ceasefire.
The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) recently observed the thirtieth anniversary of
its presence in Lebanon, a presence initially caused by
the massive Israeli invasion of 1978 and which has
continued because of repeated Israeli aggressions that
culminated in the summer 2006 war leading to Security
Council resolution 1701 (2006).
While we express our deep gratitude to UNIFIL
and praise its remarkable performance and close
cooperation with the Lebanese armed forces, we
reiterate on this occasion that Lebanon remains entirely
committed to the full implementation of resolution
1701 (2006) and abides by its obligations under it.

08-28224

S/PV.5859 (Resumption 1)

Israel, however, has yet to abide by its own obligations
under that resolution.
As a matter of fact, the Secretary-General in his
latest report on the implementation of resolution 1701
(2006), noted that
“UNIFIL has observed and reported a significant
number of Israeli air violations of Lebanese
airspace by aircraft and unmanned aerial vehicles
on an almost daily basis. … On 17 February ...
UNIFIL recorded 36 air violations”
And he rightly concluded that “All Israeli overflights
of Lebanon’s territory constitute violations of Lebanese
sovereignty and of resolution 1701 (2006).”
(S/2008/135, para. 17)
As to cluster bombs — the deadly legacy of Israel
in the south, which kill and maim children, civilians
mine-clearance experts, in addition to contaminating
agricultural fields — the situation regrettably remains
unchanged in spite of repeated calls on behalf of the
international community. Israel claims to have
submitted information on strike data, but the SecretaryGeneral in his report qualified them as being “of very
limited value”. (Ibid., para. 74)
Regarding the northern part of Ghajar, the
Secretary-General considered that its continued
occupation by Israel “constitutes a continuing violation
of Lebanon’s sovereignty, resolution 1701 (2006) and
the Blue Line” (ibid., para. 70). We reiterate here our
support of the proposal that UNIFIL take over, on an
interim basis, the administrative and humanitarian
responsibilities on the Lebanese side of Ghajar, once
the Israeli army has fully withdrawn.
The continued Israeli occupation of the Shab’a
Farms remains a major threat to the security and
stability of south Lebanon and constitutes a violation
of Security Council resolution 425 (1978). On this
issue, we urge the Secretary-General to start a long-due
diplomatic process, based on our suggestion in the
seven-point plan, that this area be placed under
provisional United Nations custodianship after the
withdrawal of the Israeli occupying forces and until the
border demarcation between Lebanon and Syria
become possible.
On the question of Lebanese detainees in Israeli
prisons, we reiterate that those detentions are a breach
of the basic rules of international law and that the
prisoners should be released immediately and

08-28224

unconditionally. As for the Israeli soldiers abducted on
12 July 2006, the Lebanese Government reiterates that
it has no knowledge of their status or whereabouts and
remains ready to cooperate with the Secretary-General.
We also reaffirm that the internationally
recognized borders of Lebanon in the south are as
referred to in the 1949 Armistice Agreement, and as
reiterated in operative paragraph 5 of resolution 1701
(2006). We continue to welcome UNIFIL assistance in
marking the Blue Line.
I would also like to inform the Council that
Lebanese authorities are maintaining a high level of
vigilance against illegal movements of arms and
material. In this context, my Government reiterates that
the control of Lebanon’s northern and eastern borders
remains a shared responsibility with Syria, as per
resolution 1701 (2006).
As to the Special Tribunal for Lebanon regarding
the assassination of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri
and the terrorist acts related to it, we would like to
express our appreciation for the sustained efforts of the
Secretary-General for its establishment. We also
acknowledge the generous contributions made by
Member States towards its funding, and we reiterate
our strong conviction that this Tribunal will be a key
judicial instrument in putting an end to impunity.
Finally, today, 25 March, a new President for
Lebanon should have been elected. While the
presidential elections have once more been postponed,
we cannot but stress the importance for the stability
and security of my country of these elections being
held as soon as possible in accordance with the terms
of the Constitution and pursuant to the Arab Initiative.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Mr. President, allow me at the outset to
congratulate your friendly country for chairing the
work of the Security Council this month. We also
would like to express our deep gratitude for the efforts
of the Permanent Representative of Panama and the
members of his delegation last month. I also wish to
express my deep pleasure at seeing the SecretaryGeneral participating with us in the meeting this
morning.
The United Nations can no longer deal with the
Arab-Israeli conflict and the Palestinian question on a

3

S/PV.5859 (Resumption 1)

business-as-usual basis. The Security Council’s
inability to carry out its obligations cannot be allowed
to lead to catastrophic results for our region and its
peoples. The United Nations must therefore ensure the
implementation of the resolutions it has adopted since
its inception, denouncing Israel’s occupation of Arab
territories, violations of human rights and inhumane
practices in contravention of international humanitarian
law and the 1949 Fourth Geneva Convention.
No preventive diplomacy can succeed unless it
addresses the core issues of our region — the Israeli
occupation of Arab territories in Palestine, the Golan
and southern Lebanon — thereby allowing a just and
comprehensive solution based on the resolutions of
international legitimacy, specifically resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), and the Arab peace initiative to
be reached. The direct or indirect support of some
parties for the ongoing Israeli occupation of Arab
territories contravenes the principles and foundations
of international law at the expense of the interests of
Arabs and Palestinians. It sends the wrong message to
Israel that its tactics of occupation, aggression,
provocative settlement activities and the forcible
annexation of territories enjoy the backing of its
supporters. Those parties would do better to urge Israel
to fulfil the requirements of peace, which is in the
interests of all parties, including those who offer blind
support to Israel.
The absence of stability in the
Middle East and the ensuing continued aggression and
escalation will inevitably harm the interests of those
parties.
Israeli actions in the occupied Arab territories —
including killing, oppression, arrests, deportation, the
demolition of homes and the expropriation of
territories — can only be described as war crimes,
genocide and a holocaust against the Palestinian
people. Israel continues to engage in targeted killings,
collective punishment and daily massacres of the
Palestinian people, especially in the Gaza Strip. The
victims, including women and children, number in the
thousands. Israel continues to close the border
crossings and to make the Gaza Strip the world’s
largest prison. It continues to deprive the inhabitants of
that territory of the basic necessities and to prevent
humanitarian assistance, including United Nations aid,
from reaching them. Indeed, Israel is exercising its
right of self-defence against electricity, water,
medicine and food.

4

All
such
practices
constitute
collective
punishment and grave violations of international
humanitarian law and the Fourth Geneva Convention.
They reaffirm once again the fact that Israel is an
outlaw State that blatantly flouts international norms,
seeks to make the situation explosive, and obstructs
any fair, comprehensive and just settlement of the
conflict.
The situation in the West Bank is no better than
that in Gaza, as reaffirmed by many senior
international observers, including Alvaro de Soto, Jean
Ziegler, John Dugard and, most recently, the United
Nations Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, Mr. John Holmes, during his briefing to the
Council last month, in which he noted Israel’s ongoing
construction of the separation wall in the face of the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice,
and its continued expansion of settlements, arrests and
other actions that are well known to all and have made
the lives of Palestinians into a living hell and increased
their suffering. The Security Council’s inability in
recent weeks to adopt a resolution calling for an end to
those crimes and Israeli violations is destroying
whatever remains of its credibility.
Despite the passage of 40 years since the Israeli
occupation of the Syrian Golan began, Israel continues
to refuse to return the occupied territory to its
motherland, Syria, and to implement the resolutions of
international legitimacy, especially resolution 497
(1981). Israel’s practices have violated all legal and
moral norms in the occupied Syrian Golan, where it
pursues a policy of terrorizing and oppressing Syrian
citizens and sending them to prisons and detention
centres, where some have remained for over 30 years
under no legal basis and in potentially lethal
circumstances as the occupying authorities continue to
ignore their medical needs. In that regard we make
specific note of our citizen Bishr al-Maqt. Our
Government has pleaded with the Secretary-General
and the International Committee of the Red Cross to
save his life. In that context, we ask the United Nations
and the Security Council to pressure Israel to release
those prisoners, including the Syrian journalist Ata
Farahat, who was arrested by Israel because of his
nationalist journalistic work.
Israel, the occupying Power, continues to prevent
the residents of the Syrian Golan from visiting their
families and relatives in Syria, their homeland. Israel’s
policies extend to the very livelihoods of our children

08-28224

S/PV.5859 (Resumption 1)

in the Golan, making life even more difficult for them.
That is quite evident in its policy of uprooting fruit
trees, including not least the uprooting of 370 trees of
our citizen Majed Fadel-Allah Abou-Awad on
23 February 2008. We informed the members of the
Security Council of the details of that most recent
Israeli aggression in our letter of 6 March.
There is no doubt that Israel’s escalation against
the Palestinian people, its forthcoming manoeuvres in
the occupied Syrian Golan, its troops massing along
the Lebanese border, its intensified settlement activities
in occupied Jerusalem, its ongoing construction of the
separation wall and assassinations of Palestinians will
make the situation in the Middle East, the Arab-Israeli
conflict and the question of Palestine priorities on the
agenda of the Arab summit shortly to be held in
Damascus. The Israeli escalation is intended to have
negative repercussions for the summit and to poison
the regional atmosphere. Instead of reaching out for the
Arab hand extended in peace, Israel has already begun
to provoke the capitals of the area, just as it did during
the Beirut summit of 2002, when it carried out the
Jenin massacre only a few hours after the adoption of
the Arab peace initiative.
The upcoming summit meeting to be held in
Damascus therefore takes on added significance. The
meeting will be an opportunity for Arab leaders to
discuss and coordinate their positions. It will be a
summit meeting of Arab solidarity to unify Arab
perspectives and positions in the face of those Israeli
challenges. It will therefore be an especially
responsible summit meeting.
Syria has made a strategic choice for a just and
comprehensive peace based on the well-known terms
of reference for peace and decisions of international
legitimacy. That means the return of all occupied Arab
territories, including occupied Syrian Golan, to the 4
June 1967 lines, as well as the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State with Jerusalem as its
capital. The ongoing occupation is a contradiction of
peace, which by definition requires mobilizing all the
necessary means to end the occupation. The question
still before us is this: if the Arab hand that has been
extended in peace is not met with a hand extended in
peace from the other side, what reason can there be for
continuing to extend that Arab hand?
Documenting the terrorism carried out by Israel
would require an archive and an entire museum

08-28224

specializing in shedding light on Israel’s war crimes
and acts of annihilation and ethnic cleansing during its
bloody history against Palestinians, Syrians, Lebanese,
Egyptians, Jordanians and others. It is astonishing that
those who talk about their suffering in the Nazi
Holocaust also publicly state their desire to inflict a
new holocaust on the Palestinian people — this time,
one of Israel’s making.
We are not the only ones to say that the Israeli
State commits war crimes and crimes of annihilation
against Palestinians. Well-known Western officials also
share that opinion, including senior international
officials of the United Nations itself. Many of them
have testified before the Security Council. Former
United States President Jimmy Carter has not been the
only one to say that Israel practices racial segregation
against Palestinians. Before him, Bishop Desmond
Tutu, who personally experienced racism, and Special
Rapporteurs Jean Ziegler and John Dugard made
similar statements.
Israel has the darkest record of violations and
attacks against international peacekeeping forces in our
region. Its aggression and attacks have been described
in the Security Council as deliberate by former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan. Israel is the only
country in the world with a policy of targeted killing.
Moreover, in the budget adopted annually by the
Knesset, Israel dedicates funds for a policy that has
been
internationally
condemned.
Since
its
establishment in 1948, Israel has kept that item secret.
However, since 2000 Israel has made those
appropriations public.
Over time, Israel has violated every border and
carried out terrorist operations outside its own
territory — beginning in Tunisia and then moving on to
Beirut, Cyprus, Iraq and every European capital. The
statement by the Israeli representative, which included
accusations against my country, was truly ironic, for he
completely overlooked his country’s official policy of
terrorism. Israel introduced that policy to the region
even before it was established in Palestine in 1948.
Everyone is aware that terrorist groups such as the
Stern Gang, the Irgun and the Hagganah killed tens of
thousands of Palestinians and forced the displacement
of millions from their land. They were also responsible
for the assassination in Jerusalem of United Nations
envoy Count Bernadotte because his conscience drove
him to request a review of the resolution dividing
Palestine into two States.

5

S/PV.5859 (Resumption 1)

Israel carried out the first act of air piracy in
modern history, when it hijacked a Syrian civilian
airliner in 1954. In Beirut in 1968, Israel carried out
political assassinations of unarmed civilian Palestinian
intellectuals. In the 1980s Israel placed bombs in the
cars of Palestinian mayors. Israel’s aggressive
behaviour in the region has led to the establishment of
no fewer than five peacekeeping operations. Israel
cooperated with the racist apartheid system in South
Africa due to the similarities between that regime’s
doctrine and Israel’s policy of ethnic cleansing and
racial segregation in occupied Arab territories. Yet
more surprising and strange is the fact that Israel
bombed the United States spy vessel Liberty during the
1967 war, because it was certain that the ship was
monitoring orders for the mass execution of Egyptian
prisoners in the Sinai. We would also remind the
Council that Israel destroyed a Libyan civilian airliner
in 1971.
Finally, the statement by the representative of the
United States suggesting that my country is interfering
in the internal affairs of Lebanon is puzzling, given the
blatant round-the-clock interference by the United
States in Lebanon’s affairs, which is taking place very
publicly and openly and without any diplomatic or
political constraints. That American interference has
resulted in displeasure among large segments of the
populations of Lebanon and the region.
Foreign interference in Lebanese affairs cannot
serve the cause of Lebanon’s stability, security and
civil peace. Lebanon very much needs support and
encouragement for its national unity, stability, civil
peace and political independence, free from external
influence or hegemony. Those who care about Lebanon
must deal with that country while taking into account
the will of the Lebanese people and ensuring
Lebanon’s integration into its natural Arab
environment. They must not jeopardize Lebanon’s
stability by sending warships to its coasts.
The President (spoke in Russian): Before giving
the floor to the next speaker, I should like to inform the
Council that perhaps there was a mistake in
interpretation earlier. The President asked speakers to
limit their statements to five minutes, not 15 or 25.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.
Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President, on

6

your accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of March, a presidency that has
been marked by dynamism and vigour. That, of course,
is a reflection of the constructive work of the Russian
Federation in the Middle East, as so well illustrated by
the visits to the region by your Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Sergey Lavrov. I also convey my gratitude to
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Panama, for the outstanding way in which he led our
Council last month.
I would also like to express my gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his presence here today and for
his introductory statement. It would be remiss of us, of
course, not to convey our gratitude to the UnderSecretary-General, Mr. Pascoe, for his briefing to the
Council.
It is my great honour to address this Council on
behalf of the Arab Group, representing the League of
Arab States.
This meeting of the Security Council takes place
at a time when the deterioration of the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories is well known to all
Council members and, in fact, to the international
community as a whole. That is due to the obdurate
stance taken by Israel and its attempts to extinguish
any hope of a just and lasting peace, in particular
following the renewed momentum created by the
Annapolis Conference.
Indeed, for over four decades now — that is, the
duration of the Israeli occupation — the Palestinian
people have never ceased to aspire to the creation of an
independent Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as its
capital and with the return of refugees in conformity
with Assembly resolution 194 (III). Israel has always
worked to undermine those hopes and to prolong the
suffering of the Palestinian people. It has carried out
settlement policies and has intimidated the population.
That is a systematic policy, which is a clear and brazen
violation of existing norms and standards.
Everyone is well aware that the Israeli occupation
authorities, on a daily basis and before the eyes of the
world, engage in practices that run counter to the
provisions
of
international
law,
international
humanitarian law, the Fourth Geneva Convention of
1949 and the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. That has been accomplished through acts of
aggression against the civilian population and by
prohibiting access to basic services and humanitarian

08-28224

S/PV.5859 (Resumption 1)

assistance, which has led to a serious deterioration of
the situation of the Palestinian people, especially in the
Gaza Strip. It is compounded by the settlements policy,
the continued confiscation of lands and the
construction of the separation wall despite the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice.
Not only does Israel destroy the hopes of the
Palestinian people for an independent Palestine and a
stable Middle East, it also is attacks the credibility of
this Organization and its ability to redress wrongs,
restore the rights of Palestinian people and restore
justice. Through its barbarian policies, it has
contributed to weakening the authority and profile of
the United Nations, as well as its credibility. All of that
is unquestionable.
Faced with the situation in the Middle East —
which is the result of Israeli intransigence, its refusal to
work towards peace and the persistent threat to
international peace and security it causes — the world
turns to this Council. The world thus expects this
Council to take urgent measures to force Israel to work
for peace and to put an end to the bloodshed in Gaza
and the West Bank by taking immediate measures to
launch a just peace process that would lead to an Israeli
withdrawal from the Arab territories occupied in 1967
and allow for the emergence of an independent
Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as its capital, in
conformity with the principle of land for peace, the
Arab Peace Initiative and Security Council resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003)
and General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
It is high time that the Council disprove the
allegations heard worldwide that it is hostage to a
number of its members who have taken a certain
position regarding the conflict and have backed Israel.
It is high time that the Council shoulder its
responsibilities and live up to the trust and confidence
that people place in it, that is, that it put an end to the
daily bloodshed in the Middle East and to the practice
of collective punishment, which runs counter to the
principles of international law and international
humanitarian law and those enshrined in the Charter.
That should enable the Palestinian people to enjoy a
decent life.
The occupied Syrian Golan continues to suffer
under Israeli occupation, as it has since June 1967. The
inhabitants of the Golan continue to suffer from the
inhuman practices of occupation and annexation,

08-28224

despite resolution 497 (1981). In addition, measures of
collective punishment are being carried out against
Syrian citizens in the occupied Golan, who reject the
occupation and are fighting against it. That is all taking
place in brazen violation of international law, the
Charter and the Fourth Geneva Convention. As
Mr. Pascoe said, the procedures for building
settlements in the Syrian Golan are still being carried
out — they are still being carried out.
The Arab territories in Lebanon continue to suffer
under the yoke of Israeli occupation. Israel is also
continuing its maritime, aerial and land-based
violations of Lebanon’s territory in violation of
resolution 1701 (2006). It continues to refuse to
provide maps of mine fields and cluster bombs dropped
during the conflict in Lebanon in the summer of 2006.
The impact of that conflict is still felt by Lebanese
citizens to this very day. It falls to this Council to put
an immediate end to the Israeli occupation and to work
towards a withdrawal of Israel from occupied Arab
lands.
Statements made by the members of the
international community here today have reaffirmed
the support of the international community for the
Palestinian people in their fight against the Israeli
occupation. The same is true of statements calling for
the Council to assume its important role in the
maintenance of international peace and stability by
taking all measures necessary to restore peace to the
Palestinian people and to put an end to collective
punishment by forcing Israel to withdraw from all
occupied Arab territories.
I hope that this will not just be a repeat of the
recent past. The Arab Group calls on this Organization
to fully play its rightful role, within the framework of
efforts aimed at strengthening the role of the United
Nations. We hope that the Secretary-General will
participate in the Arab summit to be held at the end of
this month in Damascus. We also call for an end to the
Israeli occupation, one of the last bastions of
colonialism in this century.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Amil (Pakistan): I have the honour to make
this statement on behalf of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference (OIC).

7

S/PV.5859 (Resumption 1)

The achievement of a durable and comprehensive
peace in the Middle East and the centrality of a just
and lasting settlement of the core issue of Palestine in
that regard is the shared objective of the international
community, including this Council. The OIC has a
strong and direct interest in the realization of this
objective. It is manifested in our long-standing
commitment and solidarity with the legitimate cause of
the people of Palestine and all other occupied Arab
territories. The principled position of the OIC is rooted
in its firm conviction in the supremacy of international
law, respect for the Charter of the United Nations, in
particular the principle of equal rights, selfdetermination of peoples, and the peaceful resolution
of disputes.
The eleventh OIC summit conference, held in
Dakar, Senegal, on 13 and 14 March 2008, reaffirmed
the centrality of the cause of Al-Quds Al-Sharif for the
whole Islamic Ummah. In the Dakar Declaration, the
Islamic World reaffirmed its solidarity with the heroic
struggle of the Palestinian people to establish their
independent State with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.
The summit reiterated its call on Israel to fully comply
with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, to
enable the establishment of the independent State of
Palestine, to withdraw completely from the occupied
Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967, and to
respect Lebanon’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The leaders proclaimed, once again, the common
position on the overall settlement of the Palestinian
question in accordance with the OIC and United
Nations resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Road Map of the Quartet, within the spirit of the OIC’s
constant commitment to the Middle East peace process.
The framework for the Middle East peace process
is well known. It is based essentially on the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations, in particular Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397
(2002) and 1515 (2003), and the principle of land for
peace. It is Israel’s pattern of refusal to comply with
these resolutions, which is hindering the achievement
of peace and stability in the region. Unfortunately, it is
the same behaviour of non-fulfilment of its obligations
by Israel that is frustrating the understanding and
objectives of recent important initiatives, at Annapolis
and Paris, to revive the peace process, to end the
occupation and to realize the two-State solution.
This is a tragic state of affairs. The rekindled
hope for peace is being dashed by the incessant

8

military onslaught by Israel, the Occupying Power,
against the innocent, defenceless and besieged
Palestinian civilian population in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, in particular the Gaza Strip.
The excessive and disproportionate use of force
by Israel, including strikes by warplanes and ground
artillery and targeted extrajudicial killings, among
other grave breaches of international law, including
humanitarian and human rights law, are a challenge to
the conscience of the world community. We are deeply
grieved and distressed at the heavy civilian casualties
including, women, children and infants, and the trauma
being endured by the Palestinian people in the face of
widespread destruction.
This wanton use of force, collective punishment
and terrorizing of civilian populations by the
Occupying Power has no justification whatsoever. The
OIC shares the international concern over further
deterioration of the already dire humanitarian situation
in the Gaza Strip caused by the military escalation by
Israel and its continuing illegal siege of the Gaza Strip.
Similarly, illegal Israeli actions against the
civilian population in the West Bank, including the
continuing construction of new settlements and the
wall, only fuel the cycle of violence, undermine the
steps taken by the Palestinian Authority to establish
calm and security, and threaten the prospects of peace.
The international community must respond to this
deliberate policy of escalation of the ground situation
aimed at derailing the fragile peace process. Israel
must be held responsible for its actions and their
dangerous consequences for the civilian population in
the occupied Palestinian territories.
It is high time to ensure respect for the rule of
law by putting an end to the impunity enjoyed by
Israel. The OIC supports the call by Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon that incidents in which civilians have
been killed or injured must be investigated, and
accountability must be ensured. The OIC expects
urgent follow-up action in that regard.
The Security Council, in particular, must act in a
credible, timely and effective manner in fulfilment of
its Charter responsibilities to address the threat to
international peace and security. The Council cannot
remain silent and marginalized as this crisis escalates,
undermining international law, the sanctity of civilian

08-28224

S/PV.5859 (Resumption 1)

life and the vision of a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace enshrined in the Council’s own resolutions.
It is unfortunate and unacceptable for the
Security Council to be deadlocked on even
pronouncing itself in response to violence and
deterioration of the situation on ground. The Council
must condemn the killing of innocent civilians and
violence, undertake measures to bring about an
immediate ceasefire and its respect by all parties,
ensure full compliance by Israel, the Occupying Power,
with its obligations under international law, including
humanitarian and human rights law, and demand an
immediate end to the siege of the Gaza Strip.
Going beyond these crucial immediate steps, the
Council must play its rightful strategic role in the
pursuit of a comprehensive and durable peace in the
Middle East. It must demonstrate the political will to
ensure full and non-discriminatory implementation of
its own resolutions and to respond effectively to noncompliance. It must reclaim its position as the focal
point of international efforts, and promote synergy
among different initiatives and the political, security
and humanitarian tracks. The Council must be the
principal guarantor of the understandings and
agreements entered into by the parties, including their
respective obligations under the Road Map, the
implementation of which it must also oversee.
The Security Council should thus make concerted
efforts to bring about a rapid and tangible improvement
of the situation on ground in the occupied territories,
including through the release of prisoners and removal
of all kinds of blockades and restrictions. It must
ensure cessation of all policies and actions by Israel
that seek to change the realities on the ground that
could prejudice a final settlement, including the
integrity and viability of the future Palestinian State.
Israel must halt the construction of the illegal
separation wall, freeze all settlement activity and
dismantle unauthorized settler outposts.

the situation on the ground in the Gaza Strip be
restored to what existed prior to the events of June
2007, once again stressed the need for national
dialogue among the Palestinians to achieve
reconciliation and restore unity in order to serve the
Palestinian people’s higher national interests. We call
on the international community to fully support the
ongoing efforts for intra-Palestinian unity and welcome
the breakthrough achieved in Sana’a.
The key to success in resolving the Arab-Israeli
conflict is in addressing its root cause, namely, the
continuing Israeli occupation of the Arab territories.
That is the leitmotif of the peace process, of which no
aberration or unilateral alteration will be acceptable to
the international community. The OIC calls for Israel’s
complete withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and all other
occupied Arab territories, including the Syrian Golan.
Comprehensive peace in the Middle East will
remain elusive unless all aspects of the Arab-Israeli
conflict are addressed, including the Syria-Israel and
Lebanon-Israel tracks. We therefore urge progress on
those parallel tracks to reach a just and durable
settlement. Israel must withdraw completely from
Lebanese land and the occupied Syrian Golan and
comply fully with Security Council resolution 497
(1981).
The OIC reaffirms its steadfast support to the
Palestinian people for the realization of their
inalienable right to self-determination and the
establishment of a sovereign, independent and viable
State of Palestine on the basis of the pre-1967 borders,
with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, and for a just
resolution of the refugee issue in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

The Council should ensure immediate and
unfettered provision of adequate humanitarian
assistance and of all essential goods and services in the
occupied territories, in addition to enhanced economic,
social and technical support from the international
community, including for building State institutions
and a security apparatus for the Palestinian Authority.

It was in keeping with our sincere commitment to
that larger goal that, despite recent setbacks and the
negative developments in the occupied territories, the
OIC summit in Dakar welcomed the revival of the
peace process and called for building on the
momentum in order to reach a final settlement
agreement before the end of 2008. It called also for the
establishment of an independent and viable Palestinian
State. The OIC is ready and willing to work with the
international community and the Security Council to
realize this collective objective.

Peace is indivisible. That is why the summit
conference in Dakar, while reiterating the demand that

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.

08-28224

9

S/PV.5859 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Malmierca Díaz (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I have the honour to address the Security Council on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
At the outset, I would like to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for having been present here this
morning for our debate. I also would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing.
As is known, the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory continues to deteriorate, marked
by deadly violence, instability and high tension. In
grave breach of international law and in contradiction
of the peace process, Israel, the occupying Power,
continues, inter alia, to launch military attacks against
the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian
territory, particularly in the Gaza Strip. It continues to
expand its illegal settlements and to construct the wall
in the West Bank, including in and around occupied
East Jerusalem. It also continues to impose closures
and restrictions on movement, including via the siege
of the Gaza Strip, where the isolated and imprisoned
Palestinian civilian population continues to suffer from
a dire humanitarian crisis. At the same time, the
situation in Lebanon remains complex, and the Israeli
occupation of the Syrian Golan continues.
All of these realities affect not only the Middle
East region, but the entire international community, for
they seriously impact the prospects for peace, security
and stability both in and beyond the region.
While aware of the recent efforts to advance the
cause of peace, the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM)
strongly believes that the lack of respect for
international law by the occupying Power and its
ongoing illegal occupation continue to be the major
obstacles to the success of efforts to achieve a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace. The Movement
reiterates its deep regret that for more than 40 years the
Palestinian people have been suffering under the brutal
Israeli military occupation and colonization of their
land since 1967 and that they continue to be denied
their fundamental human rights, including the
inalienable right to self-determination and the right of
the Palestine refugees to return to their lands, in
accordance with international law and relevant United
Nations resolutions.
The toll in human lives, injured, displaced,
homeless, impoverished and those without access to
basic services in the occupied Palestinian territory
continues to increase at an alarming rate. The poverty

10

rate is currently 65.8 per cent in the occupied
Palestinian territory, and in the Gaza Strip it is more
than 79 per cent of the population. The continuing
Israeli closures and restrictions on freedom of
movement and on access to persons and goods,
including humanitarian and medical goods, have made
the Palestinian economic recovery nearly impossible
and continue to aggravate the prevailing humanitarian
crisis and to further destabilize the situation on the
ground. Such violent and illegal actions have deepened
the suffering of the innocent and defenceless
Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip, who are already
suffering great poverty because of the continuing
imposition of the crippling Israeli siege and the
ensuing humanitarian crisis.
Moreover, Israel, in violation of numerous
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions, in
contravention of the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice and of General Assembly
resolution ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004 — which
reaffirms the illegality of the construction of the wall
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem — continues to build the wall and to impose
an associated permit regime and to construct and
expand its illegal settlements.
The NAM remains seriously concerned by
Israel’s recent decisions to continue the illegal
construction of settlements and the wall. We are also
concerned by the great physical, economic and social
devastation caused by those illegal and destructive
colonization practices, which are dividing the occupied
Palestinian territory into separate, walled-in enclaves
and severing East Jerusalem from the rest of the
territory, undermining the unity, integrity and
contiguity of the Palestinian territory. Furthermore, this
construction destroys entire communities, displacing
thousands of Palestinian civilians and isolating tens of
thousands more Palestinians into isolated cantons.
The continuation of those illegal actions threatens
the prospects for peace, as they will make the twoState solution and peace physically impossible to
achieve. This requires the urgent attention of the
Security Council, for the extremely negative
consequences for the peace process are undeniable.
The peace process is not a sideline to the
situation on the ground. Just as positive actions and
progress in the peace process can benefit the
aforementioned situations, the negative events and

08-28224

S/PV.5859 (Resumption 1)

illegal actions by Israel have a very detrimental impact
not only the situation on the ground, but the peace
process itself.
The NAM reiterates its call for Israel, the
occupying Power, to cease all its violations against the
Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and to abide scrupulously by
its obligations under international law, particularly
humanitarian law and human rights norms.
The Government of Lebanon has continuously
endeavoured to stabilize the situation in its territory
following Israel’s brutal aggression and serious
violations of its territorial integrity and sovereignty.
The NAM reiterates its satisfaction with the steps
undertaken by the Lebanese Government to implement
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), particularly
through the deployment of the Lebanese armed forces
in the region south of the Litani River and along the
Blue Line. The Movement also welcomes the
deployment of the Lebanese armed forces along the
northern and eastern borders of Lebanon in order to
ensure security and stability at the borders.
The NAM remains deeply concerned by Israel’s
ongoing air and land violations of the Blue Line in
breach of resolution 1701 (2006). We strongly call on
Israel to end the occupation of the northern part of
Ghajar, on the northern side of the Blue Line, and to
immediately refrain from any violation of Lebanese
sovereignty and of resolution 1701 (2006), as well as
to refrain from any provocation of the Lebanese armed
forces or the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.
The NAM calls for the prompt settlement of the
question of the Shab’a Farms in full respect for
Lebanese territorial integrity, as stipulated in resolution
1701 (2006). We call upon all parties to cooperate in
protecting Lebanon’s sovereign rights in that area, and
we note the important endeavours of the SecretaryGeneral in this regard.
The NAM is acutely aware of the enormous
challenge facing Lebanon as a result of the 1.2 million
cluster bombs launched by Israel during its attack on
Lebanon in 2006. The Movement once again condemns
the use of such weaponry by Israel and deplores the
death toll resulting from them. The NAM strongly calls
upon Israel to provide the exact location of those
deadly weapons and the maps of landmines planted
during its occupation of southern Lebanon.

08-28224

The Non-Aligned Movement expresses its
support for the integrated plan of action contained in
the statement on Lebanon issued by the foreign
ministers of the Arab League on 5 January, and in that
regard the Movement commends the efforts by the
Secretary General of the Arab League to carry out that
plan.
The Movement reaffirms that all measures and
actions taken or to be taken by Israel, the occupying
Power, which purport to alter the legal, physical and
demographic condition and institutional structure of
the occupied Syrian Golan, as well as the Israeli
measures to impose jurisdiction and administration
there, are null, void and without legal effect.
We also reaffirm that all those measures and
actions, including the illegal construction and
expansion of the Israeli settlements in the Syrian Golan
since 1967, constitute violations of international law,
international agreements, the United Nations Charter
and resolutions, including Security Council resolution
497 (1981), the Fourth Geneva Convention, and a
challenge to the international community. The
Movement demands that Israel abide by resolution 497
(1981) and withdraw completely from the occupied
Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967.
The Non-Aligned Movement expresses its hope
that current efforts will ultimately bring an end to the
occupation of all of the Arab territories occupied by
Israel since 1967 — the Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, and the occupied Syrian Golan — and
will lead to the establishment of the independent State
of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, as well
as a just solution of the question of refugees on the
basis of General Assembly resolution 194 (III). The
Movement also hopes that recent international efforts
will effectively contribute to the achievement of a
comprehensive, just and lasting settlement in the
Middle East, based on the relevant United Nations
resolutions and in accordance with the rules and
principles of international law.
The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms its support
for the Middle East peace process on the basis of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
425 (1978), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003) and the
principle of land for peace. Likewise, we reject
attempts to alter the mandate of the peace process and
the imposition of unilateral measures and strategies

11

S/PV.5859 (Resumption 1)

aimed at the imposition by Israel, the occupying
Power, of an illegal unilateral solution.

support of the Israeli and Palestinian populations, the
region and the wider international community.

The Non-Aligned Movement will continue to
support and contribute in all possible ways to the
achievement of a just, comprehensive and lasting peace
in the Middle East based on all relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Arab peace initiative and the road map.

The EU is deeply concerned about the recent
Israeli announcement that it intends to extend the
settlement of Givat Ze’ev. The EU reiterates that
settlement-building anywhere in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem, is
illegal under international law. Settlement activity
prejudges the outcome of final status negotiations and
threatens the viability of an agreed two-State solution.
The EU therefore urges Israel to take immediate action,
in particular on settlements and outposts. It calls on the
Palestinian Authority to make further efforts to
implement its obligations with regard to security,
where needed in cooperation with the Israeli
authorities. In that regard, the EU remains ready to
strengthen and extend its Police Mission for the
Palestinian Territories in order to support the
reinforcement and reform of the Palestinian security
forces.

The President (spoke in Russian): I call on the
representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Štiglic (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU).
The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries
of the Stabilisation and Association Process and
potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; the European Free Trade
Association country Iceland, member of the European
Economic Area; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova and Armenia align themselves with this
statement.
First of all, let me thank you, Sir, for convening
this debate. I would also like to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his remarks earlier today and
Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing and
frank assessment of the situation.
The European Union expresses its full support for
the Annapolis process and its commitment to
supporting the parties in their negotiations with a view
to achieving a two-State solution. A just and
sustainable solution to all aspects of the Middle East
peace process can be achieved only through
negotiation. Despite the difficulties that the process has
recently experienced, the EU welcomes the intention of
the parties to resume their negotiations and looks
forward to an early meeting of Quartet principals.

The EU considers that the violent confrontations
in and around Gaza have serious security implications.
The EU is deeply concerned by the unsustainable
humanitarian situation in Gaza and calls for the
controlled and sustained reopening of all crossings in
and out of Gaza for both humanitarian reasons and
commercial flows. While reconfirming in that context
the Council conclusions of January 2008, it extends its
full support to efforts to facilitate a peaceful solution to
the present crisis. That solution should provide for a
lasting period of quiet. The EU reiterates its readiness
to resume its monitoring mission at Rafah, in
accordance with the Agreement on Movement and
Access of November 2005.

The EU is deeply concerned about the recent
violence in Gaza and southern Israel, especially the
civilian casualties. It condemns in the strongest terms
the terrorist attack on a seminary in Jerusalem on 6
March and the continued rocket attacks. While
recognizing Israel’s legitimate right to self-defence, the
EU calls for an immediate end to all acts of violence.

The EU recalls its commitment at the
International Donors’ Conference for the Palestinian
State last December in Paris to support efforts to build
the future Palestinian State, in accordance with the
Palestinian Reform and Development Plan. It calls for
Israeli cooperation in the Plan’s implementation. The
EU expresses its full support for the upcoming
international conferences on investments and economic
revival in Bethlehem and in support of Palestinian civil
police and rule of law in Berlin.

The EU stresses the need for swift and tangible
results on the ground in order to sustain negotiations.
Action from both sides to implement their road map
obligations is vital in order to retain the confidence and

The EU continues to stand by its strong support
for the Government and institutions of Lebanon in
carrying out their missions to preserve Lebanon’s
stability, sovereignty, independence and territorial

12

08-28224

S/PV.5859 (Resumption 1)

integrity. The EU expresses concern about the ongoing
political deadlock in Lebanon and the deterioration of
the security situation.
The EU reiterates its strong support for the plan
unanimously adopted by the Arab foreign ministers in
seeking to broker a resolution to the political crisis and
commends the continued efforts by Arab League
Secretary General Amr Moussa. It urges the parties in
Lebanon to proceed, as a first step, to the immediate
holding of the presidential election. The success of the
plan requires all actors to play a constructive role. The
EU recalls that the EU High Representative has been
designated to spearhead the EU efforts with Arab
countries in that respect.
The President (spoke in Russian): I call on the
representative of Israel to make a further statement.
Mr. Gillerman (Israel): While I share the view
expressed by some members of the Council as to the
value of these debates, I feel that, at the end of this
meeting, I would be remiss if I did not express our
gratitude to the assassins of Damascus and the butchers
of the Sudan — both beacons of human rights — for
their expert presentations on terror and genocide. It
was indeed enlightening to hear a lecture about
targeted killings from a country under investigation by
this very Council for assassinating its own political
opponents in Lebanon, as well as about genocide from
the monsters of Darfur. Maybe this meeting did serve
some purpose after all.
As to the statement made by the Cuban
representative, ostensibly speaking on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, I find it strange and
disturbing, just as I did the last time. While we heard
here today from several representatives of countries
that are members of the Movement a clear
condemnation of terror, and especially of the massacre
in Jerusalem on 6 March, there was not a single word
about terror nor was there a condemnation of that
brutal act in the statement made by the representative
of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. It is
precisely because we hear such very different
statements from countries belonging to the Movement,
both around this table and outside the Chamber, and
precisely because of our deep respect for so many of
the members of the Non-Aligned Movement, that we
wonder whether the representative of Cuba spoke on
behalf of his own island. If not, whom does he really

08-28224

represent? I believe that both the Council and the NonAligned Movement deserve an explanation.
The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic has asked
for the floor to make an additional statement. I now
give him the floor.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I apologize for taking the floor once again. I
shall be very brief, for I have already made a lengthy
statement.
Perhaps had the Council met its responsibilities
in the course of the decades of the history of the ArabIsraeli conflict, we would not be at a point at which a
Member State is requesting that this item be removed
from the agenda, or one at which some people would
feel uncomfortable listening to the representative of a
country asking for an end to the occupation of its
territory that has existed since 1967.
My country is a founding Member State of this
international Organization. We consider ourselves to be
among the victors in the war against Nazism and
fascism. While there are fortunately many things that
set us apart from the Israelis, a relevant distinguishing
feature in the context of our discussion today is the fact
that a permanent member of the Council has not had to
use the veto 44 times to protect our efforts because of
evasion of responsibilities under international law and
the principles and objectives of the Charter. However,
the State to which I am referring did use the veto 44
times to protect Israel as it evaded its commitments
under the Charter and international law. It is for that
reason that the representative of Israel been able to
criticize various States, for he knows in advance that
there is some one to protect him in the Council, even if
it means using what is referred to as the privilege of
the veto.
I shall summarize the mentality of the
representative of Israel by recalling a story told by an
Israeli dove. Speaking about Israel’s disregard for the
rights of others, that Israeli advocate of peace gave the
following account, which has something to do with
your country, Mr. President. The story goes as follows.
At one point in the war between czarist Russia and
Ottoman Turkey, a Russian citizen of the Jewish faith
was conscripted into the army. He was sent to the
Ottoman Turkish front, where the war was then taking
place between czarist Russia and the Ottoman Empire.
As he was preparing to join the forces at the front, his

13

S/PV.5859 (Resumption 1)

mother said to him, “My son, each time you kill a Turk
you must rest for a few minutes”. The boy was
surprised by her statement and said to her, “But
mother, what if a Turkish soldier were to kill me?” His
mother replied, “God damn that Turkish soldier, my
son! Why would he want to kill you? What could you
have done to him to cause him to want to kill you?”
That is the Israeli mentality, one that allows for
the killing and accusing of others while proclaiming its
own innocence. However, it is all of us in the region
who suffer from Israel’s occupation, aggression,
inhumanity and evasion of its commitments and the
terms of reference for peace.
The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of the Sudan has requested the floor to
make an additional statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): We
were not surprised that the representative of the Zionist
entity fled the Chamber following his attack against
my country. We were also not surprised by his baseless
allegations, which are a reflection of his moral
bankruptcy. Nor were we surprised by his reference to
Darfur, for we know of Israel’s covert influence in that
region.
The comments by the representative of the
Zionist entity regarding occupied Palestine also ring
hollow. They were an attempt to cover up his country’s
crimes against humanity and its violations of the rights
of the Palestinian people. The Zionist entity has
undermined the credibility of the United Nations,
which has been unable to put an end to Israel’s
occupation of Palestine. That is the real tragedy.
Given the steadfastness of the Palestinian people
and of peace-loving countries, we are confident that
Palestine’s independence will be achieved, just as
apartheid came to an end in South Africa. We say to the
representative of the Zionist entity: say what you like;
the fig leaf with which you clothe yourself will not
serve to hide your crimes, nor will you enjoy impunity.
The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of Cuba has asked for the floor to make
an additional statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Quiñones Sánchez (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): It really was never the intention of my
delegation to take the floor for a second time in this
debate. However, I believe it necessary and timely to
respond to the deceptive comments made by the

14

representative of Israel with regard to the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM) and its firm position regarding the
cause of the heroic Palestinian people and the situation
in the Middle East.
First, I would like to emphasize that the Cuban
delegation makes this statement in its capacity as Chair
of the NAM Coordinating Bureau. You can be sure,
Mr. President, that we could have included many more
elements in our national capacity.
This is not the first time that the Israeli
representative has made offensive and distorted
statements with regard to the position of the Movement
on the issue before us today. I would like to make it
clear to the representative of Israel that the speech read
out in the Chamber by Cuba’s representative just a few
minutes ago represents the opinion of the 118 members
of the Movement.
Israel is once again attempting to divert attention
from truly important issues and to hide the facts about
the daily occurrences in the occupied Arab territories,
especially the crimes committed in the Palestinian
territory. Distortion and manipulation will not prevent
the Non-Aligned Movement from setting out its
principled position on the situation in Palestine and the
Middle East in all the relevant international forums,
including the Security Council.
The Non-Aligned Movement will continue to
express its resolute opposition to the illegal Israeli
occupation, as well as its full support for the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, throughout the entirety of
the Palestinian territory occupied by Israel. We shall
continue to denounce the occupying Power’s nonrespect for international law as the main obstacle to the
success of the efforts intended to achieve a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace.
We shall continue to demand that Israel withdraw
fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the 4 June
1967 borders. We shall not be silent on the issue of
Israel’s relentless aggression and its grave violations of
Lebanon’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. We
hope that, at some point, the Government of Israel will
demonstrate genuine political commitment to making
progress in the peace process — not just with rhetoric,
but with concrete actions.

08-28224

S/PV.5859 (Resumption 1)

As it always has, the Non-Aligned Movement
will continue to firmly support the peace process in the
Middle East on the basis of resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 425 (1978), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003) and
the principle of land for peace.

08-28224

The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m.

15
