A /73/PV.100*

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

100

th plenary meeting
Friday, 19 July 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Agenda item 119 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit
Draft resolution (A/73/L.99)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like
to sincerely thank His Excellency Mr. Masud Bin
Momen, Permanent Representative of Bangladesh,
and His Excellency Mr. Agustín Santos Maraver,
Permanent Representative of Spain, the co-facilitators
of the intergovernmental consultations to determine
the modalities and organizational aspects of the
international migration review forum. I must commend
them for their skill and patience in steering the complex
negotiations on the text. I congratulate them on the
excellent outcome and thank all member States for
their useful contributions and constructive spirit during
the negotiations.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/73/L.99.
Before giving the floor for explanations of vote
before the voting, may I remind delegations that

explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramirez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to sincerely congratulate the
Permanent Representatives of Bangladesh and Spain for
their commendable work as the co-facilitators of draft
resolution A/73/L.99, which is being considered today
by the General Assembly. It should be recalled that
open, transparent and inclusive consultations were held
with all members. We welcome the multi-stakeholder
discussions with representatives of civil society and
local authorities. We thank them for their leadership
and the work of their teams in leading the process.
For decades, international migration has been
a priority for Mexico. We have maintained that this
phenomenon, which is by definition transnational, can
be addressed only through international cooperation
and multilateral mechanisms. No country by itself can
aspire to effectively manage flows of people. We believe
that it is up to the United Nations to facilitate dialogue
and assistance among its Member States in the area of
migration. International cooperation in that area should
be the norm, not the exception, but the undeniably
disorganized progress of international migration forces
us to undertake periodic radical reviews of the issue,
analyse it thoroughly and attempt each time to develop
better alternatives. That is what the international
community expects from the United Nations.
Mexico will vote in favour of the draft resolution.
That vote demonstrates my country’s support for
dialogue, understanding and cooperation, not unilateral

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-22360 (E)

*1922360*
*

Reissued for technical reasons 6 August 2019

A/73/PV.100

decisions that violate international law. Voting in favour
of the text means recognizing that multilateralism is
the best way to address the complex challenges we
encounter today, such as migration. We expect there to
be some disagreement on the matter, but that does not
eliminate the possibility of finding common solutions.
Mexico will vote in favour because we know at first
hand the challenges that migration brings. Irregular
migration is unsafe and disorganized by its very nature.
We must seek to ensure that migration is an option, not
a necessity that forces people to leave their country
of origin. Mexico will vote in favour because the
international migration review forum will be open to all
Member States. And precisely because we acknowledge
that different situations exist in every country, we will
welcome the various voices and perspectives at each
forum held. Mexico will vote in favour of the draft
resolution because it firmly believes in respect for
national sovereignty and is convinced that the best way
to demonstrate that respect is by cooperating with other
sovereign States.
Mexico will vote in favour because the progress
declaration to be adopted at each forum will allow
us to identify progress and areas of opportunity. By
collectively recognizing those opportunities, we will
be able to work together for the benefit of our peoples.
Lastly, Mexico will vote in favour because it is
convinced of the enormous potential of the 258 million
migrants as drivers of sustainable development.
We invite all member States to acknowledge one
of the most relevant political commitments of our
time — making migration a safe, orderly and optional
process. We invite members to vote in favour of the
text and to redouble their efforts on the ground and
in diplomatic forums alike so that the United Nations
can fully comply with the mandates we have conferred
upon it.
Mr. Atlassi (Morocco): I make this statement
on behalf of the following delegations: Antigua and
Barbuda, Burundi, Cameroon, Chad, the Comoros,
Côte d’Ivoire, the Gambia, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea,
Jamaica, Lesotho, Mali, Nigeria, the Philippines,
Rwanda, Senegal, the Sudan, Zambia and Zimbabwe,
as well as my own delegation, Morocco.
Our group of delegations welcomes draft resolution
A/73/L.99, entitled “Format and organizational aspects
of the international migration review forums”. In that
2/7

19/07/2019

regard, our group of delegations would like to extend
its sincere gratitude to the co-facilitators of the draft
resolution, namely, Ambassador Masud Bin Momen of
Bangladesh and Ambassador Agustín Santos Maraver
of Spain, for their efforts to achieve the text. Their
leadership and expertise allowed us to achieve a very
positive outcome, containing substantive and innovative
elements for the international migration review forum,
which is the follow-up mechanism to the Marrakech
Compact on Migration. Moreover, their diplomatic
skills were vital to elaborating a text that is acceptable
to all those who participated in the negotiations.
The draft resolution we are taking action on today
is not creating something new. On the contrary, the
decision to establish the International Migration Review
Forum was taken in Marrakech on 10 December 2018,
when we adopted by consensus the Global Compact for
Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration. It was further
reaffirmed by the General Assembly when it adopted
resolution 73/195, endorsing the Global Compact.
Therefore, today’s draft resolution represents the
implementation of paragraph 54 of the Marrakech
Compact, which requested the determination of the
precise modalities and organizational aspects of the
International Migration Review Forums. In that regard,
our delegations would like to reiterate our full and
unwavering support for the Marrakech Compact on
Migration as a milestone in the history of the global
dialogue and international cooperation on migration.
As recognized by the Compact, migration has been
part of the human experience throughout history, and
it has always been a source of prosperity, innovation
and sustainable development in our globalized world.
Furthermore, the Compact underlines the fact that the
majority of migrants around the world today travel, live
and work in a safe, orderly and regular manner.
As the primary intergovernmental global platform
for Member States to discuss and share progress on the
implementation of all aspects of the Global Compact,
the International Migration Review Forum is key to
ensuring the appropriate follow-up of the Marrakech
Compact on Migration.
On that basis, our delegations participated
constructively throughout the negotiations on the draft
resolution. While we might not fully agree with some
of its elements, and while we would have wanted to
see some other elements included therein, we strongly
believe that it constitutes a balanced text. For all those
19-22360

19/07/2019

reasons, our delegations strongly support the draft
resolution contained in document A/73/L.99 and ask all
delegations to extend their support for the text and vote
in its favour.
Mr. Koba (Indonesia): Allow me to commence by
stating Indonesia’s support for the statement delivered
by the representative of Morocco on behalf of a number
of Member States. International migration is a global
phenomenon that in recent years has become contentious
and has unfortunately given rise to a “me against you”
mentality. In Indonesia’s view, international migration
needs to be discussed together and resolved in a
cooperative manner and not be obscured by unilateral
interests or rigid sovereignty approaches. It is a matter
of humanity.
Indonesia therefore fully supports multilateral
efforts to ensure that the future of the governance of
human mobility, including workers’ migration, is safe,
orderly and regular. That will definitely solidify the
three pillars of our common efforts: peace and security,
human rights and development.
Supporting draft resolution A/73/L.99 today on the
format and organizational aspects of the international
migration review forums is a pertinent pathway towards
achieving that goal. Be assured that Indonesia is fully
committed to playing an active and constructive role in
the implementation and review of the Global Compact
for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration.
Today’s vote on the modalities to review the Global
Compact reflects our commitment to upholding the
principles of human justice, compassion for humankind
and leaving no one behind. Indonesia invites member
States in this Hall to vote in favour of the draft resolution
in order to make it possible for the Global Compact to
serve as an effective global framework for humankind.
Mrs. Fangco (Philippines): The Philippines aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the representative
of Morocco on behalf of a number of delegations.
We congratulate Bangladesh and Spain for the
hard work that they put into crafting draft resolution
A/73/L.99 and leading the process of consultations that
resulted in a text that passed the silence procedure.
We thank member States for their good faith and
constructive engagement, which led to what we believe
is a balanced text that reflects the various concerns of
delegations. We regret that the draft resolution is being
put to the vote since it only sets out modalities for a

A/73/PV.100

forum, which we already agreed in December 2018
to have.
The Philippines supports the draft resolution, just
as it did resolution 73/195, which endorses the Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration.
We attach great importance to that resolution because
it operationalizes the Global Compact’s objectives
and commitments on dialogue, cooperation, sharing
best practices and strengthening partnerships, among
other things.
We acknowledge that no State can, or should,
address migration alone, and that is why we have the
Global Compact. We have laid the foundation and,
with this draft resolution, are setting it in motion. It is
important for our delegation to ensure that there will
be appropriate, available and sufficient funding for the
conduct of the Forum, while being mindful of the costeffectiveness of the mechanism.
The Philippines remains steadfast in its
commitment to the Global Compact for Migration to
promote and protect the human rights of migrants,
regardless of migration status. We remain optimistic
that between now and 2022, none of us will falter in our
commitments to protect the human rights of migrants,
regardless of status.
We will vote in favour of the draft resolution and
invite other delegations to support it. We look forward
to a robust first International Migration and Review
Forum in 2022.
Mr. Jaime Calderón (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, El Salvador expresses its
gratitude for the outstanding work done by the
co-facilitators — Ambassador Agustín Santos Maraver
of Spain and Ambassador Masud Bin Momen of
Bangladesh — throughout the entire negotiation
process and for having come up with a balanced and
coherent text in line with the mandate established in the
follow-up and review of the Global Compact for Safe,
Orderly and Regular Migration.
El Salvador acknowledges that the adoption of the
Global Compact represented a momentous step towards
a more comprehensive mechanism for migration within
the framework of the United Nations, encompassing
a wide spectrum of rights throughout the migration
cycle, while fulfilling the commitment we all made
to meeting target 10.7 of the Sustainable Development
Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development

19-223603/7

A/73/PV.100

to facilitate orderly, safe, regular and responsible
migration and mobility of people, including through
the implementation of planned and well-managed
migration policies.
In that regard, El Salvador recognizes that the
International Migration Review Forum will be the
main global platform for gauging the progress achieved
in the implementation of the Global Compact and the
fulfilment of the commitments undertaken in other
international migration-governance frameworks.
El Salvador stands ready to take the measures
necessary to implement the Compact at the national and
regional levels and to contribute to the first convening of
the International Migration Review Forum. El Salvador
will therefore vote in favour of the draft resolution, and
we respectfully invite other delegations to do the same.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution
A/73/L.99,
entitled
“Format
and
organizational aspects of the international migration
review forums”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chad, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Honduras, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman,
4/7

19/07/2019

Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Philippines, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, San
Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Thailand,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Tuvalu, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Estonia, Hungary, Israel, Poland, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Algeria, Australia, Austria, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Chile, Czech Republic, Italy, Latvia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Singapore, Switzerland
Draft resolution A/73/L.99 was adopted by 118
votes to 5, with 13 abstentions (resolution 73/326).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Saudi Arabia,
the Syrian Arab Republic and Togo informed the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in favour.]
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before giving
the floor for explanations of vote after the voting, may
I remind representatives that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Smith (United States of America): As noted
in our national statement of 7 December 2018, the
United States does not support the Global Compact for
Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration or the New York
Declaration for Refugees and Migrants of September
2016. We therefore object to the adoption of a resolution
that establishes processes to implement or support the
Global Compact objectives, such as the international
migration review forums. We are not bound by any
of the endorsements, commitments or outcomes
stemming from the Compact process or contained in
the Compact itself.
The United States proclaims and reaffirms its
belief that decisions about how to secure its borders
and whom to admit for legal residency or citizenship
are among the most important sovereign decisions a
State can make. They are not subject to negotiation
or review in international instruments or forums. The
United States also opposes the Migration Multi-Partner
Trust Fund to fund the implementation of the Global
19-22360

19/07/2019

Compact, the participation of stakeholders and work on
the Forum.
The United States opposes the creation of new
funding mechanisms and bureaucracies when there are
already multiple United Nations agencies that manage
existing mechanisms for addressing migration-related
issues, such as through the International Organization
for Migration, the International Labour Organization
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
We would like to highlight our ongoing concerns
about the potential for new budgetary implications in
this resolution. Holding a high-level conference for four
days imposes an unnecessary financial and time burden
on Member States and United Nations agencies. We
note that the prior United Nations high-level meetings
on migration were no longer than two days. We urge
this body to be prudent about its use of funds and to
avoid unnecessary and cumbersome costs.
Mrs. Zappia (Italy): In 2018, Italy abstained in the
voting on the resolution adopting the Global Compact
for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration (resolution
73/195). Since resolution 73/326, adopted today, can be
considered a follow-up to the Global Compact, we have
remained consistent by confirming our abstention today.
I would also like to add that my delegation does
not support the inclusion of operative paragraph 16 in
the final text of the resolution and that Italy will not
contribute in any manner to the Start-Up Fund for Safe,
Orderly, and Regular Migration.
Mr. Atlassi (Morocco): I am making this
explanation of vote after the voting on behalf of
Antigua and Barbuda, Burundi, Cameroon, Chad, the
Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, El Salvador, the Gambia, Mali,
Morocco, Nigeria, the Philippines, Senegal, Rwanda
and Zimbabwe.
On paragraph 18 (a) of the resolution we have
just adopted (resolution 73/326), entitled “Format and
organizational aspects of the international migration
review forums”, our group of delegations would like
to underline that the term “within existing resources”
in the aforementioned paragraph should never be
interpreted as implying any restrictions on the resources
that will be allocated to this new mechanism and should
in no way condition or limit its functioning or ability to
fulfil its mandate. This is in line with the explanation
provided by the Secretariat during the negotiations.

A/73/PV.100

It is our understanding that all necessary resources
for the forums will be made available from the regular
budget of the United Nations. We would like for this
statement to be transmitted, alongside the resolution,
to the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions and the Fifth Committee when
they consider its programme budget implications.
Mr. Klíma (Czech Republic): First of all, let me
express our sincere gratitude to both co-facilitators,
Ambassador Masud Bin Momen and Ambassador
Agustín Santos Maraver, for their leadership and
excellent work on the matter.
As we stated in the course of the voting on the Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration in
the General Assembly on 19 December 2018 (see A/73/
PV.60), the Czech Republic decided not to join the
Compact and consequently did not participate in the
intergovernmental conference to adopt the Compact in
Marrakech. Recalling these facts, the Czech Republic
cannot accept the expression “welcoming” in the first
preambular paragraph of resolution 73/326, as we
reiterated in the course of its drafting.
As a result, the Czech Republic decided to abstain
in the voting on the resolution today. However, we
would like to stress that the Czech Republic considers
the international migration review forum to be an
important platform for discussion about the problems
of global migration. That was also the precise reason
why we joined the negotiations in the first place.
We therefore welcome the fact that the international
migration review forums shall remain open to all
countries, and we look forward to further cooperation
in the field of international migration.
Ms. Zālīte (Latvia): As the Assembly may recall,
following the decision of the Latvian Parliament we
abstained in the voting on resolution 73/195 (see A/73/
PV.60) and did not join the Global Compact on Safe,
Orderly and Regular Migration.
For the same reasons, we abstained in the voting
today on resolution 73/326, entitled “Format and
organizational aspects of the international migration
review forums”.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the Holy See.
Monsignor Grysa (Holy See): My delegation
would like to thank the co-facilitators, the Permanent

19-223605/7

A/73/PV.100

Representatives of Bangladesh and Spain, for their
leadership and efforts during the negotiations on
resolution 73/326, entitled “Format and organizational
aspects of the international migration review forums”.
Informal consultations were led with exemplary
transparency and a commitment to listen to everyone
in order to achieve consensus. My delegation therefore
congratulates the co-facilitators and all Member States
that engaged constructively in that process.
From the very beginning, the Holy See was
very supportive of the whole process leading to the
intergovernmental consultations and negotiations
on issues related to the Global Compact for Safe,
Orderly and Regular Migration. Although it is the
fruit of compromise and hence not perfect, the Global
Compact is a historic advancement in our shared
responsibility to act in solidarity in favour of people on
the move, especially those who find themselves in very
precarious situations. The Global Compact, however,
will be successful only if it becomes the heart and soul
of a shared journey of solidarity, mercy, prudence,
responsibility and respect, which is good for individual
communities and countries as well as for people on
the move.
The international migration review forums are
an important element of that shared journey. My
delegation is particularly pleased that they do not limit
their activities to the evaluation of the implementation
of the 23 objectives of the Global Compact, but also
aim to identify the key challenges, opportunities and
emerging issues, and the scope for further international
cooperation on international migration, possibly
involving also those countries that have not adopted
the Global Compact. In fact, that shared journey can
happen only if all of us concretely commit to doing and
giving our share.
Mr. Dinh Nho Hung (Viet Nam): Our delegation
would like to extend our appreciation to the
co-facilitators of resolution 73/326, the Permanent
Representatives of Bangladesh and Spain, for their
hard work and tireless efforts throughout the process
of consultations and informal meetings. Viet Nam
recognizes the importance of the international migration
review forums as a platform to exchange views and
share experiences, and thereby positively contribute
to the implementation of the Global Compact for Safe,
Orderly and Regular Migration. We therefore voted in
favour of the resolution.
6/7

19/07/2019

However, we are aware that there is no perfect text
that can meet or reflect the different requirements and
interests of all countries. We therefore believe that
there is room for future improvement and clarification
of some elements and concepts in the resolution. We
are of the view that to ensure that the international
migration review forums are conducted in an effective
and constructive manner, consultations with the wider
United Nations membership need to be guaranteed, in
preparation for the discussion on the addition of the
international migration review forums.
Last but not least, when participating in the review
process, the International Organization for Migration
and the relevant United Nations bodies must operate
within their respective mandates.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.
I shall now make a very short closing statement.
Seven months ago, the General Assembly endorsed
the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular
Migration. Today I am pleased that we are moving
forward with the implementation of the Global Compact
through the adoption of resolution 73/326, on the
modalities of the international migration review forums.
The forums will become a foundation for the
implementation of the Global Compact, which aims
to achieve a positive impact on the lives of millions of
migrants, their families and communities around the
world. It provides room for Member States to share their
best practices and challenges. It gives space for partners
such as the United Nations system, civil society, the
private sector and migrant communities to engage.
The international migration review forums
establish a cooperation and exchange mechanism for
each country to act according to its own priorities,
visions and internal frameworks to achieve safe, orderly
and regular migration. Today’s decision by the General
Assembly underlines the importance of cooperation,
multilateralism and the relevance of the United Nations.
With the adoption of the resolution, we send a strong
message that we must work together to find solutions to
global challenges.
Let me once again take this opportunity to thank to
the two co-facilitators, the Ambassadors of Spain and
Bangladesh, for their tireless efforts and outstanding
work. I would also like to thank Member States and
stakeholders for their engagement in and commitment
19-22360

19/07/2019

to achieving that very important result and maintaining
the momentum created over the past several years.
(spoke in Spanish)
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda items 14 and 119.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now invite the
attention of the General Assembly to the note by the
Secretary-General contained in document A/73/946,
circulated under agenda item 32, “Report of the
Peacebuilding Commission”.
Members will recall that the General Assembly
concluded its consideration of agenda item 32 at its
82nd plenary meeting, on 20 May 2019. In order for the
Assembly to consider the document before it today, it
will be necessary to reopen its consideration of agenda
item 32.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen its consideration of agenda item 32?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 32 (continued)
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission
Note by the Secretary-General (A/73/946)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The General
Assembly will now consider the note by the SecretaryGeneral issued as document A/73/946, concerning the
extension of the appointment of the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peacebuilding Support.

A/73/PV.100

Members will recall that, in its resolution 62/236,
of 22 December 2007, the General Assembly decided
that the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacebuilding
Support shall be appointed following consultations
with Member States and shall serve for one fixed term
of five years without possibility of renewal.
As indicated in document A/73/946, on 2 September
2014 the Secretary-General announced the appointment
of Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco of Argentina as
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacebuilding Support,
for a five-year term which began on 1 November 2014
and due to end on 31 October 2019.
In the light of the particular impact of all of the
ongoing reforms on the Peacebuilding Support Office
and the need to minimize disruptions during the critical
implementation phase of the reforms, the SecretaryGeneral wishes to propose that the General Assembly
approve, notwithstanding paragraph 70 of General
Assembly resolution 62/236, the exceptional extension
of the term of Mr. Fernandez-Taranco as Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacebuilding Support by two
years, until 31 October 2021.
May I therefore take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to approve, notwithstanding paragraph 70
of resolution 62/236, the exceptional extension of the
term of Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco of Argentina as
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacebuilding Support
by two years, until 31 October 2021?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of agenda item 32?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 4 p.m.

19-223607/7
