S/PV.8633

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8633rd meeting

Monday, 7 October 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Matjila. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Ugarelli
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Craft

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
The centrality of preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention and resolution
Letter dated 2 October 2019 from the Permanent Representative of SouthAfrica
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/786)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-30375 (E)
*1930375*

S/PV.8633

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
The centrality of preventative diplomacy,
conflict prevention and resolution
Letter dated 2 October 2019 from the
Permanent Representative of South Africa
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2019/786)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Ethiopia and Namibia to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Her Excellency
Ms. Liberata Mulamula, Visiting Scholar and Associate
Director of the Institute for African Studies at the Elliott
School of International Affairs at George Washington
University; Ms. Naledi Maite, Programme Manager
of African Women in Dialogue, South Africa; and
Ms. Linda Vilakazi, Programme Manager of the Zanele
Mbeki Development Trust.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: Her Excellency
Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer
of the African Union to the United Nations; and Her
Excellency Mrs. Jeanne d’Arc Byaje, Permanent
Observer of the Economic Community of Central
African States to the United Nations.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/786, which contains a letter dated
2 October 2019 from the Permanent Representative of
South Africa to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, and give him
the floor.
2/34

07/10/2019

The Secretary-General: I am grateful for the
opportunity to brief the Council on the United Nations
work on preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention and
resolution in Africa.
All our work on conflict prevention and resolution
relies on partnerships with Member States, regional
and subregional organizations, regional economic
communities and others. The African Union is our key
strategic partner across the continent. I welcome the
leadership of His Excellency Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, who
has participated in so many of our debates.
We are making progress on conflict prevention,
together with our partners, in many parts of Africa.
In the Gambia, for example, joint action two years ago
by the African Union, the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), the United Nations
and neighbouring countries prevented a political
crisis from spiralling and supported a peaceful and
democratic transition. In Madagascar, we worked with
the African Union, the European Union, the Southern
African Development Community and the International
Organization of la Francophonie to facilitate dialogue
that contributed to the peaceful presidential election in
that country this past year. Our good offices efforts,
together with those of the African Union, the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries, ECOWAS and the
European Union, have been instrumental in addressing
political tensions in Guinea-Bissau. I urge all parties
to work towards a peaceful, transparent, free and fair
election in that country next month.
In Cameroon, my Special Representative for
Central Africa is working with the authorities and with
national and regional stakeholders to support efforts to
address, through an inclusive dialogue, the root causes
of the crises in the North-West and South-West regions.
The conclusions of the national dialogue in Cameroon
have just been published. The recent agreement in the
Sudan, brokered by the African Union and Ethiopia,
is an opportunity for the international community
to support peace at a delicate time, in a country that
has seen terrible conflict and suffering. My Special
Representative for West Africa and the Sahel has also
conducted joint efforts with ECOWAS and the African
Union to support peaceful and inclusive election
processes in Sierra Leone, Nigeria and Senegal.
19-30375

07/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

(spoke in French)
Terrorism is a growing threat to the entire continent
of Africa and has serious implications for global peace
and security. In the Sahel, terrorist groups regularly
attack local and international security forces — there
was yet another death yesterday — including our United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) peacekeepers. The
violence is spreading to the coastal States of the Gulf
of Guinea. In Nigeria, Boko Haram and its splinter
factions are terrorizing local communities and
attacking security forces, despite the efforts of the
Multinational Joint Task Force. We are seeing terrorist
networks spread throughout Libya and North Africa,
extending across the Sahel to the Lake Chad region, and
appearing in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Mozambique. This is a battle that we are not winning.
It is not just a regional issue, but a clear and immediate
danger to global peace and security. I welcome the
ECOWAS summit that was held this past month in
Burkina Faso, as well as the renewed commitment of
ECOWAS member States to participating financially
and militarily in the fight against terrorism.
We must recognize that the impact of the crisis
in Libya is growing and spreading throughout the
region as weapons and fighters continue to constantly
cross its borders. As the Council is aware, my Special
Representative is working with national, regional and
international partners to prevent a further escalation of
violence and encourage a return to the political process.
I have also already sent the President of the Security
Council a copy of the letter from the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission, in which the proposal
from the African Union Peace and Security Council is
presented to the Council. In that regard, I look forward
to enhanced cooperation with the African Union
on Libya.
Peace in Mali is also essential to peace in the
Sahel. Despite the terrible attacks in the Mopti region
this past week, I hope plans for an inclusive political
dialogue will facilitate the implementation of the 2015
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Our
peacekeeping Mission, MINUSMA, plays a critical
role in supporting implementation of the agreement and
requires consistent and strong support.
African military operations, including the African
Union Mission in Somalia, the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and the Multinational

S/PV. 8633

Joint Task Force against Boko Haram, among others,
deserve our full support. I welcome the decision to lift
geographic restrictions on provisions by MINUSMA
to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, but we must understand
that this alone is not enough. I once again urge the
Council to provide African peacekeeping and counterterrorist operations with clear mandates, backed by
predictable and sustainable financial support through
mandatory contributions.
Sustainable, inclusive development is an end in
itself; it is also the most effective way to address the
underlying causes of conflict, extremism and terrorism.
Tackling poverty and inequality, strengthening State
institutions and civil society and promoting human rights
are critical to preventing conflict and building resilient
communities and societies. These goals are central to
both the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and the African Union Agenda 2063. We are working
harmoniously with the African Union, through our
joint framework for sustainable development, in order
to build a peaceful and prosperous Africa with a
strong focus on inclusivity, women’s rights and gender
equality. The meaningful participation of women and
women’s leadership will strengthen our responses and
are essential to lasting peace.
Addressing the climate crisis is another vital
preventive measure. Climate-related risks, including
droughts, floods and changing rainfall patterns, often
intersect with political, social and economic factors.
We must urgently reduce our emissions to prevent
consequences that would be catastrophic for sustainable
development and security across Africa and step up
support for the countries that are worst affected. Today,
it is indisputable that climate change has aggravated
security challenges, particularly in the Sahel.
Nearly half of Africa’s population of 1.3 billion
people are under the age of 15. Education, training and
job opportunities for this generation must be central
to any development strategy. As we saw most recently
in the Sudan, women and young people are the key
builders of peaceful societies. I urge the Council to
work with them and for them far more effectively.
(spoke in English)
When prevention fails, the United Nations works
with our partners to reduce suffering, resolve conflicts
and build sustainable peace. We strongly support the
African Union’s Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative as
a basis for advancing peace and security and offering a

19-303753/34

S/PV.8633

Peace and security in Africa

safer and better future. I commend the Security Council
for its resolution 2457 (2019) on this initiative and for
emphasizing the role of young people. Our enhanced
strategic partnership with the African Union on peace
and security is based on the Joint Framework for an
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security agreed in
2017. It was demonstrated again in February when the
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2457 (2019),
on steps towards ending conflict in Africa through
enhanced international cooperation and partnership
(see S/PV.8473).
Our largest peacekeeping missions are on the African
continent, where more than 80,000 peacekeepers are
serving. Africa is now the largest troop-contributing
region. We owe these Blue Helmets our strong and united
support through robust funding and strong mandates. I
commend the Council’s cooperation with the African
Union, including with its Peace and Security Council.
Across the continent, the United Nations is working in
steadfast and close cooperation with the African Union
and African subregional organizations to prevent and
resolve conflicts.
The Central African Republic is just one example
of this. The United Nations, the African Union and
others are cooperating in support of the historic
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
reached in February to end violence against civilians,
strengthen the extension of State authority and bring
social development to that conflict-ravaged country.
Conflict prevention is difficult to quantify and may
not make the news, but no news is good news for the
people we serve. Prevention brings enormous rewards.
Conflict prevention and resolution depend on the
engagement of the parties involved. Beyond that, they
require a united international position and a commitment
to shared goals. The Council’s strong engagement
in prevention efforts on the African continent, in
collaboration with regional and subregional partners, is
needed and appreciated more than ever.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mulamula.
Ms. Mulamula: At the outset, allow me to express
my gratitude to you, Mr. President, for organizing
this extremely important debate on the centrality
of preventative diplomacy, conflict prevention and
resolution in addressing the agenda for peace and
4/34

07/10/2019

security in Africa. I am so honoured and humbled to
be among the invited briefers and to have been given
the first opportunity to share with the Council my
experience and appeal with regard to the role of women
in peacebuilding and conflict resolution. Before I do
that, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on presiding over
the work of the Council during October, which is an
important month in the history of the United Nations.
The entire world is witnessing the erosion of
multilateralism and its contribution to making the
world a better place for all of us to live. The fact that
the Council is debating the primacy of preventive
diplomacy is a stark reminder that we have not lived
up to the raison d’être of the United Nations, in which
we the peoples declared our determination to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war. As
the Council deliberates on the important steps required
to strengthen preventative diplomacy, allow me to flag
some of the issues arising from my own experience and
the various peace processes I have been involved in, as
well as the women’s platforms in which I have had the
privilege of participating.
I come from Tanzania, a country that has played
an extraordinary role in conflict resolution, preventive
diplomacy and peacebuilding in the Great Lakes region
and beyond. Therefore, I wish to state here that my
career path has exposed me to conflict resolution,
managing conflicts and seeking negotiated solutions.
I had the privilege to serve as the first Executive
Secretary of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region. The evolution of that organization can
be traced from the Rwandan genocide and the wars that
embroiled the Great Lakes region between 1994 and
2004. This regional framework constitutes regional
responses to the violent conflicts and genocide that
plagued the region.
Every single peace initiative, intervention,
mediation process, concept, framework and legal
instrument has been tried in the Great Lakes region.
The signing of the Pact on Security, Stability and
Development in the Great Lakes Region, which
established the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, was seen as a milestone that demonstrated
the strong political will of States of the region to build
the structures and expand the scope of responsibility
for prevention beyond Governments. This brought civil
society and women and youth groups on board. The
follow-up mechanisms that were established, including
the Summit of Heads of State, the Regional Ministerial
19-30375

07/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

Council, the Secretariat and national coordination
mechanisms, were put in place to ensure appropriate
measures to prevent conflicts escalating to violence
and mass-atrocity levels.
The complexity of the issues involved in the
cyclical violence requires that any meaningful attempt
to address issues of peace and security in the region
and on the African continent be based on a regional
framework and approach, because the countries of the
region are likely to have a better understanding of the
situation on the ground than external actors. Although
over time the assessment of legitimacy and the role of
the countries in the region that share common interests
have been called into question — and scholars have
written a great deal about this — I want to emphasize
that despite the few politically unstable situations that
remain, as well as the many unresolved issues, at least
the guns have been silenced in that part of the region
for now.
I had the enormous responsibility of sustainably
transforming legacies and cycles of violent conflicts
and genocide into peaceful coexistence between the
communities and countries of the region. It was not an
easy task, but as the saying goes, if you want to get
something done, give it to a woman, and if you want
it well said, give it to a man. My task was to facilitate
dialogue to prevent, contain and manage situations
likely to affect peace and security, and to seek to identify
potential triggers of intra- and inter-State hostilities.
In reading one of the United Nations Conflict
Prevention and Preventive Diplomacy in Action
reports, I am sorry to see that the use of the SecretaryGeneral’s good offices by deploying special envoys
and representatives in conflict areas is aimed more
at attempting to prevent conflicts or crises from
escalating than preventing them from occurring
altogether. There have been successful cases reported
in Mali, Burkina Faso, Colombia and elsewhere, but it
is usually a case of too little, too late. I want to remind
the Council that at the peak of the political crisis in
Burundi, the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
country configuration was supposed to undertake a
mission there. On the ground, we were eagerly awaiting
reinforcement from the PBC. But the mission was
cancelled at the last minute because of what was termed
the security situation in the country, while leaders from
the region were flowing into Burundi.

S/PV. 8633

I will now to turn to the agenda on women and
peace and security, because in view of the briefers
around the table I assume that it will be one of the
focus areas of today’s debate. At the 2005 World
Summit, world leaders reaffirmed the important role
of women in conflict prevention and resolution and in
peacebuilding. They called for the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, and for the first time accepted
the existence of interlinkages between development,
peace, security and human rights. In addition, and
further to the obligations under resolution 1325 (2000),
in February 2013 the United Nations and the leaders of
the Great Lakes region — the one I know best — signed
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
and its Women’s Platform. The Women’s Platform for
that volatile region, of which I am an integral part,
provides a framework for promoting the important
role of women in the peace and political processes in
the region, and contributes to achieving much-desired
stability by participating in the creation of the requisite
conditions for peace and development in the region,
among other things.
The remarkable thing, worth reporting here, is
that although the platform was initiated and launched
by Mrs. Mary Robinson, then Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General to the Great Lakes Region, her
successors, Ambassador Djinnit and the current Special
Envoy, Ambassador Xia, who are both men, have made
this their flagship programme for preventive diplomacy
and peacebuilding in the region, with tremendous
success. The joint peace missions of the African Union
(AU) and the United Nations conducted in Burundi,
the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Sudan would not have been
possible without their full support in terms of resources
and political will. I want to salute them for being
outstanding models, in both words and deeds, in the
HeForShe campaign.
Despite the many instruments, national action plans
and implementation mechanisms, women do not yet
have equal representation or demonstrable influence on
policies relating to peace and security. Violence against
women remains perhaps the most pervasive human
rights violation in the African continent and the Great
Lakes region in particular. The lack of African women’s
participation in formal mediation processes, and at
the negotiating table in peace processes in particular,

19-303755/34

S/PV.8633

Peace and security in Africa

reflects an important area of the resolution 1325 (2000)
agenda that remains poorly implemented.
Moreover, women’s significant contributions to
subnational and local mediation and conflict-prevention
initiatives, and their strong role in them, continue to
go largely unrecognized and weakly supported. It was
against that backdrop that the African Union took
landmark decisions leading to the establishment of the
Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention and
Mediation, officially referred to as FemWise-Africa.
The modalities of its operations were endorsed by the
AU Peace and Security Council on 13 March 2017 and
by the Security Council on 27 March 2017, in an Arria
Formula meeting. With the Council’s indulgence, I
would like to explain a bit more about FemWise-Africa,
which I view as directly relevant to the objectives of
this debate on preventive diplomacy and peace and
security in Africa.
FemWise, as its name suggests, aims to strengthen
the role of women in conflict prevention and mediation
efforts in the context of the African Peace and Security
Architecture. The Network provides a platform for
strategic advocacy, capacity-building and networking
aimed at enhancing the implementation of the
commitments on women’s inclusion in peacemaking in
Africa. Among its priorities are professionalizing the
role of women in preventive diplomacy and mediation
on tracks 1, 2 and 3, and ensuring a channel for their
meaningful and effective participation in peace
processes. Overall, FemWise-Africa aims at bridging
the gaps between mediation efforts on tracks 1, 2 and
3 and synergizing efforts towards inclusive peace
processes with sustainable outcomes.
We were in Burundi in June on a joint peace mission
of FemWise-Africa and the Office of the Special
Envoy to the Great Lakes Region, carried out under
the leadership of Ms. Catherine Samba-Panza, former
interim President of the Central African Republic,
and Ms. Speciosa Kazibwe, former Vice-President of
Uganda, now a member of the Panel of the Wise of the
African Union. The mission’s objective was to engage
the authorities in Burundi, the Central African Republic
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo in involving
women, civil society and other stakeholders in dialogue.
We thought it was timely to engage all stakeholders in
such preventive diplomacy in Burundi in particular, as
the country heads towards general elections next year.
6/34

07/10/2019

What struck us most is how the Barundi have been
receptive to FemWise-Africa and its localized efforts.
With the support of the Ministry of Gender, they
have formed mediation teams at the community level,
drawing inspiration from FemWise-Africa to mitigate
conflicts and tension among communities before they
escalate to crisis levels. This is an example of a good
practice of preventive diplomacy at the local and grassroots levels, which needs to be scaled up and supported
if we are to achieve sustained peace and development
in that country.
The AU involves women in its Silencing the Guns
by 2020 initiative. We met in Constantine, Algeria, to
see how to best we can play our role in ensuring that
the African Union meets those aspirations. Next year,
we will celebrate the anniversaries of those landmark
aspirations, including 20 years of resolution 1325
(2000); 25 years of the Beijing Platform for Action,
which is the model for the 30 per cent gender quota
for women representation; and, of course, Silencing the
Guns in Africa by 2020. The question is will the guns
be silent in Africa come 2020?
The African Women Leaders Network, launched
jointly in June 2017 by the African Union Commission
and the United Nations, in partnership with the
Federal Republic of Germany, here at United Nations
Headquarters, is aimed at bolstering the leadership of
women in governance, peace and security for Africa’s
transformation, including by participating actively
in ensuring that women play a meaningful role in
silencing the guns through advocacy and sensitization
of communities. As a coordinator of the peace and
security pillar of the Network, I call on the Council to
recognize those efforts and support the Network with
the resources necessary to make a difference.
I am proud to report that the Network, under
the able leadership of Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed, Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka,
Executive Director of UN-Women, and Ms. Bineta
Diop, AU Special Envoy on Women, Peace and
Security, has set the goal of generating sustainable
and concrete actions for women in Africa, in line with
the African Union and United Nations commitments
to prevention and the delivery of tangible solutions
on the ground. Women do not need to prove their
substantive impact to find solutions to the drivers of
armed conflict and displacement. Instead they should
reinforce their proactive role in peacebuilding and
sustainable development.
19-30375

07/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

I am encouraged by the Secretary-General’s
initiative for making prevention the overarching
priority for achieving peace and development. Today’s
meeting is a clear testament to the commitment of
States and the Council to take deliberate measures to
prevent conflicts and mass atrocities in Africa and
worldwide. My humble appeal to the Council is to
put our money where our mouth is, that is, to invest
in conflict prevention and efforts that target the root
causes and drivers of violence.
It is high time to see women not as victims, but
as agents of preventive diplomacy who are catalysts
for peacebuilding. I am again privileged to be a
member of the Secretary-General’s Peacebuilding
Fund Advisory Group, where women empowerment
and youth programmes have been accorded priority.
Nevertheless, we are still unable to effectively and
meaningfully engage local women organizations, due
to the hamstrung financial regulations and criteria
that govern the Fund. Those need to be changed in
line with the Secretary-General’s commitment to
ensuring that women play a meaning role in preventive
diplomacy, conflict resolution, peacebuilding and
sustainable development.
Drawing from the aforementioned, let me conclude
with a few recommendations.
First and foremost, as the Council deliberates on
preventive diplomacy, there is no need to reinvent the
wheel as the necessary mechanisms, frameworks and
legal instruments already exist, including regional
mechanisms such as the national action plans under
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, which remain unimplemented due to lack of
resources and, perhaps, political will.
Secondly, I need to emphasize that a regional or
subregional approach is the most appropriate one
and should be the primary response mechanism for
preventive diplomacy in Africa.
Thirdly, we see that the annual costs of maintaining
peacekeeping forces — more than $1 billion, for
example, in the case of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo — would go a long way towards implementing
national action plans that would translate commitments
on women, peace and security into the national policies
and programmes of many African countries.
Fourthly, I call on the Council to support and
enhance the capacity of African regional organizations

S/PV. 8633

and women engaged in conflict prevention and
mediation through FemWise-Africa and other
platforms for women. The focus should be on proactive
conflict prevention, before conflict escalates, rather
than reactive conflict prevention, preventing conflict
that has occurred from escalating. The various
initiatives taken at the international and regional levels
will have no effect in ensuring local ownership for
sustainability if they work in isolation from the local
initiatives. As mentioned in the Secretary-General’s
statement, regional blocs have assumed a vital role in
conflict resolution through mediation efforts despite
the challenges they face. They need to be capacitated
and supported.
Fifthly, there is a need to develop a holistic and
inclusive approach that ensures that no one is left
behind. The African Union Agenda 2063 and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development have placed
women and youth at the centre of their aspirations. It
goes without saying that collaboration and cooperation
among various institutions and communities that are
active in this field is essential. I participate in various
preventative frameworks, including the Global Action
Against Mass Atrocity Crimes, which is mentioned in
the Secretary-General’s report on the responsibility to
protect (S/2019/463). It is a global, inclusive, State-led
network of partners, with the support of the Swiss
Government, that is engaged in atrocity prevention. It
seeks to support States that wish to develop national
architectures for the prevention of atrocity crimes.
I invite the Security Council to work closely with
such institutions.
Finally, dialogue and mediation are vital softpower approaches that should be leveraged as the
Council reflects on the centrality and value of
preventative diplomacy.
As a woman peace activist and champion of
women leadership, the subject that I teach, let me
conclude here by quoting a famous saying in Burundi,
“Nothing about us without us.” We are here and ready
and willing to be deployed in any peace mission,
mediation or peacekeeping forces. There is no need to
look far. The African Women Leaders Network and the
FemWise-Africa network are at the Secretary-General’s
disposal if he needs able and qualified women to assist
him in his good offices and diplomatic efforts.

19-303757/34

S/PV.8633

Peace and security in Africa

The legendary South African singer, Yvonne Chaka
Chaka, defined women as well-organized men. We are
all in this together.
The President: I thank Ms. Mulamula for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Maite.
Ms. Maite: I thank you very much, Sir, for the
opportunity to address the Council.
My name is Naledi Maite and I represent an
organization called South African Women in Dialogue,
commonly known as SAWID, which I became affiliated
with at the age of 18. SAWID is an independent South
African women’s forum committed to providing a
platform for every woman to be heard through dialogue
in order to improve the status of women in our country.
SAWID was born out of an organic process of
sisterhood and solidarity. The journey began in 2002,
at the time of the Inter-Congolese Dialogue, which
took place in Sun City, a conferencing and holiday
resort in South Africa. As it may be recalled, this was
the second attempt as the initial dialogue in Ethiopia
had collapsed. We as South Africans, like the rest of
the world, watched the proceedings on our television
screens, hoping that a common peace agreement would
finally be achieved. However, the marked absence of
ordinary South Africans in and around the talks gave a
group of women the idea to organize themselves and to
drive to Sun City. On their arrival, the intention was not
to meddle in the affairs of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. They came with one very simple message,
namely, to pledge their solidarity with the struggle of
the women of that country. For them, it was agonizing
to watch the tensions and anxiety among the women
participating in the process and how they were not
central but peripheral to the talks.
As recognized in resolution 1325 (2000), in times
of conflict it is women and children who are the worst
affected. Having experienced their own political
transition just eight years prior, that handful of South
African women understood first-hand for whom the
shoe pinches and what it feels like to want peace yet not
to have a voice. The small civil society delegation was
well received, which gave birth to a number of activities.
Chief among them was the Congolese and South African
women’s dialogue, held in Johannesburg in March 2003,
at the request of Congolese women, and endorsed by
8/34

07/10/2019

the leader of the Inter-Congolese Dialogue facilitation
team, the late Sir Quett Ketumile Joni Masire.
The dialogue was attended by approximately 120
Congolese women and 180 South African women and
its purpose was twofold. The first was to facilitate
dialogue among Congolese women. Tensions ran high
at the start of the dialogue. As one can imagine, the
women came from different warring parties and
factions and dialogue was therefore difficult and
almost impossible at the start. The second purpose was
for the South African delegation to share experiences
and strategies on institutional mechanisms and laws
with a view to providing an environment for women’s
emancipation and equality in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Following the success of the dialogue, the Congolese
women resolved to hold a follow-up conference,
which took place in Kinshasa in May 2003. At the
conference, they collectively created a framework for
the Inter-Congolese Dialogue to integrate women and
ensure their effective participation in the transitional
process. Through the newly created collective, they
pressured the various negotiating parties to sign a final
agreement. Through the dialogue process, Congolese
women, in spite of deep-rooted and historical divisions,
demonstrated that even if one is affected by or a party
to conflict, that does not mean that it is impossible to
work towards a common goal, namely, that of peace and
stability in their country.
Emanating from these interactions with the
Congolese women was the realization by South African
women of the need to reflect on their own journey since
achieving democracy. The process with our sisters from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo revealed to us
that we had assumed the existence of our cohesion and
unity, which was not necessarily the case. The women
realized that post-1994, they had handed over their
agency to Government, creating a void, particularly
at the grass-roots level, and that there was an urgent
need for a collective voice representing the interests of
women in the new South Africa and enabling women to
play a more active role in ensuring that we contribute
towards nation-building and sustaining peace.
That is what led to the birth of South African
Women in Dialogue, an event held in July 2003 and
attended by approximately 1,000 South African women
from all walks of life. Our carefully crafted dialogue
model was based on three key guiding principles, which
19-30375

07/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

were largely influenced by the lessons learnt from
our interactions with our sisters from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
First was the creation of a non-partisan platform
where women were encouraged to express their own
individual views and not those of the organizations they
were affiliated with.
Second was the issue of diverse participation,
which stems from the realization that women are not
a homogenous group and that we are divided by many
issues, such as ethnicity, religious beliefs, class and
political affiliations, just to mention a few. It was also a
way to move away from the global tendency of educated
and middle-class women setting the agenda for and
speaking on behalf rural and poor urban women. Such
inclusion is the backbone of the model as there can be no
legitimate outcome from a process that is not inclusive.
The third guiding principle was the facilitation of
a private, self-reflective space away from the glare of
the cameras, where women could unburden themselves,
albeit momentarily, of current traumas and stresses.
That created a communion of sisterhood and shared
understanding of our commonalities and became the
foundation of honest and effective dialogue.
From that moment, SAWID grew to become a
formidable brand that was adopted wholeheartedly by
South African women. It went on to host 10 national
dialogues, which cascaded into many more provincial
and community-based dialogues that adopted the
SAWID model. Major local successes of SAWID
include facilitating the inclusion of women’s voices and
experiences in the national development plan. SAWID
also led and lobbied for the establishment of a women’s
ministry and lobbied for and presented a poverty
eradication model, which it implemented jointly with
the Government. Under its pan-African peace and
reconciliation dialogue programme, SAWID also went
on to facilitate peace dialogues with the women of
Burundi, shortly before the 2004 elections, and with
the women of the Sudan in 2007. It also facilitated an
African Peer Review Mechanism dialogue in 2006
and has participated in election observer missions in
various African countries.
Through those dialogues over the years, the
efforts of the SAWID forum can be summarized as
having facilitated partnerships between women and
national and international bodies to shape community,
provincial, national and continental agendas. Through

S/PV. 8633

the use of dialogue, SAWID has contributed to
strengthening solidarity and social cohesion with the
aim of promoting and consolidating peace, security and
stability in local communities and on the continent,
thereby creating a conducive space for socioeconomic
development and the eradication of poverty.
In closing, I would like to emphasize that SAWID
believes that dialogue is an important tool for both
conflict prevention and the overall consolidation of
peace in developing and post-conflict societies. Most
often, initiatives like SAWID are looked upon as
soft approaches to maintaining peace and preventing
conflict. As a result, most post-conflict strategies
neglect such initiatives, often prioritizing the military,
infrastructure and other development issues. Those are
important issues to prioritize; however, it is essential for
Governments to recognize that the project of rebuilding
societal links, acknowledging the pain and trauma of
citizens and actively investing in the healing of nations
is also of paramount importance and is by no means a
soft matter.
Investing in constructive dialogue mechanisms at
all levels of society may be a saving grace for fragile
and volatile communities. However, we would caution
that, despite their efficacy, those dialogues should not
be a grand one-off effort. Our biggest lesson from the
South African Women in Dialogue interventions is
that dialogue must be consistent and sustained in time,
otherwise the positive benefits of the understanding and
agreements reached during the dialogue can become
diluted and violence can re-emerge.
The South African Women in Dialogue forum has
been progressively evolving and continues to champion
the interests of South African women. However, due
to the lack of adequate resourcing, its scope has been
dwindling. That diminished presence has once again
created a void, and South African women are yearning
for the forum’s revitalization. The rate of violence
against women and children, including femicide and
rape, have reached unprecedented levels in South
Africa, and we occupy a low ranking on the Global
Peace Index. Those are just a few indicators of why
initiatives like the South African Women in Dialogue
forum must be preserved, especially at the grassroots level.
The President: I thank Ms. Maite for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Vilakazi.

19-303759/34

S/PV.8633

Peace and security in Africa

Ms. Vilakazi: Let me also add my gratitude for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council. As
already said, my name is Linda Vilakazi and I come
from Johannesburg, South Africa. I am an African and
care deeply about the equal treatment of all people, in
particular women and their inclusion at all levels of
society. I work at the Zanele Mbeki Development Trust,
where I coordinate the African Women in Dialogue
platform, which was launched in 2018.
Our collective experience gained through the
successful 16-year-long journey of the South African
Women in Dialogue platform, as already mentioned by
my colleague Ms. Naledi Maite, led to the realization
that an impressive number of African women occupy
various important positions at the local and global levels,
which we applaud and celebrate; however, we note that,
as a continent, we have not yet built a mechanism to
help us access and utilize their experience and expertise
for the benefit of all.
That has made it even more clear to us that, as a
continent, we lack a mechanism to meet as African
women on African soil. Often, we are convened by
others outside the continent, at their expense and on
their agenda. For example, we meet at the annual Davos
World Economic Forum, at the Commission on the
Status of Women and in many other forums. Although
such exposure is necessary, their outcomes do not often
translate into real value for the masses of Africans back
home, in particular marginalized women.
That realization motivated us to take the South
African Women in Dialogue model, as shared earlier
by my colleague, to the continent as a whole. From 19 to
23 November 2018, backed by many African women, we
successfully launched the African Women in Dialogue
platform, which was held over five days and attended by
1,000 women from 16 Southern African Development
Community countries and beyond. The launch was held
in Johannesburg. Bolstered by that successful inaugural
launch, we are now ready to host the 2019 Dialogue, to
be attended by another cohort of 1,000 women from all
55 African countries — an unprecedented achievement
that will set the bar for future dialogues.
Like the South African Women in Dialogue
model, the African Women in Dialogue platform is
designed to be inclusive, open to all, non-hierarchical
and non-partisan. Our inclusivity guide insists on
60 per cent attendance by grass-roots and marginalized
women — the women we often speak about and purport
10/34

07/10/2019

to represent. Our aim is to bring them into the room,
because their experience, voice and power are among
the key ingredients necessary to help us unite to heal
our continent and move towards peaceful coexistence.
Women attend the dialogues as individuals, not
representing any specific mandate except our personal
views, which we use to find solutions to our various
struggles. All women are treated as equals by the
African Women in Dialogue, with no class distinctions;
we do not stand on ceremony but instead we recognize
the experience brought by each woman in the room.
The African Women in Dialogue week becomes a
festival of ideas, guided by an agenda for a peaceful,
just and better continent, with women connecting,
learning from each other and sharing as they showcase
the incredible work of women from villages, towns and
communities across the continent.
Our model is simple, yet it requires patience and
resourcing and appreciation of the individuality of
each woman attending. The model requires paying
conscious and deliberate attention to the support
needed to maximize the presence and contribution of
each participant. Beyond the five-day dialogue, the
platform seeks to continue an ongoing chain of women
connected throughout the years, using dialogue to
overcome barriers and find solutions.
We do that work fully aware that it is no easy
task, that it is expensive, complex and obscured by
stereotypes and requires hard work. As my colleague
Ms. Maite already alluded to, dialogue has the benefit
of helping us rise above our differences and seek that
which binds us. It has been proven that dialogue spaces
can be used as platforms for development, while acting
as preventative systems for potential conflict and can
bring about post-conflict resolution.
The agenda for the 2019 five-day African
Women in Dialogue attests to that, as we cover a
broad range of topics — from entrepreneurship and
women’s economic opportunities to unpacking the
opportunities, challenges and even the inherent threats
of the fourth industrial revolution and discussing issues
of African feminism. We even train women on how to
use dialogue as a tool for mediation and include selfmastery discussions. The African Women in Dialogue
will review resolution 1325 (2000) and the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action, among many other documents that we have
discussed over time.
19-30375

07/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

As we speak now, the team back home is finalizing
logistics for the unparalleled 2019 African Women in
Dialogue to be held from 4 to 8 November. It is possible
that some of the African leaders present at this meeting
will hear of the group of women back home challenging
their officials to provide them with travel documents
to go join other African women in Johannesburg.
Some of those women have never travelled outside
their villages and, as such, may first have to apply for
a birth certificate and then a passport, followed by a
visa, which are issues of identity and are still central
to building peace on the continent. All of that is taxing
and expensive in terms of finances, emotions and time.
I ask that those leaders therefore please lend a hand if
they come across such requests.
In essence, the African Women in Dialogue
platform presents a unique, much-needed opportunity
for all of us to be authentic about the involvement of
African women in their diversity, as active players
in conflict prevention and preventative diplomacy. It
is a known fact that the ongoing conflicts in Africa
continue to form the bulk of the items on the agenda
of the Security Council, and we wish to change that for
the better.
We therefore seek the support of the Council to
help support and enable African Women in Dialogue
processes, as located at the village, community and
country levels, through its multilateral agreements.
The commitments made by the Council on the topic
“Peace and security in Africa: mobilizing youth
towards silencing the guns by 2020” will remain an
elusive ideal, among others, if women and youth are not
adequately engaged as core participants in the ongoing
peacebuilding process.
Chapter VI, Article 33, of the Charter of the
United Nations states that parties to a dispute shall
seek a solution through political means, including
negotiation and mediation. For that to happen, we argue
that supporting inclusive dialogue, as in the model of
the African Women in Dialogue platform, should be
the tool used to fulfil that Article. It is apparent that
preventative diplomacy is, and has been, utilized by
the United Nations system at large, and the office of
the Secretary-General in particular through its role
of good offices. However, that has not always been
regarded as a central pillar of the work of the Security
Council. As African women, we therefore hope that
through the African Women in Dialogue platform this
pillar can come to fruition, and I urge members of civil

S/PV. 8633

society to join us and support grass-roots-level dialogue
that is led by women in all their diversity and unity. We
hope that following this briefing, the Security Council
will resolve to embrace, support and adopt the practice
of inclusive dialogue as a credible and viable tool for
preventive diplomacy and thereby inspire others to do
the same.
In conclusion, we believe that through this
platform, African countries can build and maintain
peace by engaging with all women as they operate
from their local spaces, connected with others by their
participation in the annual dialogue platform. In the
final analysis, our objective is to enable communities
to own and drive their peace processes, making this
a lasting principle that underpins engagement for
development and builds social cohesion across African
borders. That is our story, our journey and our resolve
to convene annually as African women on African soil,
driven by an African agenda for inclusive development
and the maintenance of peace in our communities.
The President: I thank Ms. Vilakazi for her briefing.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express our sincere gratitude
to you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting on a vital and essential topic. I also appreciate
the invaluable briefings by the Secretary-General and
all of today’s briefers.
The resolution of conflicts through mediation is
one of the means and manifestations of civilization
for resolving international disputes by conducting
constructive and meaningful dialogue among the
various parties involved. The Charter of the United
Nations contains many tools that promote the settlement
of disputes through peaceful means, especially under
the provisions of Chapter VI, which sets out steps for
resolving disputes between parties to a conflict by, as
Article 33 puts it,
“negotiations, enquiry, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to regional
agencies or arrangements, or other peaceful means
of their own choice.”
That was clearly demonstrated in the role that Ethiopia
and the African Union (AU) played in assisting the
parties concerned in the Sudan to reach an agreement
concerning the transitional period between the

19-3037511/34

S/PV.8633

Peace and security in Africa

Transitional Military Council and the Forces of Freedom
and Change. Chapter VI emphasizes the importance
of the preventive role played by the Security Council
and emphasizes its ability to call on the parties to a
conflict to settle their disputes by such peaceful means.
It may investigate any dispute or position that might
lead to international friction that could endanger the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Chapter VIII of the Charter promotes the peaceful
resolution of local disputes through arrangements with
regional and subregional organizations, because of
their geographical proximity and historical knowledge
of such disputes. In that context, we should pay tribute
to the Charter-based cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union, which is steadily and
commendably developing. Reviewing the aspects
and patterns of that cooperation, we find significant
progress in every aspect, especially between their two
councils, the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council, which hold annual joint meetings.
We look forward to the thirteenth of those meetings, to
be held in Addis Ababa in the second half of October.
We are also seeing continued cooperation between the
Peacebuilding Commission and every African Union
entity. We call for maintaining those gains and building
on them, especially the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, with a view to ensuring that peacekeeping
missions are better equipped and more efficient, secure
and robust. That requires strong Security Council
mandates with predictable and sustainable financing.
In that regard, we commend the African Union’s
commitment to continuing to cover 25 per cent of
the costs of its peace operations and look forward to
the adoption of a resolution enabling the financing of
peacekeeping operations under African leadership.
Based on Article 19 of the Charter, the SecretaryGeneral plays a fundamental role that grants him the
right to responsibility for preventing conflicts through
his good offices or through his envoys and special
representatives in conflict zones. As a demonstration
of the priority that the Secretary-General gives the
issue of mediation, since assuming his post he has
established a High-level Advisory Board on Mediation
as a tool for using mediation and preventive diplomacy
in conflict prevention.
The Secretary-General’s special envoys and
representatives and their teams also play a major and
commendable role in conflict resolution. In view of
the significance that Kuwait attaches to preventive
12/34

07/10/2019

diplomacy, and in recognition of its noble importance, a
high-level debate on conflict prevention and mediation
(see S/PV.8546) was organized in June during the
Kuwait presidency of the Council, under the agenda item
on the maintenance of international peace and security.
We reiterate the importance of promoting the role of
prevention and mediation in conflict prevention and
resolution, as well as of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in
the maintenance of international peace and security. We
remain fully convinced that the Security Council can
make use of many of the preventive measures offered
in the Charter, including, for example, sending small
missions of a few members of the Council, a measure
that it has used in the past.
In conclusion, the Security Council, with all its
accumulated experience, lessons learned and decadeslong institutional memory, is undoubtedly capable of
taking innovative and preventive measures and steps
in the area of conflict prevention and mediation,
which will inevitably contribute to the maintenance
of international peace and security, through both its
field visits and its sanctions regimes on individuals and
entities. The success and effectiveness of the Council’s
role in preventive diplomacy depend on the timing of its
interventions and its use of those tools. The earlier an
intervention is made to ensure an appropriate response,
the better the eventual outcome in terms of material
losses and human casualties.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the convening of today’s debate
on the importance of preventive diplomacy in conflict
prevention and resolution, which is fully in line with
the priorities set in the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security. We commend Secretary-General
António Guterres and today’s briefers for their
presentations, which among other things have informed
the Council on the quality of the cooperation between
the two institutions. My delegation also welcomes the
participation of representatives of civil society in our
debate and the relevance of their briefings.
The signing on 19 April 2017 of the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework institutionalized
more predictable, systematic and strategic cooperation
between the two organizations. It enables both
institutions to intervene rapidly, coherently and
decisively in order to prevent, manage and resolve
conflicts on the continent. My statement will focus
19-30375

07/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

on three areas — the importance of early-warning and
rapid-response mechanisms as tools for anticipating
and preventing conflicts; the need to support the efforts
of regional and subregional organizations in the areas
of mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding; and the
importance of an inclusive approach to integrating civil
society, women and young people in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts.
The new types of threats to peace and security in
Africa require a coordinated response from several
actors, including the United Nations, the African
Union (AU), subregional organizations and civil
society. The efforts of those actors in the context of
a preventive approach will be effective only if they
are based on identifying the early signs of conflict
through various sociopolitical, economic, climate and
environmental indicators. It is on the basis of that
condition that they can prevent crises from occurring,
or, where they have already occurred, provide effective
and sustainable responses. By placing the Continental
Early Warning System at the core of the African
Peace and Security Architecture, the African Union is
demonstrating its willingness to increase its capacity
to anticipate and prevent conflicts. Its interaction with
the early-warning and rapid-response systems of the
regional economic communities enables it to identify
the signs and underlying structural causes of conflicts
and develop more effective preventive responses.
In the same spirit of anticipation, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) has set
up the ECOWAS Early Warning and Response Network,
also known as ECOWARN, which, in synergy with
its expanded implementation by States members, has
enabled it to carry out numerous preventive diplomacy
efforts in recent years. Alerts that are signalled during
the run-up to elections, or at times when internal
political tensions threaten to become open conflicts,
enable mediation efforts and good-offices missions
to be directed at the political actors and civil-society
organizations in the countries concerned. Overall,
despite the many challenges they face, including
disparities and weak cooperation among central,
regional and national systems and the gap between early
warning and rapid response, the early-warning systems
of the African Union and subregional organizations
have made significant progress. They are now essential
links in conflict prevention and resolution mechanisms
in Africa and therefore deserve support.

S/PV. 8633

My country believes that in order to be effective,
conflict-prevention and -resolution efforts must be part
of a collective and coordinated approach that enables
the United Nations, the African Union and subregional
organizations to align their initiatives. That is the case
with the partnership between the United Nations and
the AU, which among other things enables a shared
understanding of the root causes of conflicts and joint
visits, as we saw recently in the Central African Republic
and Libya. Such concerted preventive diplomacy
efforts facilitate support for political processes aimed
at resolving crises and peacebuilding in countries
emerging from conflict. Côte d’Ivoire is pleased to see
the expansion of that cooperative dynamic in conflict
prevention to African subregional organizations. That
is why African Union representatives and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) take part in meetings of the ECOWAS
Mediation and Security Council, ministerial meetings
and summits of Heads of State and Government, the
main decision-making bodies on regional peace and
security issues.
My country commends the exemplary cooperation
between ECOWAS and UNOWAS, whose effectiveness
was fully borne out in the prevention and management
of crises in their successive interventions in GuineaBissau, Mali, Burkina Faso and the Gambia. That
cooperation has helped to strengthen national and
regional capacities in terms of conflict resilience,
anchoring democracy, good governance and creating
environments conducive to the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals.
My delegation is of the view that the prevention
of conflicts by building stable and resilient societies
must necessarily take into account the indispensable
contribution of civil-society organizations, women
and young people. Women and young people should
therefore be mobilized and their energy and creativity
put to the best possible use by involving them more fully
in negotiations and political processes aimed at ending
crises, as well as in peacebuilding activities such as
national reconciliation, social cohesion, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes, and
security sector reform.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms its
commitment to multilateralism as an appropriate
framework for providing concerted responses to
challenges related to the maintenance of international

19-3037513/34

S/PV.8633

Peace and security in Africa

peace and security. In that regard, we reiterate our call
for solidarity on the part of the international community,
as well as for strengthening cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in their efforts to preserve or restore
peace and stability.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
today’s debate. We are grateful to Secretary-General
António Guterres for his briefing, and we also thank
Ambassador Mulamula, Ms. Maite and Ms. Vilakazi
for their interesting briefings. We fully support the
subject that our South African friends have placed at
the centre of today’s discussion. The task of preventing
armed conflict was indeed conferred on the United
Nations and the Security Council at the Organization’s
founding. Why it is not being carried out as it should be
is a major question. The answer may be a question of
political will, or the lack of it.
Yet the prevention of armed conflicts, especially
on the African continent, is crucial to the process
of ensuring global stability. Today preventive
diplomacy and its main mechanisms — mediation
and good offices — are more essential than ever. As
Ms. Mulamula said earlier, we certainly do not need
to reinvent the wheel. The United Nations has every
necessary tool at its disposal as a basis for its work in
this area: Chapters I and VI of the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as a number of additional resolutions,
including resolution 2171 (2014), which enshrined the
fundamental principles of international assistance in
this area. We welcome the Secretary-General’s efforts
to strengthen that capacity. The establishment in 2017
of his High-Level Advisory Board on Mediation,
composed of authoritative politicians and diplomats,
was an important element of that. We fully share the
assertion of the concept note (S/2019/786, annex) that
the voice of Africa must be taken into account on
issues of peace and security on the continent. And we
believe that voice must be decisive. In accordance with
the principle of national ownership, it is important
that African countries themselves play an important
role in conflict prevention and resolution. The job of
the international community is to support such efforts
while respecting States’ sovereignty and complying
strictly with the principle of non-interference in the
internal affairs of others.
We are pleased to note that a number of mechanisms
and instruments for conflict prevention on the continent
14/34

07/10/2019

have emerged in the arsenal of African countries in
recent years. They are all included in the African Peace
and Security Architecture, whose main elements are
the Panel of the Wise, the Continental Early Warning
System and the African Peace Facility. In carrying
out its mandate for conflict prevention, the African
Union (AU) is following its plan of action to build its
mediation capacity and Standard Operating Procedures
in Mediation Support strategy. Important commitments
in the area of preventive diplomacy are also enshrined
in the Joint United Nations-AU Framework for an
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, signed
in 2017, and there have been practical results in this
area. In particular, the African Union has made a major
contribution to the achievement of comprehensive
peace agreements in the Central African Republic and
South Sudan, the holding of peaceful and democratic
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Nigeria, and improvements in the situation in the Horn
of Africa. Recent examples include the successful work
of the Special Envoy of the African Union Commission
Chairperson, Mr. Mohamed El Hacen Lebatt, in
stabilizing the situation in the Sudan.
African subregional organizations, including the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
Southern African Development Community (SADC)
and the Economic Community of Central African States
also play a significant role. In that regard, we should
not fail to mention the recent successful prevention of
a political crisis in Madagascar by the African Union,
the United Nations, SADC and other partners. We fully
support the strengthening of partnerships between
the Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council. The Ad Hoc Working Group of the Security
Council on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in
Africa has great potential in that regard. We believe
that such cooperation should be based on mutual
respect and in line with regional initiatives. Preventive
diplomacy should be founded on an impartial and
balanced approach, free of mentorship and pressure on
political processes in sovereign States. Only mediation
that is based on bringing positions closer together,
seeking areas of agreement and the achievement of
mutually acceptable accords has any chance of success.
It is essential to maintain dialogue with all
constructive players involved in a conflict. It is also
imperative to bear in mind the fine line between
preventive diplomacy and putting pressure on domestic
19-30375

07/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

political processes. Often all that is necessary to
prevent conflict is ceasing to interfere in others’
internal affairs and refraining from lecturing them on
how to build democracy and respect human rights. An
example of an altogether useless case of prevention was
the NATO operation in Libya, which was carried out
in violation of a Security Council mandate and led to
myriad problems and the spread of terrorism in Libya
and the Sahara-Sahel region.
We do not need that kind of prevention.
Russia will continue to provide consistent political
support for the efforts of the African community to
prevent and resolve conflicts in Africa. We are ready
to continue to support Africa in strengthening its own
potential to counter crises in the future, including by
training peacekeepers and law-enforcement officers
from African countries at Russian educational
institutions. We hope that the forthcoming RussiaAfrica summit, the first in history, will serve as a
catalyst for our cooperation with African countries
and give impetus to normalizing the situation on
the continent.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
I would like to begin by greeting and thanking South
Africa for having taken the initiative of organizing
this debate. I also thank the Secretary-General,
Ms. Mulamula, Ms. Vilakazi and Ms. Maite for their
introductory remarks.
Belgium believes that regional and subregional
organizations play a crucial role in conflict prevention,
in particular in Africa, where ownership of security
challenges on the continent has made unquestioned
progress over the past 10 years. When a crisis is
looming, neighbouring States, the subregion and the
continent are often the actors best placed to respond
rapidly and effectively.
Belgium supports regional integration, as our
history has shown us that this is the best way to resolve
cross-border and regional problems in a consensus-based
manner in order to unify regions and create solidarity.
I would like to once again stress that it is in all of our
interests for the African Union to strengthen its peace
and security toolkit. Ultimately, African Union peace
operations will need to enjoy more predictable, longterm and flexible financing. In the division of labour
and responsibilities between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, our approach

S/PV. 8633

is guided by the pursuit of the most appropriate model
in a given context.
Two years ago in the Gambia, we saw an excellent
example of a subregional organization taking a leading
role. In Guinea-Bissau, complementarity was ensured
on the ground through the action of the Guinea-Bissau
Group of Five. In the Central African Republic, the
African Union saw its efforts supported by the Economic
Community of Central African States and the United
Nations, efforts that led to the peace agreement in that
country. Joint high-level African Union-United Nations
visits, with the participation of a representative of the
European Union, are an effective tool for monitoring
the situation in the Central African Republic.
In Burkina Faso, the Niger and Nigeria, the
United Nations Office in West Africa is contributing
to building capacities for the prevention of conflicts
between pastoralists and farmers as well as
intercommunal conflicts. These issues require a
regional approach throughout West Africa, and we
welcome the determination demonstrated by the
Economic Community of West African States during its
Extraordinary Summit held last month in Ouagadougou.
Mediation is an area where complementarity comes
into full play. Regional and subregional organizations
bring their local knowledge and expertise to the table,
while the United Nations brings its neutrality and
authority as well as universal norms. We commend
the progress made in operationalizing the Mediation
Support Unit Union and in the development of the
FemWise-Africa women mediators’ network, whose
vital importance the Secretary-General and the three
briefers have just underscored.
Our responsibility is to do everything in our power
to prevent conflicts before they erupt. We must continue
with our early-warning exercises, including exchanges
of information between the Security Council and
the Secretariat. But in order for these exercises to be
useful, we must be as open as possible and not rule out
any option or any information. Many United Nations
entities and agencies as well as research institutions
and civil-society organizations are privy to extremely
valuable and detailed information that can inform us
about incipient conflicts. Let us be proactive and pay
attention to them and include such information in
our deliberations.
But we also need to go further: early warning is
meaningless unless we also have the capacity for a rapid

19-3037515/34

S/PV.8633

Peace and security in Africa

diplomatic response. Such a response is not necessarily
the preserve of the Security Council; it can also be the
good offices of the Secretary-General and his Special
Envoys, and of Resident Coordinators. It can also
include independent United Nations initiatives, as is the
case in Cameroon at the moment.
One thing is certain: we must make greater
headway on this front. Belgium stands ready and
determined to work in this direction within and outside
the Security Council.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We would
like to express our appreciation for the convening of
this meeting and for the informative statements made
by the Secretary-General, António Guterres, and
today’s briefers. Their briefings have underscored
the critical importance of the primary goal enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations, that is, the
maintenance of international peace and security, and of
the commitments we have undertaken to take collective
measures to prevent and eradicate, in a just manner,
threats to the peace.
This is particularly relevant in a context in
which these challenges are ever more complex and
multidimensional, requiring a necessary shift towards
preventive diplomacy at both the global and the regional
levels, based on timely risk assessments, early warning
and management plans.
Against that backdrop, we believe that it is vital
to promote greater involvement on the part of regional
and subregional organizations, from the preventive
perspective and when it comes to the promotion of
peaceful means for the resolution of disputes.
For that reason, we note with interest that in
the framework of the African Peace and Security
Architecture, mechanisms have been set up that
are aimed at preventing conflicts from escalating,
including a continental early-warning system, as well
as mechanisms aimed at preventing structural conflict,
which seek to focus on the root causes thereof and
the promotion of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the African Union’s Agenda 2063, in
coordination with the United Nations.
It would be very useful to analyse the experience
gained through these mechanisms, including on any
potential logistical difficulties in obtaining sufficient
information to undertake prevention work; the need for
predictable and sustainable financing; and the need for
16/34

07/10/2019

a greater involvement by the private sector or global
or subregional bodies that can bring to the table a
better understanding of the realities on the ground, in
particular in border areas.
To that end, we deem necessary the establishment
of innovative mechanisms aimed at overcoming
potential difficulties on the part of some States in
taking a preventive approach to crisis situations or
to improve their policies in certain sensitive areas.
We believe that this work is particularly relevant in
terms of electoral processes, peacebuilding efforts and
transition processes, with a view to preventing a relapse
into instability. It would also be important to twin this
approach with the setting up of national early-warning
systems or bodies aimed at promoting options for the
easing of tensions through an inclusive approach.
We acknowledge also the importance of harnessing
mediation as a way of resolving disputes in the
framework of preventive action. This useful tool enjoys
has a real capacity to provide positive alternatives for
action before and during conflict, and, as it responds to
a mandate of the parties, is helpful in taking account
those parties’ sensitivities.
Here we would note the role played by the United
Nations Political Offices in this respect, as well as
their use as a timely source of early warning. It is key
that such mediation activities have increased in many
countries of the region in recent years, on the basis of
successful experiences, and that the African Union has
established a Mediation Support Unit. In that regard,
we believe that it is crucial to develop multidisciplinary
mediation teams in which women and young people
are represented, as the briefers, Ms. Mulamula,
Ms. Maite and Ms. Vilakazi, have just reminded us.
Such teams should also have the necessary logistical
and financial support.
We would like to conclude by emphasizing that
investment in developing and strengthening regional
preventive capacities is currently one of the most
important priorities for the efficient and effective
exercise of our shared responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): It is customary for
all Security Council members to thank the President
of the meeting for convening a debate on an important
topic when they have chosen one, but I really mean
it. Preventive diplomacy is a vital tool of the Council
in maintaining and restoring international peace and
19-30375

07/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

security, which we do not use often enough. We cannot
simply pay lip service to the primacy of political
solutions. Collectively, the Council should be willing
to engage with slow-burning political crises before
they flare up into open conflict. That is why, during
the presidency of the United Kingdom last August, we
held an open debate on mediation (see S/PV.8334). I
therefore thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
debate on an important issue.
Let me pay tribute to the efforts of the African
Union (AU) and African subregional organizations in
that regard. The AU took swift and decisive action in
June in response to a brutal crackdown on peaceful
protesters in the Sudan. The subsequent AU mediation
was crucial to supporting the Sudan’s transition to a
civilian-led Government. I am pleased that the Council
was ultimately able to express its support for the
African Union’s position on the Sudan in June thanks,
in no small measure, to the leadership of our African
colleagues on the Council.
Our conflict prevention and resolution efforts work
best where the United Nations, the African Union and
subregional organizations coordinate to leverage their
comparative advantages. We have seen that in the
Central African Republic, where the United Nations
and the African Union continue to play a vital role in
supporting the implementation of the peace agreement.
I hope that we will see further such coordinated
efforts and actions to encourage peaceful dialogue and
political processes.
In South Sudan, we urge the regional Governments,
together with the African Union, the United Nations
and all interested actors, to encourage the parties to
make further progress in implementing the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan ahead of the critical
12 November deadline. That should include further
direct contact between President Kiir Mayardit and
Riek Machar. I hope that the Security Council is able to
play a helpful role during its visit under your leadership,
Mr. President, and that of our United States colleagues
later this month.
In Cameroon, the United Kingdom welcomes the
national dialogue that took place last week as an initial
step to bring parties together to work towards peace.
Further inclusive discussion about the root causes of
grievances is urgently needed and all parties must take
action to address those grievances. We are often asked

S/PV. 8633

to ensure space for African organizations to take the
lead on African issues. We therefore call on the African
Union and the Economic Community of Central African
States to support an inclusive and peaceful resolution of
the crisis in Cameroon.
In Burundi, I welcomed our briefers raising the
situation there. We encourage Burundian and regional
actors to work together in the spirit of the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement in order to make
progress on a long-term solution to the political crisis
ahead of the 2020 elections. I hope that the Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission can and will remain
fully engaged.
There is of course no one-size-fits-all approach to
conflict prevention and resolution. In some contexts we
can best make headway by ensuring alignment by actors
behind United Nations leadership, avoiding duplication
of effort. That is the case in the United Kingdom’s
opinion, for example, in Libya, where the international
community should follow a single shared road map
towards the resumption of a political process, aligning
behind Special Representative Salamé’s leadership.
That emphatically does not mean marginalizing
regional voices. Rather, it means maximizing the United
Nations ability to leverage the support and expertise of
all relevant actors, including the African Union, the
League of Arab States and the European Union, behind
a successful process.
Conflict prevention is of course preferable
to conflict resolution but it requires effective
horizon-scanning capacities. I therefore commend the
work of the United Nations Secretariat and the African
Union Commission on strengthening their ability to
conduct joint analysis and reporting. I also commend
the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs
for the useful discussion on horizon scanning that we
held on Latin America some time ago. I hope to see
the next one soon and that such discussions take place
more frequently hereafter. It is very good, I think, for
members of the Council to have an informal opportunity
to understand the situation in a range of countries not
on the Council’s agenda.
I also welcome the development of the African
Union Continental Early Warning System, which the
United Kingdom is proud to support, including by
funding secondee roles within the AU Commission.
As we discussed in our debate on mobilizing the
youth last week (see S/PV.8629), inclusive approaches

19-3037517/34

S/PV.8633

Peace and security in Africa

to conflict prevention and resolution are key to a lasting
peace. That means supporting women peacebuilders at
the grass-roots level and ensuring women’s meaningful
participation in peace processes, mediation and
intercommunal dialogue. We welcome efforts to that
end, such as the AU’s Network of African Women in
Conflict Prevention and Mediation, which the United
Kingdom supports enthusiastically, and the Women
Mediators across the Commonwealth initiative, to
which the United Kingdom is contributing $1.5 million.
We hope that more Member States will offer their
support to such initiatives, including by supporting
the Global Alliance of Women Mediators Network,
launched recently on the margins of the high-level week
by the Secretary-General, I believe.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank the briefers
for the detailed information provided today.
Preventive diplomacy has become an essential tool
of United Nations action. In that regard, as Member
States, we have committed to establishing a culture of
prevention in taking collective action to prevent and
eliminate threats to peace. We welcome the progress
made with regard to establishing an early warning
system, the good offices of the Secretary-General,
Special Envoys, the deployment of political and peace
missions on the ground and regional offices, among
others. Despite the fact that the United Nations has
actors, tools and instruments to prevent the spread of
conflict and the development of preventive diplomacy,
the task of conflict prevention poses many challenges
that require action to maximize the possibility of
successful diplomacy.
The Security Council is responsible for maintaining
international peace and security and therefore plays
a leading role in the area of preventive diplomacy. It
is precisely the Council that is responsible for finding
solutions that allow for the challenges posed by
situations of crisis to be overcome.
We would also like to stress the importance of
regional bodies in the peaceful settlement of disputes set
out in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
We must continue to strengthen strategic partnerships
with regional and subregional organizations. The local
knowledge of regional organizations is necessary
for the adoption of effective measures in the context
of preventive diplomacy. Collective action can be
strengthened by involving regional and local authorities,
18/34

07/10/2019

in particular in the areas of prevention, development
and post-conflict.
The Dominican Republic firmly believes in the
participation of young people in efforts to stabilize
societies and the great potential of women to transform
societies and contribute to peace. Their participation is
therefore critical in all aspects of dispute resolution. We
emphasize the importance of the Silencing the Guns in
Africa by 2020 initiative. We therefore welcome the
progress made by the States members of the African
Union (AU) in implementing the AU Master Roadmap
of Practical Steps for Silencing the Guns in Africa
by 2020.
Efforts must be redoubled to continue supporting
the region in that endeavour, bearing in mind that the
aspirations for peace, security and stability in Africa
and the Sustainable Development Goals are common
priorities of both the African Union’s Agenda 2063 and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which
constitute a reinforced alliance for peace and security
in the region.
Lastly, we must identify and combat the social
roots of the violence. As the international community
continues to struggle to cope with destabilizing
conflicts and their repercussions, the need has emerged
to establish guidelines to regulate the escalation of
United Nations involvement in conflicts. Prevention
work requires that the relevant actors make political
commitments to addressing situations that by their very
nature carry the risk of renewed or resurgent conflict.
In that regard, the Dominican Republic reiterates its
commitment to achieving international peace and
security, the goal towards which we must work together
in order to enable the United Nations to carry out its
core tasks in a coherent manner.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): I wish to thank all the
briefers for their interesting presentations. We welcome
the Secretary-General’s strong commitment to conflict
prevention and resolution, including mediation. We
greatly appreciate the work of the United Nations
through its good offices, special political missions and
mediation support, which often remain invisible and do
not make the news yet are critical for conflict resolution
and prevention. Germany is very committed to this
agenda of the Secretary-General and does everything
in its power to support those efforts in very concrete
terms. Let me give two examples.
19-30375

07/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

First, the Peacebuilding Fund is one example of
a successful effort that can have a quick impact and
incentivize further funding in addressing a number of
African conflicts. Germany just announced a second
contribution of €15 million for 2019, bringing our
contribution to a total of €30 million for this year alone.
Secondly, there is the example of mediation, which
is a key instrument for advancing the peaceful resolution
of conflicts. We believe that the United Nations, in
particular its Mediation Support Unit, should remain a
strong mediation actor. The Secretariat, the Mediation
Support Unit and the Group of Friends of Mediation
have contributed greatly to the promotion of high
standards and professional approaches in the field of
mediation. We fully support that effort.
In addition to being one of the main donors to the
Mediation Support Unit, we are the largest donor to the
Joint United Nations Development Programme-United
Nations Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs Programme on Building National Capacities
for Conflict Prevention, which is also referred to as the
Peace and Development Advisers programme.
We thank the President for organizing the present
discussion on the centrality of preventative diplomacy
and conflict prevention and resolution in the context
of peace and security in Africa, the central question of
which, I think, is how the Security Council can become
more efficient in preventing violent conflict in that
particular context.
I think our briefers have basically provided the
answer today by pointing out that we need an inclusive
and multi-track approach. In order to prevent conflict,
make peace and achieve peacebuilding, we essentially
need two things — we need to involve all the relevant
stakeholders and we need to cover all the relevant aspects
of the conflict. Allow me to make a few remarks on the
relevant aspects that we need to take into consideration.
First, we need early warning and early action. If
we want to act early, we can successfully prevent crises
only if we have sufficient and relevant information,
which needs to be transmitted to the Council so that it
may react early to upcoming challenges. We would like
to encourage all members of the Council to regularly
invite civil society briefers to give us input to that end.
Secondly, there is the aspect of human rights
and conflict prevention. We need clear awareness of
human rights situations, because they are often crucial

S/PV. 8633

to conflict prevention. A clear awareness of human
rights situations helps identify grievances that, if
left unaddressed, can lead to conflict. Human rights
standards provide a framework for devising sustainable
solutions to address those grievances.
Thirdly, there is the aspect of the security
implications of climate change. Many briefers, as well
as the Secretary-General, have referred to that in their
briefings. Whether it is a question of conflicts between
herders and farmers in the Sahel, disputes over scarce
resources, especially with regard to water or food
insecurity, or vulnerabilities that are exploited by
terrorist groups — mitigating and countering climate
change and its effects must be a key component of our
stabilization and conflict prevention efforts. We believe
that the specific security implications of climate change
need to be better reflected in the Council’s work.
Lastly, the aspect of sustainable development must
be taken into account. Although not usually a Council
topic, I think we should be aware that sustainable
development is not only an end in itself but also one
of the most effective tools we have to prevent violent
conflict. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
is our road map to creating resilient, stable societies
and addressing the root causes of violence of all kinds.
In addition to those relevant aspects that we must
take into consideration, we also need to involve all
the relevant stakeholders in order to be successful in
conflict prevention. Special emphasis is needed on civil
society and mainstreaming women’s rights and gender
equality throughout our prevention and mediation
work. The contributions of regional women mediators’
networks such as the AU’s FemWise-Africa Network
and the African Women’s Leaders Network constitute
a very important development in that context, which
we applaud and welcome. The protection of children’s
rights and the involvement of young people are
equally important.
With regard to cooperation on a broader strategic
scale, the cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union is undoubtedly the most important
partnership that comes to mind in terms of building
and sustaining peace and security on the African
continent. Germany, jointly with its African partners,
is committed to supporting and further developing the
United Nations-AU partnership. We would like to see
that partnership develop further to address all phases
of conflict, from prevention and peace operations

19-3037519/34

S/PV.8633

Peace and security in Africa

to post-conflict peacebuilding. African ownership
and expertise are crucial to addressing conflicts on
the continent.
In that regard, we support African Union initiatives
such as the Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020
initiative and the push by African States for a stronger
integration of AU-United Nations peacekeeping efforts.
We believe that regional organizations in Africa, both
the AU and others — such as the Economic Community
of West African States and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, to name but a few — can
and should play a much stronger role in preventing
conflict and addressing its root causes. Increased
cooperation between the Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council should be at the centre of that effort,
which is why we welcome and look forward to the
annual joint consultative meeting to be held later this
month in Addis Ababa.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank the Secretary-General and the three
briefers for their presentations.
It is more important than ever before to step up
our investment in conflict prevention. The authors of
the Charter of the United Nations gave the Security
Council a clear mandate in that regard. Yet it must be
said that we tend to focus on existing crises instead
of trying to prevent those of tomorrow, although
investing in pre-empting conflicts is much less costly
in terms of human lives and suffering, of course, but
also financially.
Significant efforts have been made in recent
years. In that connection, I would like to commend the
initiative of the Secretary-General in stepping up peace
diplomacy and the reforms that have been undertaken
to make the United Nations system more effective in
that area, including the strengthening of mediation
capacities and the early-warning role of United Nations
country teams. I would also like to acknowledge the
work of the office of Adama Dieng, Special Adviser
on the Prevention of Genocide. That new momentum in
favour of conflict prevention has enjoyed a remarkable
success in recent years. For example, this past year
in Madagascar, the mediation led by the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Adviser, Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily,
in close coordination with the African Union and the
Southern African Development Community, helped to
avert a serious political crisis.
20/34

07/10/2019

Yet we can do more — the Security Council should
more often be seized of situations that present a risk
of conflict. Bearing that in mind, we are continuing to
keeping a close eye on the situation in Burundi, since
the destabilization of that country would have tragic
consequences for peace and security throughout the
entire region.
The Peacebuilding Commission should also
focus more on situations that present a risk and make
recommendations to the Council. The Commission’s
recent meeting on Burkina Faso demonstrated the
extent to which that forum can establish a constructive
dialogue with countries in fragile situations.
One of the great contemporary challenges for
better conflict prevention is to take climate risks into
account. The United Nations system must be able to
take a comprehensive view of the risks of the impact of
climate change on international security. We therefore
recommend that a report of the Secretary-General be
prepared with a view to providing a regular assessment
of those risks, as well as concrete recommendations.
Finally, we must promote the meaningful
participation of women, young people and civil society
in mediation and conflict prevention processes.
In that regard, I welcome the contribution of the
FemWise-Africa Network, which makes it possible to
deploy women mediators on the ground.
We must also work even more closely with
African regional and subregional organizations. The
strengthening of the partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations under the auspices of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
enhances the effectiveness of our preventive diplomacy.
That partnership is of strategic importance to us, and
we are therefore determined to support it.
In Burkina Faso in 2015 and in the Gambia in 2016,
the coordinated and united action of the United Nations,
the African Union and the Economic Community of
West African States ensured a successful outcome.
Earlier this year, in the Central African Republic,
the United Nations and the African Union facilitated
together the negotiation of the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, thanks in particular to the strong and
perfectly coordinated commitment of Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix and Mr. Smaïl Chergui.
19-30375

07/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8633

It is essential that we better coordinate our efforts.
In the Sudan, for example, it was the African Union and
Ethiopia that had the highest chance of bringing about a
successful agreement. The United Nations and all those
friendly to the Sudan supported that mediation, while
at the same time taking care not to create interference.
African subregional organizations also play a leading
role in such situations. I wish to refer here to the efforts
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development in
particular, which led to the signing of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan one year ago.

Nations, as well as the good offices and mediation
capacity of our Organization. We must also avoid
taking action by invoking Chapter VII of the Charter
at every turn. Mediators and parties to conflicts and
disputes should form a sense of community and shared
destiny in tackling difficult problems through dialogue.
We must promote security through cooperation and
respect and accommodate each other’s legitimate
concerns. It is essential to fully leverage the roles of
women and youth, shape a culture of peace and settle
differences by seeking common ground, while putting
our differences aside.

Preventive diplomacy in Africa requires us to take
advantage of all the tools at our disposal in a spirit of
partnership and effectiveness. France is working in that
spirit with its African partners, and the members of the
Council can rest assured that we will continue to do so.

We must attach greater importance to addressing
the root causes of peace and security in Africa, putting
economic and social development at the forefront
and — by developing prevention and the mitigation
of social risks — laying a solid foundation for lasting
stability. The international community should help
Africa achieve development through pragmatic action.
China is willing to dovetail the joint building of the
Belt and Road Initiative with the African Union’s
Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, as well as the development strategies
of African countries, in order to help African
countries to strengthen connectivity, enhance their
development capabilities and promote peace through
inclusive development.

Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks South Africa for taking the initiative to convene
this open meeting. We listened attentively to the
briefings by the Secretary-General and representatives
of civil society.
Peace and security in Africa are not only relevant
to the well-being of the African people, but are also
closely related to peace and stability throughout the
world. Achieving stability, peace and security in
Africa is a common aspiration of the African people,
but is also the incontestable responsibility of the
international community, in particular the Security
Council. Preventive diplomacy is an important means
of maintaining international peace and security. I
would like to make the following points on how to put
preventive diplomacy to good use.
We must fully leverage the role of African countries
in solving African problems. All countries should
uphold the principles of mutual respect, sovereignty
and territorial integrity and non-interference in the
internal affairs of other countries. We must place our
full trust in the countries of Africa and have confidence
in them, instead of taking it upon ourselves to solve
their problems. Prevention should be carried out while
respecting the will of the countries concerned and
insisting on their ownership.
We should fully leverage the unique roles of
regional organizations, such as the African Union, while
remaining committed to addressing African issues
through political and diplomatic means. We must make
good use of Chapter VI of the Charter of the United

China has never been absent from efforts to help
Africa maintain peace and security. As we speak, more
than 2,000 Chinese peacekeepers are safeguarding
peace in five United Nations peacekeeping missions in
Africa. The Chinese Navy has been escorting vessels
in the Gulf of Aden and in waters off Somalia for more
than 10 years. It has completed more than 1,200 escort
assignments for more than 6,700 vessels.
During the Beijing Summit of the Forum on
China-Africa Cooperation last year, China decided
to implement a Chinese-African peace and security
cooperation framework and established a ChinaAfrica Peace and Security Forum to provide a platform
for exchanges in the field of peace and security. We
established the China-Africa Peace and Security Fund
to support cooperation between the two parties in peace
and security, peacekeeping and stabilization.
The first batch of military assistance materials,
worth ¥200 million, has arrived in Africa in order to
support the African Standby Force and bolster African
capacity to respond immediately to crises. We have also

19-3037521/34

S/PV.8633

Peace and security in Africa

07/10/2019

provided ¥300 million in aid for the counter-terrorism
operation in the Sahel and to support the Joint Force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel.

to the negotiating table and engage in dialogue instead
of resorting to force, and when conflict has broken out,
it has helped restore peace.

We have actively supported the good offices and
mediation of the United Nations by making donations
over many years to United Nations prevention efforts.
In addition, through the United Nations Peace and
Development Trust Fund, we have provided support
to United Nations mediation mechanisms, including
the Secretary-General’s High-level Advisory Board
on Mediation and the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs crisis response system.

The most effective way to mitigate the human
suffering, immense economic cost and the aftermath of
conflicts is to prevent them from occurring in the first
place. In that regard, the United Nations, through the
General Assembly and the Security Council, together
with regional and subregional organizations, has an
important role to play in conflict prevention. The use
of diplomacy, good offices and mediation, special
envoys and political missions to the field, peacekeeping
operations, coercive measures, preventive disarmament
and recommendations of the Secretary-General, in
accordance with the Charter, provide a range of tools
for conflict prevention.

The Chinese people have always shared the same
vision and destiny with the people of Africa. We have
always shown respect, love and support to Africa on its
path towards achieving peace and development. China
will continue to stand shoulder to shoulder with Africa
and march together with it, hand in hand.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): Our statement aligns fully with those to be
delivered by Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
and Her Excellency Ms. Jeanne d’Arc Byaje, Permanent
Observer of the Economic Community of Central
African States to the United Nations.
Allow me to congratulate and commend the
delegation of South Africa for having included this
important, relevant and timely debate in the agenda of
its presidency. It constitutes a topic of vital importance
in the efforts of the Security Council, in collaboration
with the African Union, to maintain peace and
security on the African continent, in particular, and
the international security of all States Members of the
United Nations, in general.
We also thank Secretary-General António Guterres,
Ms. Liberata Mulamula, Ms. Naledi Maite and
Ms. Linda Vilakazi for their extensive and informative
briefings, which help us contextualize preventive
diplomacy, conflict prevention and resolution and to
maintain international peace and security, using good
offices, dialogue and mediation as special tools.
One of the fundamental purposes of the United
Nations, and an essential element of its mandate, is
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Since the founding of the Organization, 74 years ago,
it has on many occasions prevented controversies from
degenerating into war by persuading disputants to come
22/34

Strengthening international cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union is
absolutely essential, since the development of Africa,
a continent abundant in all types of resources, human
and economic alike, is a precondition for peace and
harmony throughout the world. It should be a priority
for the entire international community to finance
multinational missions deployed by the United Nations
and the African Union to maintain peace and security in
the region, which are crucial for stability on the African
continent. That is why sustainable and predictable
financing is required in support of peace missions led
by the African Union, as the case may be, with budgets
managed through the United Nations.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is firmly
persuaded of the importance of, and believes in,
preventive diplomacy, having participated in such efforts
in various African countries through consultations and
mediation with the direct participation of President
Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, who played a decisive role in
normalizing the post-electoral situation in the Republic
of the Gambia in early 2017. Our delegation therefore
reiterates its gratitude to the South African presidency
for holding a debate on this topic, which is very well
aligned with the efforts of the three African members
of the Security Council and the importance we have
attached over the past two years to cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union on peace and
security issues.
Members will recall that, during the presidency of
Côte d’Ivoire in December 2018, we held an open debate
on cooperation between the United Nations and regional
19-30375

07/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8633

and subregional organizations, with a focus on the role
of States, regional arrangements and the prevention and
resolution of conflict by the United Nations, especially
in Africa (see S/PV.8414). During the presidency of
Equatorial Guinea in February, the Security Council
held an open debate on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
with a focus on silencing the guns in Africa by 2020,
exploring the mechanisms whereby the United Nations
and the African Union could collaborate to end
conflicts in Africa (see S/PV.8473). That open debate
culminated in the unanimous adoption of resolution
2457 (2019), relating to silencing the guns in Africa,
encouraging the United Nations and the African Union
to strengthen their cooperation to coordinate efforts in
conflict prevention and resolution in Africa.

“There is broad consensus that conflict
prevention, management, or resolution in Africa
requires that Africans themselves act as a rudder,
guiding peace processes forward and working
with local disputants to bring about conciliation.
Outside parties such as the [United States] can
contribute by providing support to propel the
search for peace forward, but peace cannot be
imposed from abroad. Yet conflicts in Africa have
international ramifications, evident in refugee
flows and environmental damage, for example, but
also in purely humanitarian terms.

A ministerial conference on silencing the guns
will be held in November in Malabo, to which the
members of the Security Council, among other
countries, will be invited. The conference will provide
a unique opportunity to tackle in depth the topic we are
discussing here today, namely, the central importance
of preventive diplomacy and conflict prevention and
resolution. Silencing the guns in Africa is the right
mechanism to end conflicts in Africa.

Those words were not written recently. They were not
written this year, or even this decade. They are from a
1994 United States Institute of Peace report on conflict
prevention in Africa. Twenty-five years later, we are
still talking about this. Are we still going to keep having
this same conversation? Are we content with this?

I should like to conclude my statement by
highlighting that the time is now ripe to assert the
important role women have to play in preventive
diplomacy and the prevention and resolution of conflicts
by peaceful means. It is therefore necessary to ensure
that women are always involved in conflict-prevention
mediation and dialogue processes.
In conclusion, in the realm of conflict prevention,
I recall the dedicated efforts made by President Obiang
Nguema Mbasogo of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea,
where, in his capacity as Chair of the African Union
in 2011, he sought to prevent the conflict in Libya and
various African Presidents to travel to Tripoli to urge
then-leader Muammar Al-Qadhafi to leave the country.
Unfortunately, many did not agree with this African
initiative, and Libya was plunged, as we know, into
the sad situation that this fellow African country is
facing today.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I appreciate
the Secretary-General’s engagement and the briefings
from our three guests.
I would like to start by reading a passage that
caught my attention this past weekend.

“Broad consensus also exists that the old adage
of ‘an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure’
is especially applicable to conflicts in Africa.”

The Security Council meets practically every
week to discuss areas of the world affected by conflict
and instability. But far too often we issue statements,
impose sanctions, create commissions and establish
peacekeeping missions to address conflicts after they
break out. It seems to me that we have got this a little
bit backwards. Therefore, if there is one message I want
to communicate, it is that there is more the Council can,
and should do, to address conflict before it erupts. There
are four actions we can take get out ahead of conflict.
First, we should use resolutions and statements to
target the drivers of conflict. Our resolutions need to
organize specific actions directed at root causes, not
merely assemble pleasant words on paper.
Secondly, we should utilize early-warning systems
and the analytical tools at our disposal to inform our
debates and regional visits. In doing so we will ensure
that we are focused on areas where conflict could
emerge, not where it has already emerged. As fellow
Kentuckian George Clooney stated last month in
comments on South Sudan, “if you don’t care [about
the problems in that country], its problems will end up
on your doorstep.” He is absolutely right.
Thirdly, because neighbouring countries often bear
the burdens of spillover from conflict, we should increase
coordination with regional and subregional bodies.

19-3037523/34

S/PV.8633

Peace and security in Africa

Finally, the Security Council must continue to
integrate the women and peace and security agenda in
all of its work. As President Trump reminded us in his
remarks to the General Assembly, nations that empower
women are wealthier, safer and more politically stable
(see A/74/PV.3). Women’s meaningful participation in
peace processes will translate into more sustainable
peace agreements. And as Ms. Mulamula noted, “if you
want to get something done, give it to a woman”.
The United States is encouraged to see countries
like the Niger working proactively to prevent violent
conflict. Using domestic resources and international
assistance, the Niger has made progress in preventing
violent extremists from moving freely along its border
with Mali. It has also deftly managed ethnoregional
tensions in order to deny terrorist groups new pools of
potential recruits inside its borders. We look forward to
working closely with the Niger to highlight those best
practices when it joins the Council in January.
In addition, the Council should focus on more
countries like Burundi and Cameroon, where societal
divisions and weak Governments threaten stability.
Upcoming elections could also exacerbate political
tensions and security risks. We should visit and publicly
focus on potential hot spots to proactively shine a light
on areas that could descend into conflict. We have
already done that, to great effect, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
For our part, the United States is deeply committed
to long-term stability and security in Africa. These
are not just words to us; they are the fundamental
reality of our financial and political choices. Much
of our bilateral engagement on the continent focuses
on preventive diplomacy. In Burkina Faso, the United
States is piloting a $13.5 million programme to prevent
conflict. Later this month, a United States delegation
will travel to Burkina Faso to develop programming
alongside the Government, civil society and other local
and international partners.
The United States also invests millions of dollars
in development aid each year to complement our
diplomatic efforts. In dozens of African countries, we
provide funding and technical assistance to cultivate
accountable governance, encourage inclusive economic
growth and support local efforts to seek peaceful
alternatives to conflict.
We have provided similar technical assistance to
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
24/34

07/10/2019

African States, and several Member States as part of
our support for the Continental Early Warning System.
We have had the same conversation about this
issue for as long as we have because our approach to
problem solving is often too reactive. That may be the
case simply because the work of conflict prevention is
demanding and even burdensome. I do not deny that.
But it is the right work to do. It is the smart work to
do. And it is the work the Council is called to do — not
merely talk about.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
today’s briefers for their very informative briefings. I
would also like to thank the South African presidency
for organizing this debate, which addresses the
core element of the Security Council mission — the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Poland recognizes the importance and centrality
of preventive diplomacy in conflict prevention and
resolution, especially with regard to the United Nations
peacekeeping missions on the African continent. As
it has already been noted during today’s meeting,
preventive diplomacy is and has been utilized by the
United Nations system at large. However, it has not
always been regarded as a central pillar of the work
of the Security Council. Nevertheless, we believe that
tackling the complexity arising from the evolving
nature of conflicts requires a wide range of activities,
which should address the conflicts in a comprehensive
way, while using all of the available instruments and
embracing all actors on different stages, from local
communities to the highest political level.
With regard to the processes themselves, Poland
believes that it is essential for the work to be framed
within the three main pillars of the Organization — first,
in peace and security processes, with the meaningful
participation of women and minorities; secondly,
sustainable development, which goes hand in hand with
building resilience; and, thirdly, consistent respect for
human rights and the rule of law. In addition, we believe
that it is crucial to extend the cooperation in conflict
prevention to the private sector in order to align the
core business community with the strategic goals of
the international community. In that respect, when
thinking of such practical options as resource-pooling
in conflict prevention, we should consider leveraging
more private resources for development, possibly in the
form of blended, private-public financing. Promoting
good economic performance and a propitious
19-30375

07/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

macroeconomic climate will significantly help to
combat tensions on the social and political fronts, boost
investment and ensure stability for the long term.
Poland believes that all stakeholders should
continue to invest in new methods of generating
financial resources and innovative tools for gathering
information and analysing data to better determine the
most urgent risks and threats to peace and security and
where the assistance of the international community
is most needed. Let me underline the importance of
enhanced cooperation among the United Nations, the
African Union (AU) and other regional and subregional
organizations in conflict prevention and mediation, as
outlined in the Joint United Nations-African Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security and
in the Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative. In
that context, we refer to Chapter VIII, Article 52, of the
Charter of the United Nations and the Constitutive Act
of the African Union, which highlight the importance
of regional bodies in the peaceful settlement of disputes
and the primacy of preventive diplomacy as a first step
towards conflict prevention and resolution.
While we reflect today on conflict prevention and
resolution, let me stress the importance of mediation.
In that regard, I would like to refer to the words
of European Union High Representative Federica
Mogherini, who said recently in New York that there
is a need for a new generation of mediators, especially
those who understand technology and can use it for
the greater good. Furthermore, we are pleased to see
that, thanks to Finland and Turkey, the initiative of
the Group of Friends of Mediation, is thriving and
expanding every year.
In conclusion, let me once again emphasize that
conflict prevention and mediation are core principles
of the United Nations Charter and should be more
prominently reflected in the work of the Security
Council. I believe that today’s meeting contributes to
this goal.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I wish to begin by
condemning the attacks against the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali yesterday, which resulted in the loss of life of
yet another United Nations peacekeeper from Chad. I
would also like to express our deepest condolences to
the family of the victim and to the Government and the
people of Chad.

S/PV. 8633

We thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting. Indonesia welcomes the briefings
by the Secretary-General, Ambassador Mulamula,
Ms. Maite and Ms. Vilakazi.
Challenges to peace in many conflict situations
in Africa are complex, volatile and characterized by
unprecedented civilian casualties, forced displacement
and setbacks to peace processes. Far too often, however,
we are so busy reacting to conflicts that we are unable
to prevent them and address their root causes. This
approach is not sustainable and is proving to be very
costly. I wish to underline three points.
First, shifting to a culture of prevention is a
necessity. From day one, the Secretary-General has
emphasized conflict prevention as one of his priorities,
and my delegation is very supportive of this shift.
Indonesia also endorses the concept of sustaining
peace, which emphasizes a system-wide approach to
conflict prevention. We must foster synergy between
the Security Council and other entities of the United
Nations family and harness their comparative strengths
to comprehensively address drivers of conflict.
The United Nations does not lack proper tools for
preventing conflict. The United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime have been assisting developing countries
in promoting good governance, and the Peacebuilding
Fund has been funding regional peacebuilding
initiatives in Africa. Indonesia also values the role of
the Secretary-General’s good offices and of United
Nations regional offices and encourages the SecretaryGeneral to utilize every instrument in his preventive
toolbox to avoid the recurrence of conflict.
Secondly, the United Nations cannot prevent
and resolve conflicts in Africa single-handedly.
Through Agenda 2063 of the African Union (AU),
the people of Africa aspire to a conflict-free Africa.
In realizing this noble goal, the AU and subregional
organizations have been increasingly taking charge of
peace and security matters on the continent. Robust
partnership between the United Nations and such
organizations is therefore quintessential, and, in fact,
various forms of collaboration already exist, ranging
from the deployment of a United Nations-AU hybrid
peacekeeping mission to United Nations support for
regional counter-terrorism initiatives.
Thirdly, it is necessary to make full use of each
organization’s comparative advantages. The AU and

19-3037525/34

S/PV.8633

Peace and security in Africa

subregional organizations have unmatched knowledge
on conflict on the continent and familiarity with
relevant stakeholders. The United Nations must always
listen to them. They also have geographical proximity to
conflicts, which gives them a strong incentive to resolve
them, and the ability to be first responders. The United
Nations should engage with them from the earliest signs
of conflict to identify workable approaches.
Meanwhile, the United Nations could provide policy
advice, political backstopping and logistical support to
AU missions. It could provide adequate resources to
ensure that the AU can complete its critical endeavours,
including by financing AU-led peace operations. In
addition, the United Nations and regional organizations
could also team up in mediation efforts. Strategic
discussion is needed on how the United Nations could
better support the development of regional mediation
capacity in Africa.
To keep peace in our region, the countries of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) have
been working tirelessly to promote the ASEAN Way,
with its fundamental reliance on preventive diplomacy.
Indonesia believes South-East Asia and Africa have
much to learn from each other in preventing and
resolving conflicts.
I should like to conclude by underlining that, even
when regional organizations are fully determined to
play their role, there is a limit to what they can do if the
Security Council is not united or ready to take up its
primary responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations, namely, to maintain international peace and
security. We should ensure that resources are available
for peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Expecting our
special political missions as well as our peacekeeping
missions, which, as the Secretary-General mentioned,
are mostly on the African continent, to be able to
do their noble duty with limited support is to set a
mission impossible.
As the largest troop- and police-contributing
country in the Council, I should like to pay tribute to the
brave Blue Helmets in the field, including those from
Africa, which, as a continent, is the largest collective
troop-contributor on the continent.
As the last Council member to speak before the
President, and having heard the statements of various
colleagues in the Chamber, I think it is quite clear to
all of us that we all support conflict prevention. What
is needed now is to faithfully implement preventive
26/34

07/10/2019

diplomacy, with wisdom and vigour. Furthermore, I
second the statement by the Ambassador of the United
States exhorting us to take action. Africa is awaiting
us all.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of South Africa.
First, I would like to join those colleagues who
condemned the attack against our peacekeepers
yesterday in Chad. I thank Secretary-General António
Guterres for his statement. I also extend my gratitude to
the following for their insightful and extensive briefings
this morning: Ambassador Liberata Mulamula, Visiting
Scholar and Associate Director of the Institute for
African Studies, Elliott School of International Affairs,
George Washington University; Ms. Naledi Maite,
Programme Manager, African Women in Dialogue,
South Africa; and Ms. Linda Vilakazi, Programme
Manager, Zanele Mbeki Development Trust.
This debate, the first of the second week of
South Africa’s presidency of the Security Council, is
symbolic, as it places our emphasis on the centrality
of preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention and
resolution in the African continent. It is in this
context that we continue our diplomatic efforts to seek
solutions to the challenges in the Sudan, South Sudan
and the Central African Republic, and in other conflicts
around the world. We believe in this centrality because
conflict prevention and resolution is less costly than
peacekeeping, in monetary terms and in terms of loss of
life, destruction of infrastructure and displacement of
people. In his essay Clear the Obstacles and Confront
the Enemy, which he wrote on Robben Island prison in
1976, Nelson Mandela reminds us why negotiation is
preferable when he said the following:
“[w]hen we have fought it out and reduced this
country to ashes it will still be necessary for us to
sit down together and talk about the problems of
reconstruction — the black man and the white man,
the African and the Afrikaner”.
We pay tribute to the Secretary-General’s reform
agenda, especially the peace and security pillar, which
prioritizes preventive diplomacy, mediation and the
development of nationally owned peace agreements and
their early implementation. South Africa believes that
cooperation and coordination among the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations could
play an important role in conflict prevention. In that
regard, South Africa calls for enhanced and continuous
19-30375

07/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

strategic and operational coordination of preventive
diplomacy, conflict prevention and resolution efforts
by the United Nations, the African Union (AU), the
regional economic communities and other international
and local partners.
South Africa pays tribute to the United NationsAU mediations efforts in the Central African Republic,
South Sudan, the Sudan and elsewhere on the continent.
The recent operationalization of the AU Peace Fund
will further boost the AU’s capacities and efforts in
mediation and conflict prevention on our continent.
The Peace Fund is structured around three thematic
windows, namely, mediation and preventive diplomacy,
institutional capacity, and peace support operations. In
that regard, AU member States should be commended
for their efforts to contribute to the Peace Fund, whose
endowment currently stands at $115 million. African
leaders have demonstrated their political will to deal
with and resolve conflicts on our continent.
The role of women and youth in conflict prevention
and mediation cannot be emphasized enough. It is
common knowledge that, where women are involved in
peace processes, those processes are more legitimate,
sustainable and effective. We welcome the role already
been played by African Women in Dialogue, the
Association for Women’s Rights in Development and
the Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention
and Mediation, and many other similar initiatives,
in anchoring conflict prevention and resolution by
holding grassroots-level negotiations. We urge the
Secretary-General to deploy more women mediators,
peace envoys and special representatives to assist in
conflict resolution and mediation across our continent.
South Africa has presented a draft resolution on the
women and peace and security agenda to ensure the
implementation of our previous decisions regarding the
role of women in peace and security.
As we approach the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the United Nations, we urge Member States to renew
their commitment to the principles and objectives of the
Charter of the United Nations insofar as the resolution
of disputes is concerned. The time has come for the
United Nations and the Council to put in more effort
and resources in response to Chapter VI of the United
Nations Charter, on the pacific settlement of disputes.
South Africa is convinced that peace and stability
in the world will remain elusive if we do not address
the nexus between security and development. The 2030

S/PV. 8633

Agenda for Sustainable Development gives recognition
to that vital link. In that context, consideration of the
interdependence between security and development
requires that the different principal organs of the
United Nations work together, in a complementary
manner, within their respective Charter mandates, to
ensure a holistic and integrated approach to sustainable
development and durable peace.
I wish to conclude with yet another quotation from
Nelson Mandela.
“We were expected to destroy one another
and ourselves collectively in the worst racial
conflagration. Instead, we as a people chose the
path of negotiation, compromise and peaceful
settlement. Instead of hatred and revenge we chose
reconciliation and nation-building”.
South Africa appeals to our sisters and brother
on our continent of Africa to adopt a similar
mindset; instead of hatred and revenge, let us choose
reconciliation and nation-building. Once more, we
urge the Security Council to allocate more resources to
preventative diplomacy.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Namibia.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): As this is the first time
this month that I take the floor, I join colleagues in
congratulating you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. I furthermore wish to express our appreciation
to you for convening this very important meeting on
the centrality of preventive diplomacy and conflict
prevention and resolution in Africa. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General and our briefers for their
comprehensive, insightful and detailed briefings on the
issue at hand.
Upon its establishment, in 1945, the Security
Council was charged with ensuring international
peace and security. Since then, Council members have
authorized numerous peacekeeping missions, including
in Timor-Leste, Lebanon, Haiti, Cyprus and my own
country, Namibia. The Namibian experience is proof
that those missions are designed to help countries
navigate the difficult path from conflict to peace. Next
year we will celebrate 30 years of that treasured peace in
Namibia, and we thank the United Nations for its role in
bringing that peace to my country. The implementation

19-3037527/34

S/PV.8633

Peace and security in Africa

of Council resolutions is also key to solving conflicts.
I take this opportunity to recall that unresolved issues
require the full support of the Security Council to
ensure the full implementation of its resolutions.
The nature of conflicts has changed since the
Security Council was created. The role of the Council
must therefore also adapt. The Council must at all times
guard against not simply being reactive. It must be
proactive. It must play a stronger role in preventing wars
and conflicts from occurring. Misery, human suffering,
starvation, intolerable living conditions and human
rights abuses are among the early warning signals for
which we must all look out. Success in that requires
strong cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, which are more familiar and in tune with
the situations in their respective regions. I would also
like to add that we must focus on external factors as
well, such as climate change and food insecurity. Those
are early warning signals of problems to come as far as
peace and security are concerned.
The signing, in April 2017, of the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security provides guidance for
deepening cooperation between the two organizations
at all levels in peace and security. That vital partnership
has since then gone from strong to stronger. In that
regard, Namibia firmly supports the call by the African
Union (AU) and the African members of the Security
Council for predictable financing, through United
Nations-assessed contributions, for AU-led peace
support operations authorized by the Security Council.
The strengthening of the United Nations-AU
partnership was concretely demonstrated in recent
months with the signing of peace agreements, notably in
the Central African Republic and South Sudan notably.
The Sudan is also an excellent example of the power
of preventive diplomacy and conflict prevention and
resolution. The upcoming Security Council visit to the
African Union headquarters, where consultations will
be held with the AU Peace and Security Council, also
demonstrates the importance of the United NationsAU partnership.
The need to prioritize preventive diplomacy and
mediation in approaching crises and conflict situations
was continuously emphasized during Namibia’s
chairmanship of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) from August 2018 to August
2019. Concrete examples of that policy include the
28/34

07/10/2019

successful and peaceful elections held in both the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Madagascar.
SADC has been assisting in finding a political solution
in Lesotho, and we are optimistic that through dialogue
that sisterly country is moving in the right direction.
SADC fully supports the need to enhance the AU’s
prevention capabilities and tools, in the context of the
AU’s aspiration of achieving its Silencing the Guns by
2020 initiative. We cannot overemphasize preventative
diplomacy, mediation and negotiations in peacebuilding
and reconstruction.
I also wish to emphasize the importance of women
negotiators and mediators in peacebuilding processes,
as espoused in the AU Agenda 2063. It was in 2000,
during Namibia’s presidency of the Security Council,
that the Council unanimously adopted the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security. That resolution formally drew global attention
to the unrecognized, underutilized and undervalued
contributions of women in preventing war and in
peacebuilding and engaging individuals and societies
to live in harmony. According to the International
Peace Institute, when women participate in peace
processes, the resulting agreement is 35 per cent more
likely to last at least 15 years. That number alone should
encourage parties to ensure that women are part of the
conversation. We, as the international community, can
only benefit from recognizing the fundamental role of
women in peace and security. To that end, Namibia will
be launching an international women’s peace centre,
and we welcome commitments by other Member States
on concrete deliverables in the coming years, such
as Commitment 2025 on women’s inclusion in peace
processes by Finland and Spain.
To conclude, I would like to underscore Namibia’s
commitment to preventive diplomacy and conflict
prevention and resolution. My delegation furthermore
recognizes the ongoing peace efforts on the continent,
and we commend the efforts of the United Nations
and the AU, as well as subregional organizations and
regional economic commissions. We firmly believe that
taking a more proactive approach by using preventive
diplomacy and conflict prevention will bring an end
to violence on the African continent. As our founding
father in Namibia once said,
“A people united, striving to achieve a common
good for all members of society, will always
emerge victorious”.
19-30375

07/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

In making that wisdom relevant, I believe that the
Council would see much greater success.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate South Africa on having assumed the
presidency of the Security Council for the month
of October. Our delegation wishes to assure you,
Mr. President, of our fullest support and cooperation
during your tenure. Let me once again thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this critically
important debate. We hope that it will rekindle our
aspirations for strong cooperation between the United
Nations Security Council and the African Union (AU)
Peace and Security Council, especially in building
capacity for preventive diplomacy.
We thank Secretary-General António Guterres,
Ambassador Mulamula and the two civil society
representatives — Ms. Linda Vilakazi and
Ms. Naledi Maite — for their comprehensive briefings
and reflections.
Ethiopia strongly believes that conflict prevention
and mediation are critical tools for sustaining peace
and development. Preventing the outbreak of conflicts
and their recurrence are also the central pillars of the
African Union Peace and Security Architecture. We
believe that the fundamentals of cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union also lie in
the need to promote conflict prevention and in the
primacy of political solutions, which centre on properly
implementing the objectives of the Peace and Security
Architecture, including through projects such as the
African Continental Early Warning System, the targeted
activities of the AU Mediation Support Unit and the work
of the AU Panel of the Wise. At this juncture, I wish to
recall that discussions in the Council are not showing
satisfactory progress on the importance of strengthening
the AU Peace and Security Architecture, including on
the need for sustainable and predictable funding for AU
peace support operations through mechanisms such as
United Nations-assessed contributions.
On balance, the use of preventive diplomacy by the
United Nations system — particularly the SecretaryGeneral’s good offices — remains indispensable
but underutilized in avoiding and containing crisis
situations. The Security Council must also do more to
support and promote national and regional conflictprevention efforts. That is highly important given that

S/PV. 8633

the nature of modern conflicts tends to be transnational,
especially where borders are porous, as is the case in
many parts of Africa. It therefore goes without saying
that both the humanitarian and material losses resulting
from conflicts are too great. That is why they should
be stopped or minimized through conflict prevention,
mediation and preventive diplomacy, which are by
far the best tools we have at our disposal to avert the
outbreak of crises.
We recently witnessed the significance of mediation
in our region. The collective wisdom of the Sudanese
people and the endeavours of the African Union,
Ethiopia and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) resulted in facilitating peace and
stability in the Sudan — blessed be the peacemakers.
We again witnessed that conflict prevention and
resolution are less costly, bringing hope, nurturing
cooperation and giving us the momentum and serenity
to reflect on wars being destructive and peacebuilding
life and harmony.
We believe that inclusivity and building national
consensus are a foundation for successful conflict
prevention in intra-State disputes. Peace endures when
development is inclusive, when citizens’ security is
guaranteed, when women and young people are actively
involved in decision-making and when barriers to their
economic advancement are removed. We have seen
the power and potential of young people as agents of
positive change all across our region, most recently in
Ethiopia and the Sudan, as well as across West African
countries. We must listen to young people — their
hopes, aspirations and concerns. The meaningful
participation of youth in peacebuilding activities will
deny armed and terrorist groups such as Al-Shabaab
the chance to thrive by exploiting development and
governance gaps. In some of the conflict zones on the
African continent, the total absence of State structures
and functioning institutions, as well as corruption and
maladministration, have pushed a sizeable number of
young people to consider joining those terrorist groups.
It is therefore critical to continue to invest in youth
empowerment and to bolster State capacity and good
governance initiatives at the local level, including in
ungoverned spaces.
Ethiopia is committed to the implementation of
the African Union’s Peace and Security Architecture,
as well as its flagship vision of Silencing the Guns
in Africa by 2020, both of which emphasize conflict
prevention and the pacific settlement of disputes on the

19-3037529/34

S/PV.8633

Peace and security in Africa

continent. In our subregion, Ethiopia has championed
the goals of IGAD’s Conflict Early Warning and
Response Mechanism, which aims to prevent violent
conflicts through structured and consistent early
warning and early response. At the national level,
over the past year and a half, Ethiopia has prioritized
building peace, including by setting up a Cabinet-level
ministry to ensure the implementation of peacebuilding
measures in order to strengthen the rule of law and
bolster the capacity of our security sectors. In addition
to empowering local communities, we are anchoring
our peacebuilding initiatives on indigenous traditions
such as the use of elders’ councils and religious leaders,
with the objective of reaching national consensus. We
recognize that those efforts will not succeed without
the active participation of women and youth.
We would once again like to reiterate that, despite
significant progress in recent years, these regional and
national conflict-prevention objectives cannot be met
by Africans alone, not least because of a lack of material
and financial resources. The international community,
particularly the Security Council, whose primary
function is the maintenance of international peace and
security, should actively support national, regional and
subregional efforts, based on the view that prevention is
better than cure. In that regard, we urge members of the
Security Council to further strengthen United NationsAU partnership around peace and security as a platform
for conflict prevention and mediation on the continent.
The President: I now give the floor to Mrs. Byaje.
Mrs. Byaje: At the outset, let me thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate on peace
and security in Africa, with a focus on the centrality
of preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention and the
resolution of conflicts. We also wish to thank you,
Sir, for providing this platform and opportunity to
review the efforts made in this particular field with
a view to enhancing collaboration and building more
ties while also opening up opportunities for closer
operational cooperation. The Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS) highly appreciates the
contributions shared during this debate.
Maintaining global peace and security requires
collaboration among several actors. In that respect,
ECCAS acknowledges the milestones achieved in
addressing issues that are impeding peace and security,
putting forward conflict prevention, preventive
diplomacy and good offices through our strategic
30/34

07/10/2019

partnership with the United Nations and the African
Union (AU) and thanks to the assistance of our bilateral
and multilateral partners, civil society and networks of
women and youth.
In that regard, my contribution to this debate will
focus on three major points. I will first give a brief
historical background on the involvement of ECCAS in
peace and security issues. I will then highlight areas of
cooperation with other entities, before concluding by
looking at the remaining gaps and challenges, calling
for concerted actions to speed up the implementation of
initiatives aimed at preventing conflicts.
Before delving into today’s theme, allow me
to revisit briefly the security situation in Central
Africa — a region prone to all sorts of conflicts
owing to its geographic location at the heart of a
volatile geopolitical landscape that is regularly marked
by recurrent conflicts that adversely compromise
peace and security, with a negative bearing on the
subregion’s community.
It is worth mentioning that that alarming state
of affairs has been in the making not as of today or
yesterday, but mainly since the period from 1992 to
1998, during which seven of our 11 States members
went through violent wars and devastating genocide,
prompting the institution to embrace a new orientation
in its objectives. ECCAS, which focused initially
on the promotion and enhancement of harmonious
cooperation and balanced and self-sustained economic
and social development in all areas, with the ultimate
goal of realizing regional integration, was then
compelled to reinforce its objectives in February 1999
with the creation of the Council for Peace and Security
in Central Africa (COPAX), whose core mission was to
prevent and resolve conflicts in the subregion.
Since its inception, COPAX has focused its action
on the area of conflict prevention, early warning
mechanisms and, more recently, strengthening
cooperation with civil society organizations active in
the area of conflict prevention. Political and diplomatic
actions have also been conducted to counter and control
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons. In
that framework, the Heads of State and Government
have vowed to enhance the promotion of peace and
security at the highest level as a prerequisite to improve
citizens’ living conditions, security and stability in
the region.
19-30375

07/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

However, preventing conflicts of different natures
from erupting in the region, leading to social crises,
and curbing systemic problems rooted in poverty and
all sorts of exclusion, as well as governance issues at the
root of political and institutional conflicts, have proven
to be a tedious exercise. Tensions tend to escalate
during electoral processes, while attacks related to
terrorism and violent extremism and their corollary of
forced migration, transnational crimes and maritime
insecurity are on the rise, eating away all resources
devoted to development. Worth mentioning are also
cross-cutting issues linked with human trafficking,
smuggling and illicit cross-border trade, as well as
arms proliferation.
We note with concern long-standing traditions,
such as transhumance and pastoralism, that have now
become sources of conflicts, triggering instability and
the resurgence of negative forces and armed groups
looting natural resources. Battling those challenges
in a holistic and inclusive manner has been promoted
by all parties involved. In that regard, ECCAS lauds
the meaningful involvement in preventive efforts by
women and youth networks, which have proven to be a
strong asset to rely on in order to achieve lasting peace.
ECCAS will therefore continue to work in tandem
with the AU and the United Nations through the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa in
building capacity to empower those agents of change,
namely, women and youth, so as to ensure their equal
participation in all efforts deployed to promote peace
and security and in enabling them to play a central role
in leadership and decision-making.
Collaboration among all those actors is also needed
to curb and eradicate the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons if we are to silence the guns by 2020,
create the necessary conditions for development to
thrive and achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.
It is urgent to realize that those changing realities of
conflicts coming in sophisticated and multifaceted
dimensions in the area of conflict prevention call for
a drastic shift in our response. That is at the root of
the new and innovative approach prompting the AU
and its main pillars, namely, the regional economic
communities and member States, to try to embrace
other avenues and endogenous solutions to peace and
security issues.
In order to achieve that noble goal, Africa is leaning
towards financing a major part of its own operations

S/PV. 8633

of maintaining peace while expecting assistance
from this organ, which holds the responsibility of
maintaining peace and security in the world. Pooling
predictable resources to find adequate solutions to the
challenges remains relevant in complementing efforts
to be deployed.
Within the framework of subsidiarity, complementarity
and solidarity, the AU, the United Nations, ECCAS
and other regional entities have worked together
to coordinate and harmonize their interventions in
terms of prevention and addressing the root causes
of conflicts. Allow me to illustrate some areas of
collaboration and joint action conducted under regional
arrangements with several examples that have yielded
tangible results.
Progress has indeed been achieved through several
mediation, good offices and political missions that have
eased hostilities and recently resolved political crises.
Some of the latest positive developments owing to
the role played by regional organizations include the
collaboration of ECCAS, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and neighbouring States
in supporting the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. The
panel of facilitators — made up of ECCAS member
States and actors from neighbouring countries — as
well as the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
and the engagement of the European Union in that
process were instrumental in the implementation
of the African Initiative road map and in easing
tensions with armed groups, which led to the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic.
We witnessed a peaceful transition of power for
the first time in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which has led to positive changes. The just-concluded
national dialogue in Cameroon has sparked new hope
in the resolution of differences affecting communities.
At this juncture, it is important to mention that ECCAS
is about to conclude an institutional reform that will
boost the capacity of the Central Africa Early Warning
Mechanism and the Central Africa Multinational Force,
with a view to aligning them with the continental
architecture. Currently, those two bodies are quite
challenged, and their level of intervention minimized,
despite their comparative advantage with regard to
their proximity to the scene of action.

19-3037531/34

S/PV.8633

Peace and security in Africa

Among their stumbling blocks are the
decision-making process and the lack of human,
logistical and financial resources. There is therefore a
great need to build their capacity to enable them to mount
fast interventions in an emergency situation — often
hampered by the tedious nature of decision-making, as
it requires a green light from the Conference of Heads
of State and Government to be put into motion.
In order to meet those challenges, ECCAS urges
our economic and financial partners to enhance
the capacities of the Central Africa Early Warning
Mechanism and of the Central Africa Multinational
Force in the image of the AU Peace and Security
Council or the Security Council. In contributing to
those initiatives, ECCAS will continue to push for
regular COPAX meetings during the Summit of Heads
of State and Government, while ensuring reporting on
its work on a daily basis to inform the decision of Heads
of State and trigger action if needed.
ECCAS commends the United Nations for
recognizing the role of complementarity played by
regional and subregional organizations, mainly in the
pacific settlements of disputes. The AU reform gives
an even more important role to the regional economic
communities, and the ECCAS reform has taken into
account all those changes and the contributions and
new responsibilities assigned to them. ECCAS values
the AU technical support for our organ of earlywarning system, which will help it in reaching its
operationalization to the level of other regional organs
and enable it to deliver on its mandate.
In conclusion, let me reiterate the strong
commitment of ECCAS to the importance of investing
in the prevention of conflicts and relying on preventive
diplomacy — instead of using force — in mediation
efforts as the only viable path leading towards
conflict resolution.
The President: I thank Mrs. Byaje for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mohammed.
Ms. Mohammed: Let me start by congratulating
you, Mr. President, on taking over the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of October and
by thanking you and the Republic of South Africa for
having included this important item relating to peace
and security in Africa, with a focus on the centrality
of preventive diplomacy and conflict prevention, on
the agenda of the Security Council. I would also like to
32/34

07/10/2019

thank the Secretary-General and the briefers for their
enlightening briefings, particularly on highlighting the
role of women in preventive diplomacy and how we
can leverage the relevant platforms and initiatives to
promote better engagement.
The contemporary threats to peace and security
on our continent and, indeed, globally are so complex
and interconnected, with broad consequences, that
no single organization alone can manage to provide
the appropriate solutions. Consequently, the scale
and complexity of the challenges we face today
require the harnessing of the collective efforts of all
our stakeholders. In this context, the centrality of
preventive diplomacy as a peacemaking tool becomes
indispensable in our peace efforts.
Today’s debate is therefore all the more relevant
because preventive diplomacy and conflict prevention
remain a strategic priority for all of us. They perfectly
illustrate the raison d’être of multilateralism and the
various organizations that emanate from it. At a time
when the credibility of our Organization is being
questioned, this debate could serve as a basis for
harnessing our collective commitment to devoting
greater attention to the prevention tool, which remains
by far the most profitable in the long term, but,
unfortunately, the least resourced.
With this in mind, permit me to make the following
three key points.
First, given its clear comparative advantage in
this area, the African Union (AU) has over the last
decades adopted several instruments, mechanisms and
policy documents to boost its prevention capacities. As
a result, Africa is well equipped, within the African
Peace and Security Architecture and the African
Governance Architecture as its twin blueprints, for
promoting peace, security and stability.
The African Peace and Security Architecture is
built on a continuum ranging from anticipation and
prevention, conflict management and resolution,
to post-conflict stabilization, reconstruction and
development. As the Council is aware, the African
Union Peace and Security Council is the nerve centre
of the African Peace and Security Architecture. Since
it became operational in 2004, the Peace and Security
Council has covered significant ground and made
considerable gains in addressing and resolving conflicts
on the continent.
19-30375

07/10/2019

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8633

Another pillar of the African Peace and Security
Architecture is the Panel of the Wise, which is the core
of African Union preventive diplomacy. The Panel
of the Wise, since its operationalization in 2007, has
significantly contributed to enhancing preventive
diplomacy in Africa. Stemming from this Panel,
there are a number of arrangements in supporting
subsidiary platforms, including PanWise, which is
the platform of the African Union, regional economic
communities and regional mechanism panels involved
in preventive diplomacy.

their annual consultative meeting, is a testament to the
tremendous progress that has been made in fostering
our collective efforts to address the complex peace and
security challenges in Africa.

Within the framework of enhancing preventive
diplomacy, I would like to point out that the African
Union Commission now has a functioning Mediation
Support Unit to institutionalize and provide predictable
and sustainable support to all AU-led mediation efforts.
Furthermore, the African Union’s peacemaking and
preventive diplomacy efforts are also championed
by special envoys, special representatives, high
representatives and 13 liaison offices and missions
across the continent.

I would also like to highlight the fact that the
African Union’s Agenda 2063 envisions a peaceful,
prosperous and integrated Africa, which is consistent
with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
on the Sustainable Development Goals. In line with
the spirit of Agenda 2063, the AU is implementing its
flagship project on silencing the guns on the continent.

While some progress has been made in close
collaboration with the subregional organizations and
with the strong support of the United Nations, we
must recognize that a number of challenges continue
to undermine our ability to effectively deliver on
our mandate, most notably the possibility of gaining
appropriate entry points into tense situations likely to
evolve into violent conflicts.
The second point I would like to make is on the
importance of strategic partnerships. Indeed, the
collaboration between the African Union and its
regional economic communities and mechanisms and
with the United Nations, as provided in the various
frameworks, is addressing and resolving conflicts and
has progressively gained momentum, as guided by the
provisions of the African Union Peace and Security
Architecture and the African Governance Architecture.
The Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security,
signed in April 2017, is premised on the growing
recognition that a stronger partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations is a strategic
necessity in the process of responding early, coherently
and decisively to prevent and manage conflicts in
Africa. In addition, the progressively deepening
partnership between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council, through

Close consultations between the two Councils and
the implementation of the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security are improving our shared appreciation
of the challenges with which we are confronted and
is sharpening our response tools, including through
preventive diplomacy.

In this respect, I wish to commend the Council
for the contribution it made to this effort by adopting
resolution 2457 (2019) earlier this year, in which, inter
alia, it calls for the mobilization of the United Nations
and its agencies to support the African Union in the
implementation of the noble goal of Silencing the Guns
in Africa by 2020. The results thus far obtained from
this collaboration are quite appreciable, and the Council
will agree with me that only by pooling our collective
expertise and resources, leveraging our comparative
advantages and working collaboratively can our two
organizations realistically expect to have a positive
impact on the ground.
My third and last point is on the importance of
including women and young people in peace processes,
which cannot be overemphasized. It is only by ensuring
that they play decision-making roles not only in
conflict resolution but also in mediation, including in
the implementation of peace agreements, that we can
truly address the issues vital to securing sustainable
peace. The AU Commission, for its part, has created
platforms for the empowerment of women in peace and
security such as FemWise-Africa, which is a network
of women mediators. This network has attracted many
young women mediators, a good number of whom have
been trained and are being deployed to some conflict
and post-conflict areas to accompany the political
processes in several countries.
In addition, in our efforts to enhance women’s
participation and leadership through the African Union

19-3037533/34

S/PV.8633

Peace and security in Africa

and the United Nations, we came together to help launch
the African women’s movement called the African
Women Leaders Network in June 2017. The African
Union has also recently launched the initiative of Youth
for Peace, which aims at empowering young people and
engaging them in peace processes on the continent.
In that regard, the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission has appointed a Special Envoy on
Youth, a young lady with the necessary experience
and commitment who addressed the Council recently
(see S/PV.8629). We are also undertaking regional
consultations with African youth in order to further
enlist their efforts towards building peace on
the continent.
In our endeavours we are always conscious of the
primary responsibility of our member States to prevent
and resolve conflicts as well as to protect civilians
and promote human rights, as provided for in the
relevant African instruments and international law.
This being so, I would like to highlight here the launch
of the grand national dialogue in Cameroon, which
is dedicated to finding an internal national solution
to the crisis affecting some parts of the country. We
welcome this initiative because we are convinced that
local initiatives driven by people stand a better chance
of reaching a lasting solution, in a spirit of compromise,
for the preservation of peace, stability, harmony and
national unity. In that vein, our collective peacemaking
endeavours in the Sudan, South Sudan, Libya, the
Central African Republic, Somalia, Mali and the Sahel,
and the Great Lakes region, including the Lake Chad

34/34

07/10/2019

basin and the Horn of Africa, are commendable and
should be consolidated to enhance partnership between
the African Union, the regional economic communities
and the United Nations.
In conclusion, mediation as part of preventive
diplomacy is indeed indispensable to the resolution
of crises and conflicts. Improving shared analysis
and appreciation of the challenges with which we
are confronted is an important first step to providing
coherent, effective and timely responses to conflict and
crisis situations in Africa. In that context, we need to
utilize all preventive diplomacy tools, among which are
good offices, Special Representatives, Special Envoys
and emissaries, to foster a collective approach.
Despite the gains made, more needs to be done
to further enhance the effectiveness of preventive
diplomacy. I would therefore like to stress the
importance of continued collective and concerted
efforts to respond to the existing and emerging threats,
the relevance of partnerships and collaboration among
Governments, civil society organizations and the
private sector, as well as the sustained engagement of
all stakeholders, including women and young people, in
the decision-making processes relating to the promotion
of peace and the advancement of socioeconomic
development. Only by pooling our collective efforts,
expertise and resources, together weighing our
comparative advantages and working collaboratively
can we realistically expect to have a positive impact and
find durable solutions so as to ensure sustainable peace.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

19-30375
