UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FOURTH

COUNCIL
RECORDS

YEAR

2132nd

MEETING:

NEW

20 MARC

J#$$lBRh

I-%

MAR2 5 1982

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2132)

Page

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .,................
Complaint
by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 16 March 1979 from the Permanent
Representative
of Angola
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13176).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

WPV.2132

1
1

1

.

,

‘.

NO-l-E
Symbols of Wnited .Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the Oflckzr Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
~.‘f’
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published 4n yearly volumes of Resblutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2132nd MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 20 March 1979, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Leslie 0. HARRIMAN

(Nigeria).

out the right to vote, in conformity with the provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional ‘rules of
procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Houngavou (Benin),
Mr. Thou (Botswana), Mr. Mondjo (Congo), Mr. Roa KoUn
(Cuba), Mr. Florin (German Democratic
Republic),
Mr. Se@ (Ghana), Mr. Doukoure’ (Guinea), Mr. Rabetafika
(Madagascar), Mr. Lobe (Mozambique), Mr. Gooneratne
(Sri Lanka) and Mr. SahIoul (Sudan) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agend&UZ)
1. Adoption of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT:
I should also like to inform
members of the Council that I have received a letter dated
19 March from the representatives of Gabon, Nigeria and
Zambia [S/13181] which reads as follows:

2. Complaint by.Angola against South Africa:
Letter &ted 16 March 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13176)

“We, the undersigned members of the Security Council, have the honour to request that, during its meetings
devoted to the consideration of the item ‘Complaint by
Angola against South Africa’, the Council should extend
an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Mishake Muyongo, Vice-President of
the South West Africa People’s Organization.”

l7te meeting was called to order at 4.20 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 16 March 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13176)

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees
to the request.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken by the Council at its 2130th meeting, I invite the
representative of Angola to take a place atthe Council table
-and the representatives of A&r@, Bulgaria, Ethiopi?, Viet
Nam and Yugoslavia to take the places reserved for tnem at
the side of the Council chamber.

4. The PRESIDENT:
I wish to draw the attention of
members of the Council to document S/13180, which contains the text of a letter dated 19 March from the ChargC
d’Affaires of the Permanent Mission of South Africa to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Council.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Muyongo (South
West Africa People’s Organization) took a place at the
Council table.

5. Mr. AASEN (Norway): The recent attacks carried out
by South African forces against Angola and Zambia constitute serious violations of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of those countries and must be condemned by the
international community.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola) took a pIace at the Council table and Mr. BouayadAgha (Algeria), Mr. Yankov (Btdgaria), Mr. Worku (Ethicpi@! I& -&a Van--Van Lau (Viet Nam) and Mr. Komatina
(Yugoslavia) took the places reservedfor them at the side of
the Council chamber.

6. Angola and Zambia have, together with the other
front-line States, always been in the forefront of the liberation struggle in southern Africa. They have for a long time
carried an unreasonably heavy burden politically, materially and financially. The recent armed attacks against the
two countries by South Africa add to this burden through
further human suffering and destruction of property. In this
connexion, the Norwegian Government wishes to reiterate
its view that it is the responsibility of the international
community to provide effective economic and humanitarian assistance to the front-line States.

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Benin, Botswana, the Congo, Cuba, the German
Democratic Republic, Ghana, Guinea, Madagascar,
Mozambique, Sri Lanka and the Sudan in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
question on the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the discussion, with1

7. The latest South African attacks have been launched at
a time when the search for a peaceful settlement of the
Namibian question has reached a particularly delicate
stage. This situation called for the utmost restraint by all
parties concerned. The actions now undertaken by South
Africa can only contribute to complicating further the
already very difficult process of achieving genuine independence for Namibia under United Nations supervision
and control.

oppressed peoples to fight for their dignitv. Such attacks
will come to an end once South Afri& withdraws from
Namibia, which it occupies illegally, and once the peoples of
Namibia and Zimbabwe exercise their inalienable right to
self-determination. The policy of violence and intimidation
pursued by South Africa will not bring about the longawaited stability. Likewise, it will not discourage the neighbouring States from assisting their kith and kin who are
waging a just armed struggle. Only South Africa’s withdrawal from Namibia and the attainment of genuine independence by the Namibian people will bring about the
required stability.

8. In this connexion, the Norwegian Government would
like to commend the Secretary-General and his staff for
their untiring efforts in pursuance of Security Council resolution 435 (1978). We should like also to express our support for the efforts by the Western contact group to break
the present impasse in the negotiations.

15. On 6 May 1978 the Security Council adopted resolution 428 (1978), in which it warned South Africa that it
would take drastic measures against it if it continued its
aggression on the neighbouring States. South Africa chose
this time for its attack on Angola because it thought that the
Council would not be in a position to act in view of the
proximity talks on Namibia, which are actually being held
now. It is an irony of the day that such talks, held with the
intention of attaining a peaceful settlement in Namibia,
should be used as an excuse for South Africa’s aggressive
policy.

9. It is imperative that the negotiating process now under
way should be allowed to be concluded successfully. We
therefore urge the parties concerned to contribute to an
internationally acceptable solution in Namibia in accordance with resolution 435 (1978). Inconclusive negotiations
over the Namibia question may have far-reaching consequences for the whole region and may represent a serious
threat to international peace and security. The South African Government, as the illegal occupying force in Namibia,
bears a main responsibility for future developments in
Namibia and southern Africa as a whole.

16. Some speakers have stated that the kid-glove treatment’ given South Africa by some Members encourages its
Government in its course of destructive attacks on neighbouring States. It is doubtful that the power of persuasion
could prevail on South Africa to seereason. We believe that
the power of confrontation will bring better results.

10. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): I should like to make the
following brief statement on behalf of the Government of
Kuwait.

17. South Africa is the most powerful country in Africa. It
is armed to the teeth, notwithstanding Security Council
resolution 418 (1977), on an arms embargo against South
Africa. I have a feeling that many of us pay lip service to the
observance of this resolution, for, in reality, arms have
never stopped reaching South Africa. The fact that Member
States, particularly those in a position to do so, have
refrained from supplying the relevant committee with information on the violation of the resolution bears witness to
the indifference and apathy with which Council resolutions
are always met. We realize that Angola and other front-tine
States are facing impossible odds. But they may derive a
little consolation from the fact that the overwhelming
number of Member States are steadfastly behind them politically, morally and materially.

11. The situation in southern Africa is in a critical stage
now. The efforts of the Western five-some of them
members of the Security Council-towards the attainment
of Namibia’s independence are at the stage of make or
break. The fact that South Africa chose this time to launch
its attack on Angola casts serious doubts on its sincerity
concerning the independence of Namibia. My delegation
supported the request by Angola for the convening of the
Council to consider the implications of this brutal attack.
My Government condemns in the strongest terms South
Africa’s cowardly aggression against Angola.
12. It has been stated during this debate that the reason
behind this attack is the desire to intimidate the neighbouring African States and to frighten them, so as to make
them discontinue their assistance to the freedom lighters of
Namibia. No doubt South Africa wants to surround itself
with docile, obedient African States that would not oppose
its inhuman policy of apartheid

18. Destruction is awful, particularly when it takes place
in small and developing countries whose primary concern is
social and economic progress. But that is the price Angola
and others are paying for their unswerving dedication to
their convictions and principles. They are engaged in a
battle of patience and a battle of sacrifice. We believe that
the outcome of that battle will be victory-triumph.

13. Angola is a republic that has sworn to give its full
support to the South West Africa People’s Organization
(SWAPO). It is being punished and subjected to brutal
aggression because it does not follow a policy that tallies
with South Africa’s But Angola, in its support of SWAPO,
is in our view implementing what the majority of the
Members of the United Nations have called for-that is, the
offer of all forms of assistance to the freedom fighters in
Namibia and in Zimbabwe. It is unfortunate that those who
act in accordance with United Nations resolutions and out
of their convictions suffer for their sincerity and dedication.

19. My delegation whole-heartedly supports the young
Republic of Angola, and also whole-heartedly supports the
application of the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter
against South Africa.
20. Mr. NEIL (Jamaica): The delegation of Jamaica listened with great attention to the eloquent presentation
yesterday by the representative of Angola [213Oth meeting,?,
in which he gave a detailed account of the recent barbarous
acts of aggression carried out by South African armed
forces against his country. It is painful to recall that, from its

14. But the attacks on Angola and on other front-line
States will not put an end to the determination of the
2

very emergence as an independent State, the People’s
Republic of Angola has been the victim of hostile armed
attacks by South Africa which have continued unabated.
The escalation of these attacks since the beginning of
this month has resulted in their extension to the western
provinces of Zambia.

the cause of their oppressed brothers in southern Africa.
They have already made heavy sacrifices in the cause of
freedom, and we have been assured that they will continue
to withstand and endure the violent assaults directed
against them. Jamaica commends them for their support
for and contribution to the cause of peace, justice and
freedom, and we continue to stand in solidarity with them
and the liberation struggle.

21. Jamaica strongly condemns this latest series of armed
attacks, which should be viewed by the Security Council
with the utmost gravity. They involve the violation of the
territorial integrity of a sovereign African State and represent a territorial extension of the tactics of violence and
terror which the South African regime relentlessly perpetrates against the African majority in Namibia and in South
Africa itself. These unprovoked acts of aggression, involving the use of napalm, have caused considerable loss of life
and untold suffering among civilian populations, and have
also caused immense damage to property.

26. The failure of the Council in the past to take the
necessary measures provided for in the Charter has no
doubt encouraged the Pretoria r6gilr.e to persist in committing acts of aggression. These acts should not only be
condemned; they have to be stopped. The Council must
begin the process whereby effective enforcement measures
under Chapter VII of the Charter may be applied against
South Africa to halt these acts of aggression. This is the only
way that we can hope to deal with South African defiance,
and thii is the only way that the Council can fulfil its
responsibilities for the maintenance of international peace
and security.

22. These acts are a serious violation of the principles of
the Charter, international law and accepted norms of international conduct. Once again, they demonstrate the grave
danger to international peace and security posed by the
racist regime of Pretoria. It cannot escape the attention of
the Council that the in-built violence of the apartheidsystem
and South Africa’s persistent and contemptuous disregard
of international opinion and the Charter’s principles are
inimical to the creation of conditions conducive to peace in
southern Africa.

27. Mr. HULINSKi’
(Czechoslovakia) (interpretation
fi-om Russian): Just a few days ago the Security Council
considered the bloody acts of aggression of the illegal
regime of Southern Rhodesia undertaken with the support
of the South African racists against Angola, Mozambique
and Zambia. Today it is discussing a further seriesof aggressive attacks on the People’s Republic of Angola undertaken
by the apartheid r&me of South Africa from the intemational Territory of Namibia.

23. It must also be a matter of grave concern to the
Council that, in addition to its other atrocities, South Africa
continues to use the United Nations Territory of Namibia as
a spring-board for launching unprovoked attacks against
independent African States. And the timing of these attacks
is not without significance. It is a further indication of the
extent of South Africa’s sincerity in cooperating with
efforts by the United Nations to bring genuine independence to Namibia. It has proved difficult for South Africa to
mask its real intention of pursuing its neocolonialist
designs on Namibia. Its sustained campaign to destroy
SWAPO, which is the sole authentic representative of the
people of Namibia, as well as the current wave of armed
aggression, only demonstrates that South Africa is determined to sabotage the process of bringing about genuine
independence for Namibia in accordance with the provisions of resolution 435 (1978). South Africa’s actions stand
in clear contrast to the constructive attitude taken by the
front-line States and SWAPO, which have in good faith
given their co-operation and have exercised considerable
restraint in the face of intense and persistent provocation.

28. South Africa’s attack on Angola once again demonstrates that the racist regimes have no intention of complying with the repeated demands of the Council for the
immediate cessation of their aggressive actions against independent African States.
29. My delegation shares the ‘view of these criminal
actions of the South African racists expressed by the representative of Angola, Ambassador de Figueiredo, by the
Chairman of the African Group, the representative of
Ethiopia, Mr. Worku, and by the representatives of other
African States who have already addressed the Council.
30. The Territory of Namibia has repeatedly been used by
the South African r&me for acts of armed aggression
against Angola and against other sovereign States. This
shows that as long as South Africa continues illegally to
occupy Namibia, as long as South African troops are on
Namibian territory, there will be no tranquillity or security
for the countries of that part of Africa.

24. I wish to make it clear that Jamaica would like to see
the current proximity talks succeed in reaching agreement
on the outstanding issues in the United Nations plan for
Namibia. But for thii result to be achieved, pressure must be
brought to bear on the recalcitrant party, namely South
Africa, to co-operate and to desist from provocative actions
that jeopardize the implementation
of resolution 435
(1978).

31. By its repeated acts of aggression the Pretoria r&me
has constantly been flagrantly violating the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of neighbouring African States and the
security of their inhabitants, and at the same time it has been
undermining all the efforts aimed at bringing about a just
solution to the Namibian problem in accordance with the
will and aspirations of the people of that country.

25. South Africa should have learnt by now that its violent
tactics cannot shake the determination of the African
States, in particular the front-line States, to continue to
support the cause of freedom and liberation in southern
Africa. This determination rests on their unshakeable commitment to the principles of the Charter and to the justice of

32. Its criminal actions clearly demonstrate ‘that South
Africa is stubbornly pursuing one objective only in
Namibia: the creation of conditions for imposing upon the
Namibian people a neocolonialist solution by carrying out
a so-called internal settlement. In order to achieve this, the
racists have been attempting to bring to bear brutality and
3

‘.,

terror tactics on Namibian patriots, headed by SWAPO,
and have been trying to force neighbouring African States
to give up their support for the just struggle of the people of
Namibia for total freedom and genuine independence.

.

37. The United Nations should no longer permit the
South African racists constantly to defy international
public opinion. We must take measures that would actually
force the South African authorities to comply with United
Nations decisions to assure the Namibian people of the
earliest possible independence and put an end to the
repeated acts of aggression against sovereign African
States. It is clear that mere condemnations by the Security
Council of the South African racists’acts of aggression have
long been inadequate.

33. It is the South African racists, and they alone; who
have been threatening international efforts to bring about a
peaceful settlement of the Namibian problem. It is no accident that the most recent acts of aggression by the Pretoria
r&me have coincided with the racists making a number of
arrogant demands with regard to the settlement plan for the
Namibian problem, demands which are aimed at ensuring
that the proposed United Nations operation in Namibia will
be carried out exclusively on terms advantageous to the
Pretoria regime and to the traitors connected with the
Turnhalle group.

38. That is why the Czechoslovak delegation once again
wishes to express its unreserved support for the demands
that the Council should take effective measures against the
South African racists, including sanctions under Chapter
VII of the Charter. These demands are contained in the
numerous decisions of the General Assembly which were
supported by the overwhelming majority of Members of the
Organization. Furthermore, we are under the obligation to
do this under resolution 428 (1978), in which the Council
decides to

34. The schemes of the racists must be decisively repudiated. Any further talks with the South African Republic
can be fruitful only if they are used to exert the necessary
pressure on the Pretoria r&gime and prevail upon it to agree
unconditionally with the settlement in Namibia on the basis
of the relevant decisions of the Security Council. We cannot
for a moment permit these talks to be abused for the purpose of exerting pressure on SWAP0 and the front-line
African States in order to prevail upon them to make
further concessions to the arrogant demands of the occupiers from Pretoria. At the same time, in view of the constant attempts by the South African regime to change or
place their own private interpretation upon the provisions
of a Namibian settlement, we find entirely justified and
legitimate the demands that the special reports of the
Secretary-General presented for the approval of the Council should contain all the specific provisions affecting the
implementation of the proposed United Nations operation
in Namibia.

“meet again in the event of further acts of violation of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s
Republic of Angola by the South African racist regime in
order to consider the adoption of more effective measures, in accordance with the appropriate provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations, including Chapter
VII thereof”.
39. In the communiqut
issued by the Miniitry of
Defence of the People’s Republic of Angola, issued in
document S/13177, the words of the President of
Angola, Mr. Agostinho Neto, are recalled, and I quote:
‘I.. . the imperialists can come with their planes, their
tanks, their cannons and their warships, but they will not
be able to prevent our heroic people from fulfilling their
sacred internationalist duty towards the peoples of
Namibia, Zimbabwe and South Africa, to whom we
once again reiterate our militant solidarity. Let them
come from where they may, how they may-the racists
and their overlords will run into the impenetrable barrier
of the determination of an Angolan people ready to
defend its liberty, the integrity of its fatherland and
socialism”.

35. The question of the acts of aggression by the Pretoria
regime against neighbouring African States has already
been frequently discussed in the Security Council. As a
result of the direct connivance with that regime by certain
Western circles which have vested interests in preserving
their economic, political and strategic positions in southern
Africa, the Council has so far found itself unable to take
effective measures against the South African r&ime. The
active support of the racist r&ime by certain Western countries is the reason for the virtual inaction of international
bodies and has hindered adoption of genuinely effective
measures against the racists. Similarly, as has often been
repeated and stressed by African representatives, these
countries bear quite a large share of the responsibility for
the dangerous situation existing in southern Africa, which is
fraught with the most serious consequences both for the
people of Namibia and for the independent development of
the liberation countries of Africa. At the same time, the
policy of betrayal practised by the Maoists with regard to
the national liberation struggle of the peoples of Africa, as
we have noticed, for example, in Angola, pursues the same
goal.

40. In their just, heroic struggle, the people of Angola are
not alone: they are supported by the progressive forces of
the whole world, including the people of the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic. Indeed, my country has always consistently favoured and supported the struggle of the African
peoples against colonialism, racism and upmheid and for
freedom and national independence. We shall continue to
do so.
41. Mr. KAISER (Bangladesh): Bangladesh has strongly
supported the request of the Government of Angola to
convene this urgent meeting of the Council to consider acts
of aggression launched by South Africa against the People’s
Republic of Angola. We have done so to express our indignation and condemnation of these attacks which violate the
most rudimentary principles of international law respecting
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States.

36. The threat to peace and security that exists in the
south-western part of Africa can be eliminated only if a just
solution to the problem of Namibia is ensured. And such a
solution can be achieved only on the basis of strict compliance with the relevant resolutions of theGeneral Assembly and the Security Council.

42. The extent of South Africa’s aggressive actions is
spelled out unambiguously in the communiqub issued by
4

-

I

I

the Angolan Ministry of Defence and elaborated in the*
statement of the representative of Angola [213&k meez&I/.
South Africa itself has also blatantly admitted their
execution. This is an incontrovertible .fact. South Africa’s
distorted motives cannot in any way justify its illegal
actions, which have resulted in indiscriminate killing and
wounding of innocent civilians and significant damage and
destruction to Angolan property.

African enmity, the immediate and overt reason for attack
was to decimate Namibian patriots, many of whom have
found refuge in Angola, and to frustrate the purpose of their
long struggle for liberation and selfdetermination.
49. For over a year South Africa has played the game of
co-operation in international efforts to effect a genuine, free
and democratic transition to independence in Namibia
under United Nations supervision and control. Having
failed in its attempts to exercise direct control over that
Territory, South Africa’s intent has been to fashion a solution that would perpetuate its indirect rule with the added
incentive of securing international legitimacy. To achieve
that end, the primary objective has been to negate and
exclude the presence and influence of SWAPO, recognized
by the overwhelming majority of nations of the world as the’
sole and legitimate representative of the Namibian people.

43. These attacks on Angola are not new. Previous
speakers have vividly alluded to past acts of aggression
perpetrated by South Africa on Angola inimical to its very
emergence as a sovereign State and, thereafter, to the continued viability and consolidation of its political independence. The Council itself, by its resolution 428 (1978),
strongly condemned Pretoria for acts of aggression committed against Angola and warned that further aggression
could lead to adoption of enforcement measures under
Chapter VII of the Charter.

50. Maximum concessions were extracted: South Africa’s
illegal presence in Namibia was ignored defacro; the status
of Walvis Bay left in abeyance; a South African Administrator-General exercising significant jurisdiction and powers was installed; the right of South Africa to .maintain a
significant military presence was accepted; its retention of
powers over law and order and policing functions, even
during the transition period, acknowledged; enforced registration of voters within South West Africa preceded a socalled internal election, despite international condemnation
and its rejection as null and void. Nevertheless, there has
now emerged a puppet South West African representative
element recognized by South Africa ‘as a veritable “national” presence-whose wishes South Africa must take into
account. Having done all in its power to circumscribe,
contain and dilute any possible role for SWAP0 in the
future of Namibia, .one would have -thought South Africa
would be content to let the long-awaited process towards
transition begin.

44. Nor have these acts been restricted to Angola: they
have been perpetrated on all the front-line States. The representative of Zambia, Ambassador Paul Lusaka, in his statement yesterday /ibid./, referred to attacks against Zambian
sovereignty only last week, when South African troops
terrorized and tortured innocent villagers, and also planted
line-mines and set up road blocks. The resulting toll was
four dead and five wounded, all civilians. Moreover, these
attacks were preceded two weeks ago by aerial bombardment and raids which killed 9 innocent Zambians and
wounded 14 others.
45. Twelve days ago the Council adopted resolution 445
(1979) strongly condemning the racist minority r&me of
Ian Smith for committing acts of aggression against
Angola, Mozambique and Zambia. It did not escape the
Council’s notice during the debate that acts against distant
Angola involved something more than purely white RhodeSian action. South Africa’s complicity and collusion werean
ever-present consideration.

5 1. Not SO. South Africa does not believe merely in hedging its bets, it is determined to eliminate the least shadow of
a threat. Thus the rejection of the latest report of the
Secretary-General, dated 26 February /S/13120], the de+
picable attack on his impartiality and the quibbling over
inconsequential details regarding modalities for initiating
the transition process, constitute sufficient camouflage to
launch unprovoked attacks against Angola in order to rain
death and destruction on Namibians and Angolans alike.

46. These attacks clearly are not isolated instances. They
are not simple reprisals in the face of alleged provocations.
They are not spontaneous counteractions. They appear to
form part of a larger design, a persistent, premeditated
pattern of action executed in accordance with a calculated
plan of escalating aggression. The indications are obvious
and manifold, the timing precise and the objectives transparent.

52. The position of Bangladesh on the proximity talks is
unequivocal. We have supported the initiative to clear the
ground for a decisive breakthrough on the Namibian settlement issue. It is our understanding, however, that the latest
report of the Secretary-General represents the maximum
degree of compromise and that his proposals can be neither
diluted nor revised. The purpose of these talks must be
directed at securing South African realization and acceptance of this fact and at pinpointing the consequences of its
refusal to accept the proposals. It cannot be forgotten
that in law South Africa has no standing in Namibia. Its
presence there is illegal. Its position can in no way be
equated to the legitimate status of SWAP0 as the sole
representative of the people of Namibia. South Africa, as
the representative of Zambia unequivocally stated, “is not
the custodian of the interests of the Namibian people and
cannot be the voice through which they will air their aspirations” [213Oth meeting, para. 321.

47. The crux of the matter, the central problem in this
region around which all other problems revolve, is the
determination of the white minority settler regimes to maintain their privileged status quo at any cost. The front-line
States have demonstrated conspicuous restraint and extended maximum co-operation by seizing all initiatives for a
peaceful settlement in Rhodesia which could lead to an
independent Zimbabwe in accordance with fundamental
principles universally accepted by the international community. Despite these efforts, the ‘end result was impasse
and circumvention. The dateline for the sham. elections,
already declared null and void and invalid and illegal by the
Council, now looms large.
48. The problem of Namibia is integrally connected to the
latest acts of aggression launched on Angola by South
Africa. While Angola remains a permanent target of South
5

.

53. Hope for a peaceful settlement in Rhodesia, as in
Namibia, seems to be receding despite the optimism generated a year ago. The racist minority r6gimes in southern
Africa have demonstrated only bad faith. In their terminology, co-operation simply stands for the maintenance of
white supremacy directly, or indirectly through puppet
regimes. Meanwhile, they have sought to bolster their position through armed provocation against front-line African
States in an attempt to intimidate them and nullify their
conrribution, ‘The result has been an escalation of armed
attacks which have undermined all approaches for a peaceful solution and have given rise to grave threats to peace and
security.

60. But this same reflection leads us to think that the
crimes such as those perpetrated in the implacable raids
against Angola and Zambia might be governed by another
psychological factor. Here one could apply what the
Secretary-General said in one of his oral reports, revealing
so much understanding of human nature and the inevitable
course of history, about the syndrome of distrust within the
Pretoria Government. Its intransigence and rebellion have
created for it a grave crisis of anguish and isolation which
makes it see attacking enemies even in its own shadow.

54. Bangladesh believes that the Security Council must
condemn the racist regime of South Africa for its continuing aggression against all front-line States and, in particular,.
Angola. The time has come for the Council to move beyond
mere condemnation and to consider further measures,
including those under appropriate provisions of the Charter. There is an imperative need also to render moral and
material assistance to the front-line States to enable them to
maintain their resistance against South African aggression
and to support the liberation struggle. The Council must
thereby demonstrate forcefully that the process towards
peace in southern Africa cannot be wilfully impeded by
South Africa.

61, South Africa knows that it is out in the cold and alone.
With its guilty conscience, isolation becomes a fence and,
being fenced in, it feels threatened on all sides. It is an
obsession which has a grain of truth, and we should bear it
in mind so that the resolution which will contain the Council’s decisions will not neglect the inclusion of a new appeal
to the Government of Pretoria. The Council must again
appeal to it to abandon its suicidal arrogance bordering on
paranoia and bear in mind that there is but one way to
redemption from the responsibility which overwhelms it.
That is the way offered to it in the proposals of the Western
Powers, which SWAP0 has accepted, thus eloquentlyproving its moderation and spirit of peace.

55. In conclusion, I wish to reaf%rn my Government’s
full suppo, t for the just struggle of the oppressed peoples of
Namibia and Rhodesia for national liberation and genuine
independence and our firm solidarity and support for all the
front-line States in their determined sacrifices to aid their
cause.

62. It is in the light of these brief reflections that my
delegation believes that the draft resolution setting down
our concerns should be as concise and pragmatic as possible. To this end, it should be neither extensive nor repetitious, since, in the case of the suffering inflicted on the
people of Angola, we find all the characteristics of arrogance and treachery of past deeds, which have already met
with the unanimous repudiation of the international community. Let us avoid what has become common and routine in United Nations resolutions: the rhetoric of recrimination, the punitive action which would appear to have no
other purpose than self-indulgence, thus diluting its substantive effect in mere words which do not solve anything. It
is not a matter of condoning abuses and injustices by silencing truth. It is a matter of eradicating evils by applying a,
pragmatic therapy, even though the audible resonance with
which we at times try to attenuate our frustrations is absent.
Let us avoid the rhetoric of injury, the daily exercise of
which clouds the immediate perspectives, confuses minds
and makes the paths to peace less accessible.

56. Mr. PUENTES

IBANEZ

plainable intention to bring its series of aggressive acts to
total war. And this we are reluctant to believe.

(Bolivia) (interpretation

porn Spanish): The delegation of Bolivia wishes to express

its most energetic condemnation of the attacks being perpetrated by the South African armed forces against the frontline States. The complaint by the Government of Angola
opens up a new and painful chapter in the already long
history of misdeeds by the Government of Pretoria. My
Government supports the Government of Angola and
expresses to it its most sincere solidarity.
57. As for the attacks themselves, it would seem that in
South Africa there is a deliberate intent to place obstacles in
our path and to prevent the success of the negotiations
being so laboriously carried out with the assistance of the
Secretary-General and the Western Powers members of the
Security Council which formulated the proposals contained
in document S/12636 of 10 April 1978.

63. To attain this objective, we believe the action of the
Council could be summarized as follows:
--Fist, to condemn the acts of violence committed by
South Africa against the populations of Angola in all their
gravity.

58. Aggression against Angolan populations is from every
point of view reprehensible. It runs counter to,the alleged
good faith of the Pretoria Government, which says that it is
co-operating in the search for negotiated formulas but at the
same time does not hesitate to add new factors of concern
by using its well-supplied arsenal against defenceless populations in neighbouring countries.

-Secondlv. to make a final anneal to the Pretoria
Govemmenito refrain from any a; of provocation which
might be interpreted as yet another mockery and defiance of
not only the authority of the Council but also the mediating
efforts of the Western Powers and the relevant resolutions,
which we unhesitatingly consider to be the final choice for
the peacefui transition of South Africa to legitimacy.’

59. Thus the attitude of South Africa is inconsistent. Its
Government cannot but be aware that the measures that it
has so far used have created for it an image which is not at
all enviable and have led to its isolation in the international
community. To add yet new reasons for grievance to those
already accumulated can only be interpreted as’an unex-

-Thirdly, to reatlirm our confidence in the co-operation
of the Secretary-General and to encourage the efforts .at
persuasion of the Western Powers, which are determined to
6.

tide of revolution of the national liberation movements in
southern Africa is rising, The armed struggles and mass
movements of the peoples of Zimbabwe, Namibia and
Azania to oppose racist reactionary rule and to win
national liberation are growing and developing in depth.
The African countries and all justice-upholding countries
the world over are unanimous in strongly demanding an
immediate end to South Africa’s illegal occupation of
Namibia and the immediate accession to independence by
the Namibian people. Beset with troubles at home and
abroad, the South African racist regime finds the going ever
more difficult. History testifies to the fact that no mactionary force will step down from the state of history of its own
accord, and the South African reactionary r&ime will be no
exception. In order to save itself from its’doom, the reactionary regime, at the end of its tether, is stepping up its counterrevolutionary dual tactics. On the one hand, it is staging the
political fraud of an”lntemal settlement** of Namibia, hold.ing sham elections to implant puppets there. On the other
hand, it is intensifying its armed suppression,.and has even
taken the perilous path of launching armed invasions of the
neighbouring African sovereign States. However, its perverse course can neither crush the heroic peoples of southem Africa, nor intimidate the justice-upholding front-line
States. On the contrary, it can only arouse the peoples of
Namibia, Azania,‘Zimbabwe and the other African peoples
to rise against their common enemy and engage in ever
greater struggles, thereby hastening the downfall of the
pernicious racist regime.

remove the last outstanding barriers for South Africa to
agree to a prompt application of their proposals. As for the
rest, we remain optimistic and we think that the process of
the liberation of Namibia and Zimbabwe will attain its
objective and that the odious system of apartheid will
shortly be forever buried in opprobrium. Finally, it is universally held that the total liberation of these last two bastions of colonialism will clear the path for peace .and
development in southern Africa.
64. Before concluding, I should like to say that the
Government and the people of Bolivia fervently hope that
we shall shortly see an end to the bloody price which the
peoples of Namibia and Zimbabwe are paying for their
freedom, and that hatred will cease to dim the halo of joy
which we all hope will crown the birth of these future States.
65. Mr. LA1 Ya-Ii (China) (interpretation from Chinese):
At the beginning of this month, the Security Council considered the question of the series of frenzied armed attacks
on and invasions of the African front-line States by the
Smith racist regime in Rhodesia. In recent days, the Botha
racist authorities in South Africa also dispatched aircraft
and troops to launch armed attacks on Angola, Zambia and
other African front-line States. It is reported that, within the
short space of eight days, from 6 to 13 March, the South
African racist authorities carried out armed invasions of
Angola on eight occasions. On 14 March, they sent large
numbers of aircraft to bomb Kahama, in the province of
Cunene, and the Catengue area, in the province of Benguela. These invasions and attacks have seriously infringed
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola and other
front-line States, and have brought inestimable loss to the
lives and property of the peoples there. This is yet another
sanguinary crime committed by the South African Botha
racist r&me against the African peoples. The Chinese
Government and people express the utmost indignation
and strongest condemnation at this.

68. While the racist authorities are puttingup a last-ditch
fight, the super:Powers. which are external forces in the
area, have also stepped up their rivalry in Africa. They are
actively engaged in interfering in the liberation struggles of
southern Africa to fish in troubled waters, therefore throwing the African continent into greater turbulence. However,
neither the racists’ dying kicks nor the super-Powers* foul
deeds can stem the southern African peoples’ forward
march.

66. The South African racist r&me and its internal and
external policies are a scourge on the African people and
constitute a grave threat to world peace and international
security. Over a long period, the South African racist regime
has consistently spumed the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations. At home, it practises a Fascist tyranny,
carrying out inhuman policies of apartheid and racial discrimination. Abroad, it colludes with the Rhodesian Smith
racist regime to suppress the national liberation struggles of
the peoples of southern Africa, ceaselessly carrying’ out
armed provocations and military invasions against neighbouring African States and posing a serious threat to
their independence and security. The South African racist
r&me has illegally occupied Namibia for a long time. It has
also resorted to various schemes and stratagems to resist
any measure adopted by the United Nations aimed at putting an end to its illegal occupation. It is impossible to keep
count of the South African racist authorities’ crimes. It is
entirely legitimate for the African countries to demand that
the Security Council should condemn South Africa and
adopt effective measures to check its acts of aggression. This
just demand of the African countries has the Chinese delegation’s firm support.

69. The Chinese Government and people firmly support
the just struggles of the peoples of Azania, Namibia and
Zimbabwe against imperialism, colonialism and racism.
We firmly support the just struggle of the African front-line
States to repulse the armed provocations and aggression of
the South African racist authorities. The Chinese Govemment has consistently maintained that the racist rule of
South Africa and Rhodesia must be terminated, that Zimbabwe and Namibia must achieve genuine national independence free from outside intervention and on the basis of
territorial integrity and unity; South Africa’s system of
racial discrimination and upqrtheid must be smashed, all
outside intervention must be stopped. We are convinced
that, although the struggle is complex and the path tortuous, so long as the peoples of southern Africa and of the
entire African continent heighten their vigilance and foil the
schemes and sabotage of the racists and outside forces,
uphold unity and persevere in struggle, with the support of
the world’s people, they will surely win final victory in their
struggle for national independence and liberation.
70. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the next speaker, the
Vice-President of the South West Africa People’s Organization, Mr. Mishake Muyongo.

67. The South African racist r&ime’s obstinacy and
arrogance in no way prove its strength, but its essential
weakness. ‘Fragile internally while keeping a ferocious
front, it is putting up a death-bed struggle. At present, the

71. Mr. MUYONGO: Mr. President, I wish to apoiogize
for not having been present in the Council chamber
7

to the Namibian problem. It is doing everything in its power
to wreck the efforts to secure implementation of the United
Nations plan for Namibia.

throughout this meeting. My colleagues and I were engaged
in the proximity talks held outside this building.
72. It is an honour’which we assume with pleasure to be
accorded the privilege once again of addressing the Security
Council. We thank the representatives of Gabon, Nigeria
and Zambia for having sponsored our appearance before
the Council.

80. A year ago this august body met to condemn a similar
premeditated invasion of Angola by the same racist South
African troops who savagely, brutally and murderously
massacred women, children, elderly and bed-ridden Namibians at Kassinga. That attack, like the latest ones, came at a’
time when SWAP0 and the international community were
on the verge of working out final details for the implementation of United Nations supervised and controlled elections.

73. Mr. President, it is also with a senseofsatisfaction that
we acknowledge your assumption ofthe Presidency of the
Council for the month of March. It is more than a mere
coincidence that a representative of Nigeria, a country
which has now courageously assumed its role of leadership
in African affairs, especially in regard to the struggle for
liberation in southern Africa, should preside over the deliberations of the Security Council when it is seized of the
complaint by the People’s Repubhc of Angola resulting
from the unprovoked, armed invasion of its territory by the
military forces of racist South Africa.

81. Furthermore, the Security Council is aware that racist
South Africa contrived and conducted bogus elections in
‘Namibia during the month of December of last year. The
intentions of those bogus elections were the same as those of
the Kassinga massacre and the latest series of military violations of Angolan and Zambian territories and air space. The
bogus elections were also aimed at imposing on the
Namibian people Pretoria’s own chosen Turnhalle stooges
and renegades.

74. We are sure that the deliberations of the Council will
culminate in a decision that will once and for all prevent the
Fascist fanatics of Pretoria from continuing to carry out
murderous acts and attacks against the Angolan people and
Namibians who are enjoying political asylum in that
country.

82. South Africa is perpetrating acts of aggression and
military attacks against neighbouring African States on the
pretext of protecting the lives and property of the people of
Namibia. That is obviously wrong and insulting to the
heroic Namibian people and must be rejected with contempt. South Africa’s continued illegal occupation of
Namibia has no other aim than to protect Pretoria’s colonial interest; as such, the latter has no political or moral
right to speak on behalf of the very people it oppresses. In
carrying out its acts of aggression against Zambia and
Angola and also in conducting its massacre against the
Namibian civilian population in those countries, South
Africa tries to hide its ugly face behind the words of its
stooges. By virtue of their shameless collaboration with the
enemy in its massacring of Namibians, the puppets who are
now being paraded in the corridors around here as representatives of the Namibian people are equalIy guilty of these
heinous crimes and their hands are dripping with the blood
of the Namibian patriots.

75. The Council has listened to 13 speakers since it began
the consideration of the complaint launched by Ambassador Elisio de Figueiredo, the Permanent Representative of
the People’s Republic of Angola to the United Nations,
regarding the recent military attacks against his country.
76. It is a well-known fact that since its achievement of
independence under the leadership of MPLA /Movimento
Popular de Liberta@io de Angola], Angola has been repeatedly subjected to military attacks, political and economic
sabotage by the racist regime of South Africa and its imperialist allies. Pretoria has never reconcileditselfto the reality
of a revolutionary People’s Republic of Angola, which is
committed to the liberation struggle of the peoples of
Namibia, Zimbabwe and South Africa.

83. I should like on this occasion to reaflirm our militant
and fratemai solidarity with the heroic people of Angola
and Zambia under the leadership of the MPLA-Workers’
Party and UNIP [United National Independence Party],
.sspectively, for the priceless sacrifices that they are making
in support of the cause of the liberation of our people. The
sacrifices that they are making will for ever remain fresh in
our memories.

77. Moreover, in spite of its many public pronouncements
and pretences that it is prepared to accept the Namibian
people’s demands for genuine independence, Pretoria has
absolutely no intention of abandoning its control over our
country. In tine with its imperialist and neocolonial designs
in Africa, Pretoria wants to keep Namibia and use it as a
neocolony under a puppet administration and as a springboard for its aggressive military attacks against independent African States.

84. We pledge our renewed commitment to co-operate
with the peoples of Angola and Zambia and other front-line
States in defence of their territorial integrity and national
security and further to ensure the Namibian people’s final
victory over colonialism, imperialism and the forces of
death and darkness.

78. Since it is the fundamental policy objective of racist
South Africa to undermine and destabilize Angola and
other front-line States, and also to deny the Namibian
people the opportunity to achieve genuine independence
under the auspices of the United Nations, Pretorialaunched
its Iatest series of attacks into Angola and Zambia in order
to sabotage the efforts of the international community to
accelerate the decolonization process leading to genuine
independence in Namibia.

85. In conclusion, we should like to reiterate before this
august body that no amount of intimidation and harassment will deter us in our noble struggle to liberate OUT
beloved fatherland.
86. As a movement fighting’for a just and noble cause, we
are assured of continued and increased support and assistance from anti-imperialist countries and peoples. We also

79. These premeditated attacks, coming as they do at the
time when proximity talks are being held, are an ample
proof that South Africa does not want a negotiated solution
8

:: : -

‘.

appeal to all the progressive and peace-ioving forces of the
world to provide us with all the concrete material assistance
required to prosecute this struggle to its logical conclusion.
In the same vein, we appeal to the entire international
community to extend support and assistance to the People’s
Republic of Angola and the Republic of Zambia so as to
enable them effectively to defend their sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

manent strategic strongholds, are endeavouring to jeopaidize all that breathes, works and fights for freedom and
independence, all that is aspiring towards free cooperation
among States and peoples.
92. At this point it is necessary to stress once again the
links connecting the aggressive activities of racist regimes.
The synchronized and well-prepared armed attacks of the
Pretoria and Salisbury regimes against Angola, Zambia,
Botswana and Mozambique, which are the expression of a
deliberate and elaborate plan of aggression against independent African countries, constitute an attempt, on the
one hand, to destabilize those countries and, on the other, to
perpetuate domination and exploitation in the whole region
of southern Africa, primarily in Zimbabwe and Namibia, to
inhibit the liberation struggle for genuine independence
under the leadership of SWAP0 and the Patriotic Front as
the only legitimate representatives of the peoples of their
countries, and to break up the unity and solidarity of African countries and weaken international solidarity with and
support for the struggle against the oppressive regimes of
aparrheid, racism and racial discrimination.

87. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
88. Mr. KOMATINA
(Yugoslavia): I wish to thank the
Security Council for again giving me the opportunity to
express my country’s views at yet another serious moment
for world peace and security.
89. Rare are the months when the Council has been called
upon to deal with so many grave problems at the same time.
This, in itself, testifies to the seriousness of the situation in
which we find ourselves and to the responsibilities with
which all of us are confronted. This makes the Council’s
task of finding the right answers and solutions even more
urgent and complex.

93. We are also faced with provocation aimed at undermining all the efforts that the international community has
been exerting so far with a view to enabling the peoples of
Zimbabwe, Namibia and South Africa to realize their fundamental human rights and their inalienable right to freedom and independence. Finally, what is in question is no
longer individual and isolated casesof State terrorism, but
major military operations involving all branches of the
armed forces and a vast amount of war mattfriel. We are
confronted with an overt military campaign whose consequences cannot be visualized at the present moment.

90. Two weeks ago we spoke in a debate dealing with
identical questions concerned with the negative develop
ment of the situation in and regarding Southern Rhodesia.
Today we are dealing with a similar problem having the
same roots and consequences, that is, South Africa’s aggression against the People’s Republic of Angola. Actually
identical problems are involved: threats to the freedom,
independence and security of sovereign African countries,
particularly in southern Africa, where the racist regimes are
maintaining a real state of war against all the neighbouring
countries and have imposed on the peoples of Zimbabwe,
Namibia and South Africa a system of terror and oppression unheard of in modem times; an attack against
authentic national forces tending towards the liberation of
southern Africa from colonial and racial domination; an
interventionism that South Africa is no longer trying to
conceal under a cloak of legitimacy, in the name of its own
allegedly endangered security, endeavouring, rather, to
obtain broader international support for it by invokmg the
ghost of rhe cold war and to “intemationalize” thereby the
“defence” of racist regimes.

94. The present as well as all past attempts by colonialist
forces to break the back of the liberation struggle in southem Africa have proved to be futile, because experience has
clearly shown that nothing can break the will of a people to
fight for its freedom, if it has a clear perception of the
objectives it wishes to achieve, if it pursues an independent
course and if its struggle is integrated into the general tight
for all-round emancipation, to which all the peoples of the
world aspire today. Comtemporary history provides endless proof to that effect. Let us take only the liberation
struggle of the Angolan people, which lasted longer than
any other struggle in Africa. There are few better examples
in modern history of the fact that no aggression, conspiracy
or terror can suppress such a long rebellion, nor deflect it
from its basic objective of achieving the independence of the
country, as the sole way of ensuring free national and social
development.

91. Those who would be inclined to think along those
lines even for a single moment should be reminded of the
aggression committed against independent Angola in 1975,
aggression whose object was not only the so-called destruction of the basesof liberation movements in Angola but also
the conquest of Luanda and. the overthrow of the legal
Government of Agostinho Neto. Let us also remember the
recent bombing of refugee camps, villages, the Calueque
Dam, the burnt huts and frightened faces of women and
children. In actual fact, the objective of the racist regime is
not to destroy the camps of liberation forces but to destabilize an L‘unpleasant” neighbour, a champion of the idea of
liberation. Both the attacks against Mozambique and Zambia yesterday, and against Angola today, are the result of a
permanent situation of war in southern Africa, a situation
due to the existence of racist regimes and threatening world
peace and security. Those neo-Nazi regimes, in collaboration with the forces that are extracting huge profits from the
exploitation of southern Africa or are trying to secure per-

95. My delegation is taking part in this debate not so
much for the purpose of saying anything that is not already
known. This problem, as well as similar ones, has been
repeatedly debated in the world Organization, and at gatherings of African countries within the non-aligned movement, so that there is actually nothing that should not be
clear in this case.
96. We are taking the floor, in the first place, to condemn
energetically, -once again, the aggression against African
countries and peoples perpetrated by the racist regimes of
southern Africa and, in particular, the most recent aggression against non-aligned Angola, whose freedom and independence constitute a solid basis for the liberation struggle
9

threaten peace and security in the region as well as in the
rest of the world” fUl318.5, annex para. 76J.

in southern Africa and whose people have never shrunk
from making sacrifices both for their own liberation and for
the liberation of Namibia and Zimbabwe.

101. At their meeting at Maputo, the non-aligned countries called for the lending of economic, financial and
military assistance to the front-line States with a view to
strengthening their defence capabilities, enabling them to
resist successfully continuing armed aggression and the
attempts made by the racist regimes to destabilize their
internal development. That is also the duty of all the States
Members of the United Nations.

97. Secondly, we wish to reaffirm our solidarity with
Angola and, through it, with all the liberation forces in
southern Africa. My country is linked to Angola by strong
ties of friendship and solidarity engendered and forged at
the height of the liberation struggle of the Angolan people
and consolidated and substantively enriched through peaceful and equal co-operation during the last few years, both in
bilateral relations and in co-operation within the framework of the non-aligned movement.

102. For the non-aligned countries, the anti-colonial
struggle and decolonization have never been an end in
themselves, but have always meant a continuation of efforts
to consolidate and safeguard independence, to free it from
all forms of dependence. Simultaneously, support for the
liberation struggle of peoples against colonialism, foreign
domination and aggression not only has been elevated to
the level of a moral obligation but has also become a basic
principle of international relations, in the same way as the
continuation of colonialism, foreign occupation and intervention have been condemned as acts of aggression contrary to the elementary norms governing relations among
sovereign States. It is for that reason that non-aligned policy
has been able to provide the broadest and most solid
foundation for the achievement and strengthening of the
genuine independence of all countries.

98. Thirdly, we wish to lay stress once again on the
dangers emanating from the existence of racism and on its
connexion with imperialist forces, which make its existence
possible, and to emphasize the need for the rapid elimination of this system of slavery and humiliation of the human
person. In this connexion I wish to point to the grave
responsibility of countries which continue to maintain political, diplomatic, economic and military ties with the racist
regimes and to call upon them to get actively involved in
preventing the rampaging of racism and to contribute to
the elimination of this constant threat to world peace and
security and to the elementary freedoms of nations, countries and peoples-that being the very reason for which the
United Nations was founded and for which it exists.

103. The aggressive acts of southern African regimes and
their co-ordinated armed attacks against the front-line
States have been condemned, in particular, in the statements of the African Group and the United Nations
Council for Namibia, which have drawn attention to the
dangers arising out of the continued deterioration of the
situation in southern Africa. The Secretary-General,
Mr. Kurt Waldheim, has himself also expressed deep
concern at the military actions taking place at a time when
efforts for a peaceful settlement of the question of Namibia
are being made.

99. Finally, my delegation wishesto draw the attention of
the Security Council to the fact that the present aggression
by the racist South African regime against Angola is not a
mere episode, but amounts to systematic threatening of the
territorial integrity of a sovereign country, a State Member
of the United Nations, by the militarist apparatus of the
racist regime. It is absurd, and at the same time tragic, that
this should occur at a time when efforts are being exerted
towards a peaceful settlement of the problem of Namibia.
The response of the racist regime in Pretoria to these efforts,
taking the form of ruthless aggression against the country
that has made a decisive contribution to the creation of
conditions in which the United Nations could fulfil its role
as protagonist of a peaceful settlement, constitutes a challenge to the whole international community. Let us hope
that this will have a sobering effect on all international
factors, and that all will join in exerting indispensable pressure on South Africa with a view to compelling it to comply
with the decisions of the United Nations.

104. Consequently, we think that the Security Council
must react unequivocally, resolutely and promptly against
the newest acts of aggression perpetrated by the regimes at
Pretoria and Salisbury. The decision taken at the end of the
current debate must be in harmony with the unanimous
desire of almost the whole of the international community.
Mere condemnations are no longer sufIicient, as the racist
regimes do not abide by moral norms and standards. It is
also indispensable to impose sanctions under Chapter VII
of the Charter and to implement them consistently. Failure
to take such a decision, or disapproval of it, at this moment
and in this forum could have far-reaching negative consequences for the development of the situation in the region
and beyond.

100. The Security Council must take action against such
behaviour on the part of South Africa, in accordance with
the Charter and its mandate to safeguard peace and
security. Such action would enjoy the broad .support of
the international community, as shown by the decisions
adopted by all the gatherings of non-aligned countries,
including the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Non-Aligned Countries held at Belgrade in July 1978 and
the Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of
Non-Aligned Countries held at Maputo. Both gatherings
emphasized the imperative need for all States Members of
the United Nations, and in particular members of the
Security Council,

105. My country will lend its whole-hearted support to
such decisions, in the same way as it will lend its support
both to Angola and to the other front-line States &I- the
defence of their national independence. We have always
considered that the liquidation of the system of racism and
colonialism in southern Africa is a question of the highest
priority, just as we believe that any expansion of the zone of
freedom and independence in the world is one of the prerequisites of the freedom and independence of every people
and a decisive contribution to peace and security in general.

“to undertake effective measures, taking into consideration all relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular Chapter VII, to deal decisively
with the aggressive actions of the racist regimes which
10

106. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Benin. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make a statement.

supreme sacrifice of thousands of Angolans who have died
for the total liberation of their beloved country. The Angolans are determined to fight to the last man for their independence, which they have won at such a high cost. They
have often shown their firm determination. The People’s
Republic of Benin firmly and militantly supports this struggle, with which it expressesits entire solidarity. The Angolan complaint now before the Council has our total support
and is entirely justified.

107. Mr. HOUNGAVOU
(Benin) (interpretation from
French): The delegation of the People’s Republic of Benin is
happy once again to have been invited to participate in this
debate over which you, Mr. President, are presiding with so
much talent. I should like to thank you for that.
108. The Security Council is again-and I am sure it will
not be the last time-considering a caseof aggression by the
colonialist and racist r&me of South Africa. Ever since its
foundation in 1975, the young People’s Republic of Angola
has been the prime target of the colonialists, racists and
militarists of South Africa. To this very day there have been
acts of aggression, invasions, armed raids and violations of
the territory and air space of Angola by reconnaissance
aircraft of Western manufacture, amounting to hundreds of
incidents, and there exist in the region permanent risks of
war with the possibility of the extension of hostilities.

114. The white Republic of South Africa-racist, colonialist and anti-black regime that it is-along with the
system it has constructed, apartheid and its determination
to play a great-Power role and dictate to African States, is
seeking to mislead international public opinion with regard
to the question of the decolonization of Southern Rhodesia
and, principally, the question of the decolonization of
Namibia.
115. My delegation has had many occasions to denounce
the tremendous confidence trick being played with regard
to the question of the decolonization of Namibia. The racist
leaders of Pretoria, who know no scruples, often go back on
what they have said or promised, leaving a trail of selfcontradiction behind them. Thousands of pages of documents published by the United Nations make that amply
clear, but I shall not tax the Council on that score.

109. The so-called Republic of South Africa, white in
colaur, with its white institutions, is a foreign element on
our continent. Furthermore, its backward ideology, the
background of which is the defence of Western and supposedly Christian civilization in our continent, has absolutely nothing in common with the brilliant African
civilizations, which are profoundly humane. Our ancestral
customs have nothing in common with an anti-black racist
ideology.

116. The Namibian affair, as it has been conducted, and
as it is understood by thePretoria racists, remains confused,
and any African State, no matter how “moderate” it may
be, finds it dificult to follow the white racist adventurers of
Pretoria in their madness, military adventures and acts of
aggression throughout Africa.

110. The white Republic of South Africa, the racist
Republic of South Africa, makes it absolutely clear by its
militarist and belligerent activities against the People’s
Republic of Angola today, and against other African countries tomorrow, that it is a foreign entity, a hideous excrescence, which has never been accepted and will never be
accepted by an independent Africa. We can understand
how irritating this total repudiation is, but it will grow with
every succeeding African generation. The struggle of the
whole of Africa for its survival against this foreign entity,
which is rejected in every part of Africa, will only become
fiercer, and the protectors of that pernicious, oppressive
and aggressive regime should be well aware of that.

117. What is the meaning today of these armed attacks
and the constant threat posed by Pretoria to the People’s
Republic of Angola and Zambia, to SWAP0 bases, and to
Namibian refugee camps? What is the reason for these
military expeditions which take the lives of innocent
victims?
118. In the territory of Angola, Pretoria is seeking to
crush SWAPO, which is the very vanguard of the armed
active struggle for the liberation and true independence of
Namibia. If the Pretoria racists could reason, be it ever so
little, they would surely have realized that the People’s
Republic of Angola and the other four front-line countries
and SWAP0 had shown a great deal of moderation and
flexibility.

111. Thus, by its very existence in southern Africa, and
primarily because of its oppressive and colonialist nature,
the white South African Republic constitutes a constant
and serious threat in Africa, a threat directed against more
than 20 million indigenous inhabitants, who have been
transformed into slaves on the soil of their ancestors, and
against independent Africa as a whole, which rejects it.

119. The People’s Republic of Angola, in particular, has
taken grave risks, and that showsthat even those who are as
determined to fight as they are should seize every opportunity for peaceful settlement. SWAPO, which has made
serious concessions, has demonstrated the same flexibility,
without losing its determination. But what a high price has
been demanded of it and of the People’s Republic of Angola
by South Africa and the four front-line countries by aggression, by massacre, by the savage slaughter of women and
children, by the destruction of the economic and social
infrastructure, by lying slander and squalid manceuvres that
have been mounted to wring other concessions from Africa
in an attempt to place Namibian puppets in power to preserve those interests that are in contradiction with the interests of the oppressed people of Namibia! That is the real
problem.

112. But neither oppression nor the slavery practised
inside the country-which we call apartheid-nor acts of
armed aggression and other warlike acts against independent African States, against the front-line States,
Angola and Zambia, and against the SWAP0 bases will
ever succeed in imposing this foreign offshoot of intemational imperialism upon Africa. The racist and colonialist
r&ime of South Africa, even with all its sophisticated weapons, will never be able to haltthe march of history towards
the total liberation of the peoples of Africa.
113. The People’s Republic of Angola has freed itself from
foreign domination, but it has paid a very heavy price: the
11

.

120. These contradictions are visible to the naked eye.
That is why this debate will have sense and poIitica1 point
only if its background, which is the decolonization of
Namibia, is examined by the Council in the present context.
The armed attacks by South Africa against African States
and its squalid manceuvring against SWAP0 serve only to
make the people of our continent even more keenly aware
of the danger represented by this colonialist and racist
regime of uprooted whites from Europe, adventurers,
robbers and bandits who come to exploit our people and
remain here.

critical time. We have always stood together during the
Several crises that have become almost a daily occurrence in
our part of the world. Our unconditional support can therefore be taken for granted, for his struggle is ours.
127. It will not be necessaryfor me to narrate the details of
the attack I perpetrated by South Africa during the past
several days: the representative of Angola has amply and
eloquently done so. Suffice it to say that, quite clearly, the
attacks were on a large scale and very serious-indeed. We
have here not just another skirmish, but a major conflagration involving highly sophisticated war machinery, including weapons of mass destruction, unleashed against a young
country that has only recently emerged from along; devas-.
tating colonial war, and is only now trying to reconstruct its
war-shattered economy for the good of its people. Its scarce
human and material resources are continual1 being diverted to the defence of its sovereignty an ci+territorial
integrity in the face of numerous unprovoked attacks, both
against itself and against the innocent Namibian refugees
whose only desire is to liberate their country from brutal
South African occupation.

121. The imperialists, who spawned apartheid, should
never lose sight of the truth that the liberation of Africa, the
liberation of Namibia, is absolutely inevitable. The imperialist Powers, which are aiding and abetting apartheid, and
which live on pillage, exploitation, oppression, massacre
and slaughter, should never forget that the liberation of our
continent is inevitable.
122. The People’s Republic of Benin once again condemns vigorously the Pretoria racists and all their protectors for their policy of aggression, adventurism and lies
against our people. This policy of diplomatic manceuvring
jeopardises peace and security in our continent. My country, the People’s Republic of Benin, will never cease to call
for strict measures by the Security Council, particularly the
implementation of all the measures provided for under
Chapter VII of the Charter.

128. This latest attack cannot be viewed in isolation. Its
broader context is the over-all critical situation in southern
Africa, some of whose major features are as follows: the
intensification of the liberation struggle in South Africa
itself, in Namibia and in Zimbabwe, the increased oppression of the peoples of these countries by the racists, the
persistent efforts by the front-line States to find ways to
resolve the situation peacefully, the desperation of the racist
regimes in South Africa and Rhodesia, which have united to
wreak havoc in our area, and the repeated attacks by one or
both of these minority r&imes against the front-line States
of Angola, Botswana, Mozambique and Zambia, whose
only crime, one might say, in the eyes of those who violate
the basic human rights of their fellow men, is their untiring
search for genuine peace in the region and their unflinching
support for those who are struggling to free themselves
from oppression. This, then, is the context, and these events
ought to be viewed together if their real import is to be fully
grasped.

123. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Botswana, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
124. Mr. TLOU (Botswana): The question the Council is
seized of today-that of yet another dastardly attack by the
armed forces of apartheid South Africa against our neighbour, the People’s Republic of Angola, an attack which has
further exacerbated the situation of tension and insecurity
already existing in our unhappy war-torn region-is a very
grave one indeed. After hearing the lucid statement by the
representative of Angola yesterday /213Oth meetingl, and
after reading the communique released by the Ministry of
Defence of the People’s Republic of Angola, no one can be
in doubt about the urgency, the precariousness and the
gravity of the situation, nor can any one fail to be deeply
moved and acutely concerned. We are confident that the
Council, therefore, will treat this matter with the seriousness
and urgency it deserves.

129. The coordinated and premeditated strategy of the
white minority regimes has been clearly illustrated by the
recent events. The pattern is now clear: while South Africa
and Southern Rhodesia were attacking both Angola and
Zambia, Mozambique wasalso being attacked by the illegal
regime in Southern Rhodesia. But then, this is not new. It
has been so for a very long time now. On countless occasions before, these countries have been similarly attacked,
and my own country, Botswana, has been attacked by
Southern Rhodesia on numerous occasions.

125. My delegation, Sir, is therefore pleased to see you
presiding over this crucial debate, for not only do you
possess immense diplomatic skill that will enable you to
guide this debate to a successful conclusion, but you also
derive inspiration from your great country, Nigeria, whose
dedication to the liberation of southern Africa is beyond
reproach.
.

130. Our countries are the props of peace and the only
islands of sanity in southern Africa, and those who attack us
demonstrate their desire for war rather than for peace. But
we remain, despite all this, committed to peace rather than
to war. How else can we interpret, for instance, this latest
attack against Angola, when it is known that Angola has
played, and is playing, so vital a role in the search for peace
in Namibia? What of the timingof this attack as compared
to the earlier one on Kassmga? Both were launched just at a
time when possibilities seemed bright for a peaceful solution
of the Namibian problem.

126. I should like, at this point, to pay a tribute to the
Government and people of Angola for remaining calm and
for standing firm in the face of naked aggression. Our
condolences go to the bereaved families that have lost their
beloved ones in the recent atrocious bombings. To my
brother and colleague, the representative of Angola, I
would say that I need not reassure him here of Botswana’s
total support for the People’s Republic of Angola at this
12

131. South Africa’s aim, then, can only be to frustrate
attempts to resolve the Namibian problem in accordance
with United Nations resolutions. Who, then, is for war, and
who for peace, we must ask? Thanks to the tenacious
resolve of the people of Angola and their revolutionary
leadership, that country has continued, together with the
other front-line States, to search for peace in Namibia,
despite several attempts to make it abandon this noble goal.
This can also be said, of course, of Zambia in this particular
context.

swana condemns these attacks against a sister State, expresses its solidarity with the Government and people of
Angola at this hour of their greatest need and reatlirrns its
dedication, together with the other front-line States, to the
search for peace in our region.
135. The Security Council should unequivocally condemn the attack against Angola and take whatever action it
deems necessary to stop a recurrence of such flagrant
aggression. Those who wield influence over South Africa as
a result of their history and other relations with that country
should use the leverage at their disposal to stay the murderous hand of the apartheid @me. The Council should also
redouble its efforts to resolve the Namibian independence
issue for indeed most of Angola’s problems stem from the
occupation of that international Territory by South Africa.
The quicker the marauding South African troops of occupation vacate Namibia the better for the future of our
people in southern Africa.

132. Therefore, those who want genuine peace in southem Africa should take note of thii situation and use their

influence and the means at their disposal to stop South
Africa from standing in the way of peace in our region. For
so long as South Africa and its tottering little satellite,
Southern Rhodesia, continue to resort to war, so long will
peace in the region remain illusory; so long will our region
remain poised on the edge of a dangerous precipice.
133. The international community must now, more than
ever before, rally behind the people of Angola, for the days
ahead could be even more dangerous and perilous as a
result of these aggressive acts. Certainly Angola should be
enabled to increase its defence capacity in order to withstand these dastardly attacks.

136. Members of the Council, let your decision this day be
worthy of the trust the people of Angola have always had in
this august body.

134. The international community should unequivocally
condemn South Africa for its aggression. For its part, Bot-

The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.

.

13

Litho in United Nations, New York

Price: ws.

1.50

7%70002-January

1982-2.250
