United Nations

A/RES/60/235

General Assembly

Distr.: General
8 February 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 122

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 December 2005
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/609)]

60/235. Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
on the inspection of programme and administrative
management of the subregional offices of the
Economic Commission for Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/218 B of 29 July 1994, 54/244 of 23 December
1999 and 59/272 of 23 December 2004,
Having considered the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on
the inspection of programme and administrative management of the subregional
offices of the Economic Commission for Africa, 1
1.
Recalls its resolution 59/287 of 13 April 2005 and its decision that the
development of Africa shall be among the priorities of the Organization for the
biennium 2006–2007;
Recalls also its resolutions 57/2 of 16 September 2002 and 57/7 of
2.
4 November 2002, and stresses the important role played by the Economic
Commission for Africa in coordinating the activities of the United Nations system at
the regional level in support of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development; 2
3.
Takes note of the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on
the inspection of programme and administrative management of the subregional
offices of the Economic Commission for Africa,1 and welcomes the initial steps that
the Commission has taken to implement the recommendations of the Office;
4.
Urges the full and expeditious implementation of the recommendations
of the Office of Internal Oversight Services, and requests the Secretary-General to
support the efforts of the Economic Commission for Africa and its subregional
offices to implement the recommendations of the Office;
Also urges, in particular, the appropriate integration of the subregional
5.
offices into the strategy for the Economic Commission for Africa to ensure

_______________
1
2

05-50170

A/60/120.
A/57/304, annex.

A/RES/60/235

increased coordination and the most effective management of resources and
implementation of mandates;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the information and
communications technology capacity and strategy of the Economic Commission for
Africa and its subregional offices are fully integrated with the information and
communications technology strategy of the Organization and that it is used to its full
capacity to disseminate information by electronic means;
Also requests the Secretary-General to intensify his efforts to fill
7.
vacancies in the subregional offices, inter alia, by recruiting staff with the
appropriate operational skills and expertise that match the development priorities of
the respective subregions;
Takes note with concern of the finding that the subregional offices of the
8.
Economic Commission for Africa have a restricted ability to act as the operational
arm of the Commission throughout the countries of their respective subregions
owing to the lack of adequate resources for core functions, the insufficient level of
guidance and support from the headquarters of the Commission and the lack of a
clear understanding as to the role of the subregional offices;
Stresses the important contribution that the Economic Commission for
9.
Africa and its subregional offices are making towards supporting the efforts of the
regional economic communities of Africa to implement the priorities and objectives
of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development, and recognizes the need to
strengthen the subregional offices;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to develop separate subprogrammes for
the subregional offices of the Economic Commission for Africa;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to enhance interaction between the
regional advisers and subregional offices of the Economic Commission for Africa to
ensure a closer link with subregional needs;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General
Assembly at its sixty-first session a comprehensive plan of action to strengthen the
subregional offices, based on the recommendations of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services, with timelines and clear lines of managerial accountability and,
in the context of the plan of action, to ensure that adequate resources are provided to
the Economic Commission for Africa and its subregional offices to continue their
support for the New Partnership for Africa’s Development and the regional
economic communities for Africa, as well as to ensure the full implementation of
the recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services.
69th plenary meeting
23 December 2005

2
