TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

th
MEETING: 30 MAY 1967

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 344)

..,,..,......,.....,..........

Page

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . , . . , . . . . , , .
Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and
Denmark addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/7902)
...I.,
Complaint of the representative of the United Arab Republic in a letter to the
President of the Security Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and security in the Middle East
and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907) . s . . , , . . . I . . .
Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/79 10) . . , . . . . . , . . . , . . . , . . . . , . . . . , . . , . , .

SJPV.1344

1
1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutiolzs and Decisions of the
Seek@ Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 196.5, became fully operative on that date.

TWRTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FORTY-FOURTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday, 30 May 1967, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. LIU Chieh (China),
Pl’t’sent: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil. Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1344)
I.

Adoption

of the agenda.

--3

Letter dated 13 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902).

3.

Complaint of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May I967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907).

4.

Letter dated ‘9 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern
Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/79 10).
Adoption

of the agenda

2%~ agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/7902)
Complaint
of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening p,eace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international
peace and security” (S/7907)
Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern
Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/791 0)
1. The PRESIDENT: In connexion with inviting representatives to participate in the discussion, I wish to draw
attention to the fact that there are insufficient places at the
Council
table for accommodating more than four non-

members. In these circumstances, and in accordance with
the established practice, representatives who are invited to
participate, without vote, in the discussion are requested to
take the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber, on the usual understanding that when it is time
for any invited representative to speak, he will be called to
take a place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. G. Rafael (Israel),
Mr. M. A. El Kony (United Arab Republic), Mr, M. H.
El-Farra (Jordan) and Mr. G. J. Tonzeh (Syria) took the
places reserved for them
2. The PRESIDENT:
A letter dated 29 May 1967
/S/7911] has been received from the ChargC d’affaires of
Lebanon requesting that his Government be permitted to
participate in the Council’s discussion. Accordingly,
I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite the
representative of Lebanon to take the place reserved for
him at the side of the Council chamber in order to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote.
At the imitation of the President, Mr.
(Lebanon) took the place reserved for him

G. Hal&z

3. The PRESIDENT: The Council will now continue its
discussion of the item on its agenda.
4. Mr. IYALLA (Nigeria): The report of the Secretary
General of 26 May 1967 which is before the Council in
document S/7906 is a source of gratification for my
delegation; reading it has confirmed the view which we
expressed at the 1342nd meeting of the Council that the
work of the Council in considering the grave situation in
the Middle East would be very much assisted and would be
more meaningful if we had the results of the SecretaryGeneral’s delicate mission in Cairo. Several speakers before
me have so eloquently thanked the Secretary-General for
his courage and his unfailing services to the United Nations
and to the cause of world peace that it is sufficient for me
to say that the Nigerian delegation entirely supports the
Secretary-General’s position and whole-heartedly
thanks
him for his efforts.
5. The report itself has been repeatedly quoted by many
delegations in their statements before the Council. My
delegation does not see any need to further burden the
Council by repeating the process.
6. The matter before the Council is most grave. The
situation in the Middle East has become very explosive, and
the background to this situation involves several intricate

and complicated factors, including legal considerations,
remote or more recent historical events, and deeply held
beliefs and passions. It is necessary that these matters be
given careful and urgent consideration by the Council.
Nevertheless, it is our view that while these far-reaching
issues are being considered and tackled, it is the pressing
and immediate duty of the Council to lend its weight and
support to any step that would prevent a further deterioration of the existing situation and would help to reinforce
the uneasy and brittle peace in the area. It is fitting, and
indeed essential, that one such step should be an immediate
appeal to all parties in the conflict for restraint, so that the
existing delicate situation does not erupt into a terrible and
tragic conflict. The Nigerian delegation would therefore
join in such an appeal, or any resolution in appropriate and
satisfactory terms containing such an appeal, to the parties
concerned. This appeal should, in our view, not prevent the
Council from continuing its consideration of the more
fundamental and substantial aspects of the disputes and
complaints before it.

12. We reserve our right to intervene again on the
substantive issues in this discussion.
13. The PRESIDENT:
of Lebanon.

I now call on the Foreign Minister

14. Mr. HAKIM (Lebanon): Mr. President, I should like to
thank you and the members of the Security Council for
@ving me the opportunity to participate in the debates of
the Council on the item on the agenda. I have been sent by
the Government of Lebanon to address the Council on the
grave situation which exists in the Middle East today.
15. In his report of 19 May 1967, the Secretary-General
has described the situation as “more disturbing” and “more
menacing, than at any time since the fall of 19.56” [S/7896,
para. 191. After returning from his visit to Cairo, he said in
his report of 26 May 1967 that hc could “only reiterate this
assessment” /S/7906, para. I]. Not only do I agree with his
assessment, but I also believe the danger of war is even
greater. Will there be war or peace in the Middle East? That
is the question. But if there is war tomorrow, it will be
much more dangerous than the Suez war.

7. We should like to emphasize, however, that nothing in
our position should be taken to imply any form of
interference with the exercise by a country of its sovereign
jurisdiction and the complete control of its territory.

16. I am in a position to know the facts of the present
situation. The facts are very grim. The facts are stubborn
things that cannot be brushed aside. Those who think they
know the facts and have calculated the risks would do
better to review the situation, determine the real facts, and
recalculate the risks. If there were war tomorrow, it would
be because Israel had struck the first blow.

8. I am instructed to make it clear that the Nigerian polity
will not support any action that tends to impair or
encroach upon the right of a legal Government of any
country to maintain the integrity of its territory and
waters, and to order its affairs according to its own light.
9. Nevertheless, while recognizing the right of each State
over its own affairs and its own territory, and while
emphasizing that no action should be taken to jeopardize
those sovereign rights, we-who maintain diplomatic relations with all the States in the area and have maintained an
uninterrupted record of close and friendly relations with
most of them-specially appeal to them in this moment of
great danger to consider the wider interests of peace in all
their actions.

17. In his latest report, the Secretary-General said: “Presi~
dent Nasser and Foreign Minister Riad assured me that the
United Arab Republic would not”-1 repeat, “would
not”-“initiate
offensive action
against Israel” [ ibid.,
__
para. 9/. On the other hand, he said: “The Government of
Israel has further declared that Israel will regard the closing
of the Strait of Tiran to Israel flagships and any restriction ~
on cargoes of ships of other flags proceeding to Israel as a
cams belli”[ibid.,para.
lo].

10. Specifically, we would join in an appeal to all parties
to maintain the commendable restraint of the last few days,
through which the actual outbreak of hostilities and
violence has been avoided and to maintain this peace while
other means are being explored-both
here in the United
Nations and through other channels-and while the substantive disputes are being seriously and urgently pursued.

18. We all know that the United Arab Republic has
affirmed that it will exercise its sovereign rights over the
Strait of Tiran, which falls well within its territorial waters. )
Lebanon supports this exercise by the United Arab Re*
public of its sovereign rights over the entrance to the Gull 1
of Aqaba. We will stand by theunited Arab Republic in its’
defence of those rights.

11. My delegation believes that the Secretary-General’s
report provides us with much that can form the basis of
action both by this Council and by all concerned in the
Middle East. As a first step, we think the Council should
issue an appeal for restraint. Secondly, the Council should
seriously take up the suggestions of the Secretary-General,
for instance to reactivate the Mixed Armistice Commissions. Thirdly, we feel that the Secretary-General should be
encouraged to continue his most useful contacts with the
principal parties in the Middle East and with the other
interests involved. We note that, in paragraph 18 of his
report, he has stated that he was able to indicate to both
the United Arab Republic and to Israel some possible steps
which could be taken by mutual consent and would
thereby reduce tension.

19. If Israel commits aggression as a result, the responsi,
bility for starting the war will fall fully and squarely on
Israel. This time it must be clear to everybody that it would;
be a total war. The Government and people of Lebanon~
would fulfil their commitments under the charter of thti
League of Arab States and tile Arab Treaty of Mutual1
Defence. A unanimous declaration reaffirming these corn’
rnitments was adopted by the Lebanese Parliament on 23.
May 1967-a week ago.
20. All the Arab States would be involved as they all haw(
the same commitments. A few days ago, the Council of Ih!(
Arab League reaffirmed that an attack on any Arab coUntr)
would be considered an attack on all. Fighting which
2

:
i
!

started in one area would quickly expand. The war would
escalate. Who can be certain it would not become, to
borrow an idea from Secretary-General U Thant, the first
phase of the third world war?

26. When the armed forces of the United Arab Republic
took over the positions formerly occupied by the Emergency Force, the [Jnited Arab Republic resumed the
exercise of its sovereign rights over its territorial waters in
the Strait of Tiran, the entrance to the Gulf of Aqaba. It
had never given up those rights. It is not bound by any
international agreement to allow freedom of navigation in
its territorial waters to the ships of Israel, a country with
which the United Arab Republic is in a state of war.

21. Look at your maps, gentlemen; examine them carefuIly. The Arab world extends from the Atlantic to the
Indian Ocean. It occupies a vast territory with immense oil
resources. Its strategic location is well known. It is
inhabited by one hundred million people. Countless more
millions support them. In a total war the Arabs will use all
means to defeat their enemy, for they are convinced of the
justice of their cause. They are Fully united in the defence
of the rights of the Arab people of Palestine, who have been
expelled from their homeland, In such a war, the Arabs
would distinguish their friends from their enemies. The
interests in the Arab world of those who would become
their enemies would be completely eliminated. It would be
a long war, with no cease-fire until final vi.?tory. No one can
foresee the consequences, no one can foresee the dangers to
world peace.

27. I shall not deal with the legal aspects of the question
of navigation in the Gulf of Aqaba, as my friend, the
United Arab Republic representative, Mr. El Kony, has
already done so. I should only like to say that the United
Arab Republic simply re.established the situation existing
before Israel’s aggression against Egypt in 19.56. It went
back to the status quo ante.
28. The world had lived with that situation before
November 1956; it can live with it now, Instead of
punishing Israel for its aggression in 1956, some are
suggesting that it should continue to reap the fruit of that
aggression. They would thus encourage the aggressor, Israel,
and would prove to the whole world that aggression pays.

22. I am speaking to you dispassionately, with all the
reason and objectivity at my command. I am speaking to
you so frankly because of my country’s abhorrence of war
and attachment to peace. Lebanon appeals to you, as
responsible members of the Security Council, to preserve
the peace.

29. In fact, that is the history of Israel ever since its
creation in 1948, a history of unpunished aggression; one
could say rewarded and profitable aggression, For the
question of the alleged Israel right of freedom of navigation
in the Gulf of Aqaba is only a part, indeed a small part, of
the question of Palestine. This Israel State, which was
created on the basis of a great injustice done to the Arab
people of Palestine, has never ceased to commit aggression
ever since its creation, The Zionists expelled by force and
terror the rightful inhabitants of the country, and they have
continued to deny them the right to return to their
homeland in spite of numerous United Nations resolutions
affirming that right.

23. What could possibly justify the incalculable risks and
immense dangers to which I have referred? Free navigation
for Israel in the Gulf of Aqaba? Is it to ensure a so-called
right for Israel ships and strategic materials to go thro@h
the Strait of Tiran that the whole world must undergo such
terrible sacrifices and losses? It is inconceivable that some
great and responsible Powers could think and act so
irrationally.
24. Let us see what has happened during the last three
weeks, The crisis started with Israel leaders making threats
of aggression against Syria. They threatened to invade
Syria, occupy Damascus and overthrow the Syrian Arab
socialist r6gime. Such reckless and arrogant threats had
never been known before. They were an insult to Arab
national dignity and a challenge to Arab national honour.

30. Israd occupied by force more territory, about 23 per
cent moyc, than was allotted to the Jewish State by the
partition resolution of the General Assembly /181 (11)]. It
defied the United Nations by refusing to implement the
General Assembly resolution on the internationalization of
Jerusalem (303 f1V)], which decided to make the Holy
City a corpus separatumunder United Nations administration.

25. The United Arab Republic was in duty bound to take
all necessary steps to fulfil its obligations to defend Syria
against Israel aggression. To be able to do so, the United
Arab Republic requested the Secretary-General to withdraw
the United Nations Emergency Force. I have heard no
greater absurdity than the suggestion that the SecretaryGeneral should have refused to comply with that request.
The United Nations Emergency Force is not an occupying
force stationed on the territory of a Member State against
its sovereign will. It was in Sinai and Gaza on the basis of an
agreement between the Secretary-General and the President
of Egypt. It was on the territory of the United Arab
Republic with that country’s consent. When that consent
was withdrawn, the Emergency Force had to be withdrawn.
1 commend our Secretary-General for his decision ; it was
the only possible decision for him to make, and a sound
and honourable one,

31. Finally, Israel committed a series of aggressions, some
of which were listed by the P,>rmnnent Representative of
the United Arab Republic ill 1.:s letter of 27 May 1967
/$/7$X5’] to the President of the Security Couhcil. There
were several olher acts of aggression, many of which were
condemned in resolutions of the Security Council. The last
two of these large-scale armed Israel attacks were the brutal
attack on As Samu in Jordan in November 1966, and the
aerial attack on Syria which took place one month ago, on
7 April 1967. Israel was born of aggression and has
continued to live by aggression with impunity.
32. I would like to draw your attention, Mr. President,
and that of the members of the Security Council to these
simple facts. Regular Israel armed land and air forces
crossed the armistice demarcation lines more than twelve
3

times, committing

acts of aggression on the territory of the
coujltries.
Not Once---I repeat, not
the armed forces of any Arab country cross the
lines into Israel territory,

neighbouring

once-did
armistice

events of that day is based solely on lh~ investigation
carried out by the Israel-Syrian Mixed Armistice Commission, the results of which were transmitted to the Syrian
delegation on that Commission on 28 April 1967. It
consists of a covering letter from the Chairman of the
Israel-Syrian Mixed Armistice Commission to the Syrian
delegation to the Commission on the investigation carried
out, the maps of the area, a statement on where the
cultivation took place which led to the conflict, and the
death certificates of the people who were killed, as will be
seen later in my intervention.

Arab

what has the United Nations done to make had
behave and keep the peace, to stop Israel’s aggressive
policies and to give justice to the Arabs of Palestine?
Nothing-except
to pass dozens of resolutions which are
gathering dust in the archives of the United Nations.

33.

34. The Arab countries, which have a responsibility to
their peoples and to the world for the maintenance of peace
in their region, will not-1 repeat, will not-tolerate
any
longer Israel’s aggressive policies, The Arab peoples are
united and determined to put a stop to Israel aggression.
Let no one make the mistake of doubting this Arab unity
and determination.
Whatever the suffering and the
sacrifices, the Arab peoples will defend their independence,
their sovereignty and their national security. They will
pursue their aim of undoing the great injustice inflicted on
the Arabs of Palestine and of restoring their rights to their
usurped homeland. The Arab countries want peace, but
peace based on justice. They arc faithful to the United
Nations as an instrument for the attainment of a just peace.

39. The Israel aggression on Syrian territory which took
place on 7 April 1967 is a classic example of the ruthless
implementation
of the Israel expansionist, bloodthirsty
policy.
40. First, the piece of land cultivated is a disputed portion
in the village of Samra that was destroyed previously by
Israel forces and whose Arab owners were expelled by
force. That was clearly confirmed in the investigation of the
Mixed Armistice Commission. T,hat is the aspect of trans.
gression of Arab land and rights, which Israel has engaged in
since 1948.
41. Secondly, this cultivation was carried out by armed
bulldozers, thus adding violation of the Armistice Agreement to violation of Arab rights and property.

35. The Government
of Lebanon believes that the Security Council has the primary responsibility for preventing
war nnd maintaining
international
peace. But Member
States, under Article 51 of the Charter, have the inherent
right of individual and collective self-defence. The Security
Council has the duty to prevent aggression before it takes
place and thus preserve the peace. It must not fail in its
task.
36. The PRESIDENT:
Syria.

42. Thirdly, the warning shots, as the report of the Mixed
Armistice Commission indicates, fired into the air by the
Syrian soldier Hassan Harnmadih to withdraw the tractor
from the field was answered by a barrage of Israel fire
coming from three directions: Israel military positions
along the Ein Gev road; mortars situated north of Haon and
Israel tanks situated both near Samra in the demilitarized
zone and on the northern slope of Tel Qatsir.

I now call on the representative of

43. Thereafter, seventy-two air sorties undertook bombing
and strafing not only against military positions, as the Israel
representative and his Prime Minister want world opinion to
believe, but also against five other villages which have no
military posts or equipment whatsoever, as was confirmed
by the investigation of the Mixed Armistice Commission.
The villages of Sqoufiye, Nerane, Jalabina South, Nassaryia
and Amaret Aaz Ed Dine were subjected to destruction and
mass killings by Israel aircraft, without their having
committed any wrong or having been engaged in the battle,
In Sqoufiye alone, there were sixteen dead, of whom four
were women and one a child. This is in addition to the
scores of wounded visited in Kuneitra hospital by personnel
from the Mixed Armistice Commission.

37. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): The Middle East crisis upsetting
our area and constituting
a threat to world peace and
security is, in the chronology and chain of events of the last
two months,
the direct outcome of the unprovoked,
massive attack by regular Israel forces against the Syrian
people and Syrian territory which took place on 7 April
1967. In its wider and deeper context, it is but a
manifestation
of the Palestine question, which still exists
and which has been on the agenda of the Security Council
since 1948.
38. I shall deal first with the tragic events of that
memorable
day-that
is to say, 7 April-since it was the
point of escalation of the present crisis. For on that day the
Zionist Israel &gime in Palestine, carrying out the will of its
masters and manipulators, unleashed once more its infernal
forces of destruction and annihilation against Syria. Both
we and the Israelis have given our versions of the story in
three letters submitted to the President of the Security
Council and circulated as Council documents.’ But what is
it that in fact happened. 7 The following version of the

44. It is sufficient here to cite the physical evidence
observed by the Commission’s personnel on the spot. They
said:
“In the centre of the village of Sqoufiye the investigating United Nations military observers inspected a
damaged area approximately 100 metres by 2.50 metres.
Within this, an area of completely demolished dwelIings
of approximately 70 metres wide by approximately 175
metres long was observed. Damage beyond this area
ranged from severe to very slight at the outer limits.

1 SCC official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-secotzd
Year, Supplemetzt
for April, May and Jllne 1967, documents
s/7843, S/7845, s/7849,
S/1853,
SIT863 and S/7880.

4

“Within the area of total destruction five bomb craters
were seen and examined by the investigating United
Nations military observers. Shrapnel pieces with thicknessesranging from 4 millimetres to 2.5 centimetres were
recovered from the craters. Pieces of bomb tail fins, 22
centimetres by 47 centimetres, and other ordnance debris
were also recovered.

This was at a time when the Syrian side had accepted the
appeal of the Chief of Staff and stopped cultivation.
“(d) The use of an armoured tractor which constitutes
an act of violation of the General Armistice Agreement;

“‘(e) The ignoring
armoured tractor;

“In a village cemetery sixteen new graves, two of them
still open, were viewed.

of the warning to withdraw the

“‘(f) The refusal of the cease-fire proposed by the
Chairman of the Mixed Armistice Commission which
Syria accepted to be effective at 1015 hours; Israel
offered 1130 hours for the cease-fire but reneged, and
resumed its brutal air bombardment of Syrian positions”- and villages-“across the armistice demarcation
line and inside Syrian territory after 1130 hours.”

“United Nations military observers, in passing completely through the village, did not observe”-as they
state in their investigation-“any
military ir,stallations or
equipment within the village.
“The estimated number of destroyed dwellings was
placed at approximately forty as the extensive destruction in the area of the bomb pattern completely obliterated any evidence of outlines of the dwellings which
had received the direct hits. Approximately fifty additional dwellings showed from severe to minor damage.”

That attack resulted in the deaths which I have mentioned.
50. All these facts, the sequence of which is accurately
given here and which can be ascertained through the United
Nations machinery in the area, prove beyond any doubt
that lsrael had prepared for that attack grid provoked Syria,
which, in what followed, acted in legitimate self-defence.

45. Let it be known that I am referring only to Sqoufiye,
among the villages that I mentioned, because I do not want
to take up the time of the Council by citing the casualties
and the destruction perpetrated in the other villages.

51. All these facts have now been substantiated by the
report of the Israel-Syrian Mixed Armistice Commission,
enclosed with the letter addressed to the senior Syrian
delegate by the Chairman of the Commission on 28 April
1967. But the very striking addition is the extent of
destruction by bombs, napalm and rockets, of the lives of
innocent Arab people and their property, not excluding
villages and places of worship, in such a brutal and
deliberate manner.

46, The representative of Israel conveniently passed over
all this in silence. And his Prime Minister had assembled his
soldiers and pilots to praise them, according to the 4 May
1967 issue of News from Israel, for having “fulfilled the
order to attack only military targets and not civilian
settlements in Syria”,

52. Here I wish to cite the following paragraphs of the
letter from the Chairman of the Commission addressed to
the senior Syrian delegate:

47. By this manoeuvre Israel authorities thought that they
could go on deceiving world opinion by their distortion of
the truth through their hold on mass media. It is up to the
Council to choose whom to believe: the international
observers or the peaceful, innocent and harmless statements
of Mr. Bshkol.

“Damascus, 28 April 1967
“ ..*

413. In this connexion, as a party to the dispute, we
respectfully submit that the Secretary-General, if possible,
should circulate to the Security Council a factual report
about this clash and attack.

“1. Enclosed please find two copies of the abovereferenced investigation reports relating to the intensive
exchange of fire which occurred on 7 April 1967. . . ,
“2. A study of these investigation reports substantiates
the complaints in so far as:

49. In my letter to the President of the Security Council
on 28 April 1967 (S/7863],
I mentioned the acts of
aggression committed by Israel on 7 April, as follows:

"(a) Cultivation of a portion of Block 1.5198 of the
Samra lands (Haon fields) by Israel did take place on
7 April 1967; part of this cultivation was carried out by
armoured bulldozers; and this cultivation was opposed by
Syrian fire,

“(a) The extension of cultivation and encroachments
by the Israelis of Arab lands in the southern demilitarized
zone never before cultivated;

“(b) Israel military forces located inside the southern
sector of the demilitarized zone directed heavy machinegun, mortar and tank fire towards Syrian positions,
villages and territory during the morning and afternoon of
7 April 1967.

“(b) The introduction of and resorting to armed forces
to carry out cultivation in areas forbidden by the General
Armistice Agreement;

“(cl The ignoring of the repeated appeals made by the
Chief of Staff of the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization in Palestine to stop cultivation of disputed
lands pending final settlement.”

“(cl Israel aircraft bombed and/or strafed the Syrian
villages and/or settlements of Sqoufiye, Nerane, Jalabina
5

56, The representative of the United Arab Republic
explained yesterday [1343rd meeting] the occupation by
Israel forces of the demilitarized zone of El Auja along the
armistice demarcation lines.

South, Nassaryia and Amaret Aaz Ed Dine, as well as
Syrian military positions.”
I place these reports at the disposal of any member of the
Security Council who may wish to study them.

57. The Israelis have repeated that strategy of piecemeal
invasion in the demilitarized zones on the Israel-Syrian
demarcation lines. Israel has always coveted those zones,
especially between Syria and Israel. The northern demilitarized zone, commanding the Jordan River for about 20
kilometres until it empties into Lake Tiberias, has been the
site of the Israel project to divert the Jordan River waters,a
project
which was begun in 1953. The southern
demilitarized
zone between Israel and Syria stretches
south-east to cover the El Hamma region, Control of this
last-mentioned area is necessary if a party is desirous of
diverting the Yarmouk River, which emanates from Syria
and Jordan and flows into the Jordan south of Lake
Tiberias.

53, The extraordinary thing is that the Israel authorities,
not satisfied with the crimes they have thus committed,
have since engaged in statements which would sound to any
impartial observer as though the Israelis were about to
launch large-scale hostilities against Syria. However, since I
dealt with those statements in my intervention yesterday, it
is not necessary for me to do so again. I merely wish to
bring to the attention of the members of the Security
Council paragraph 8 of the Secretary-General’s report
[S/7896], which is sufficient.
54. The two reports which the Secretary-General has
addressed to the Security Council [S/7896 and S/7906]
deal with tension along the armistice demarcation lines
between Syria and Israel. A number of members of the
Security Council have referred in their statements to the
tense situation between Syria and Israel. In fact, the
representative of the United States, Mr. Goldberg, in his
statement yesterday [1343rd meeting/ also referred to this
situation as one of the four highly sensitive problems which
he enumerated. I must, therefore, turn to this particular
aspect, and in doing so I am especially addressing myself to
points’6 and 7 listed in document S/7907, namely the Israel
aggression against the water projects in Syria utilizing the
Israel Air Force, and the repeated Israel aggression against
the dernilitarized zones specified in the Israel-Syrian
General Armistice Agreement-points which have been used
as illustrations of the complaint which was put forward by
the representative of the United Arab Republic in document S/7907 and which was accepted as an item of the
agenda.

58. No sooner had those two demilitarized zones been
established by the Israel-Syrian General Armistice Agreement than Israel forces started their gradual occupation. On
27 March 1951, United Nations military observers encountered Israel armed forces in the southern demilitarized
zone. General de Ridder, Acting Chief of Staff of UNTSO,
addressed a message to the Chief of Staff uf the Israel
Defence Forces declaring that he considered this “a flagrant
violation” of the General Armistice Agreement, and rev
questing him to order his forces “to withdraw outside the
demilitarized zone”.
59. On the night of 30-31 March 1951, the Israel Army
answered this request by expelling 785 Arab civilians from
the central sector of the zone. UNTSO requested an
interview with the Arabs to ascertain if they had, as Israel
alleged, left of their own accord. To preclude this investigation, the senior Israel representative at the Israel-Syrian
Mixed Armistice Commission, on 4 April 195 1, charged the
Commission Chairman with partiality, declared that he
“would not sit at the same meeting with him”, and
promptly walked out of the Mixed Armistice Commission,
terminating any Israel affiliation with the Commission,

55. Let me say that the cuItivation of disputed portions of
land might appear, at first, to be a trifling matter, one that
would not warrant lengthy consideration. That is exactly
what the Israel propaganda machine would like world
opinion to believe. The real fact is that behind this
apparently simple, naive and innocent matter lie the most
aggressive intentions and planning. Any impartial observer
following the trend of events over the last twenty years
would ascertain Ihe existence of this established Israel
policy in the field of cultivation. Israel wants to obtain
several advantages, no matter to what extent its process is
contrary to international law and United Nations resolutions. It intends first to carry out the gradual expansion
that Israel has been bent upon since its inception. The
chronological facts since 1948 indicate a constant Israel line
of conduct in this implementation of its expansionist plans.
Secondly, it wants to break any restrictions on its conduct
provided for by international law, public and private, and
by the Armistice Agreements, in order to ensure for ever
the primacy of the rule of force over the rule of law.
Thirdly, it uses cultivation as an instrument to provoke
Syrian reaction. If that reaction is strong, it aims at
crushing it ruthlessly, $0 as to eliminate another obstacle in
the way of achieving its further expansion and to make
Syria weary in the long run of useless resistance. But events
are proving that peoples stand firmly for their rights.

60. The next day, on 5 April 195 1, the Israel Air Force
carried out an unprovoked aerial bombardment of the
Syrian village of El Hamma at the southern tip of the
demilitarized
zone. Syria complained to the Security
Council, which, at the end of its debate, on 18 May 195 I,
adopted resolution 93 (1951) condemning Israel’s at&k as
a violation of the cease-fire, the Armistice Agreement, and
Israel’s obligations under the United Nations Charter. In
that same resolution the Council condemned the Israel
authorities for expelling the 78.5 Arab inhabitants of the
zone in March 1951, and stipulated their return forthwith;
it condemned the Israel authorities for refusing to allow an
investigation by the Truce Supervision Organization, and :
for terminating Israel’s affiliation with the Mixed Armistice
Commission. The resolution noted the Council’s concern I
over Israel’s repeated restriction of the freedom of move- 1
ment of United Nations observers in the demilitarized zone,
and called upon Israel to reactivate its participation in
procedures of the Mixed Armistice Commission and lo I
comply with orders of the Truce Supervision Organization. 1
6

6 1, In the meantime, Israel armed forces had carried out
two further attacks against Syrian civilians in the northern
demilitarized
zone. The conflicts in this northern demilitadzed zone centred around Israel’s attempted diversion of
the Jordan River, the mainsprings of iYhich are in Syria,
Lebanon and Jordan. Lieutenant-General Burns, former
Chief of Staff of the Truce Supervision Organization, sets
out the case concerning the politico-military
strategy used
by Israel in the northern demilitarized zone between Israel
and Syria as follows:
“Briefly, and stripped so far as possible of technicalities, the question at issue may be put thus. The Israelis
claimed sovereignty over the territory covered by the DZ,
subject only to the specific restrictions against military
forces therein, . , . They then proceeded, as opportunity
offered, to encroach on the specific restrictions, and so
eventually to free themselves, on various pretexts, from
all of them. It was essentially the same process as they
adopted in the El Auja demilitarized zone”‘-on
the
armistice demarcation line with Egypt,

cease-fire provisions of its resolution 54 (1948), of the
terms of the General Armistice Agreement”.
Paragraplls 4
and 5 of that resolution state that the Security Council:
“Expresses its grave concern at the failure of the
Government of Israel to comply with its obligations;

“Calls U~OII the Government of Israel to do SO in the
future, in default of which the Council will have to
consider what further measures under the Charter are
required to maintain or restore the peace .”
66. The third one, resolution 171 (1962), of 9 April 1962,
also condemning Israel for attacking Syrian territory, states
that the Security Council:
“CNls for strict observance of article V of the General
Armistice Agreement, which provides for the exclusion Of
armed forces from the demilitarized zone, and annex IV
of that Agreement, which sets limits on forces in the
defensive area.”

62. Concerning the southern demilitarized zone between
Syria and Israel, the Israelis continued to expel Arab
ixlhabitants after the air offensive against El Hamma on
5 April 195 1. Two hundred more Arabs were expelled.

67. But we are now in 1967, and these are solemn
resolutions adopted by the Security Council. The people
who spoke yesterday about the rule of law and respect for
law had better put to Israel and the Israel representatives
their questions about what has been implemented
of all
these resolutions. Is it mere coincidence that after the
attack of 7 April 1967, to which I alluded, when we knew
that civilian targets were bombarded and that civilians were
killed, we did not come to the Security Council? The
reason is to be found in another sad experience. Some of
the members of the Security Council will remember that on
25 July 1966 I complained to the Security Council /1288th
meetingj about an attack perpetrated in the same area on
14 July 1966, when a development project along the rivers
in Syria was completely destroyed and when those who
committed the crime confessed to it, saying, ‘We went and
bombarded Syria”. The Security Council failed to take any
action.

63. It would take me quite a long time to enumerate the
history of this long, tragic sequence of events and the
various attacks that have been perpetrated by Israel against
Syria; but let me quote Major-General von Horn, who, in a
report dated 16 February 1960, reported as follows on the
fortifications
in violation of the General Armistice Agreements inside the demilitarized zone:
“The foundation ten years ago . . . of the kibbutz of
Beit Qatsir . . , and the development of cultivation by the
Israel settlers using the waters of Lake Tiberias . , .
rapidly resulted in depriving Arab farmers in the demilitarized zone of all access to the lake and of any land
between the kibbutz and the lake. Moreover, like other
Israel border settlements, in or out of the demilitarized
zone, the new kibbutz became a fortified position.”
[S/4270, paw. 2.1

68. This is a very grave situation because, as I said at that
meeting, a small country like Syria can do nothing except
to invoke the rule of law; yet when we invoked the rule of
law, the law wascompletely disregarded.

64. With reference to these various attacks, the Security
Council adopted three resolutions concerning the demilitarized zones. The first one, resolution 93 (1951) of 18
May 1951, to which I have already referred states, inter
ah, that the Security Council:

69. To give the Council an idea about this aggressive spirit
of Israel, at least 300 soldiers and civilians were killed in
these various attacks-killed and massacred in a dastardly
fashion. The JerusalemPost, after describing the attack on
Lake Tiberias in 1962, had this to say on 18 March 1962:

“Decides that Arab civilians who have been removed
from the demilitarized zone by the Government of Israel
should be permitted to return forthwith to their homes
and that the Mixed Armistice Commission should supervise their return and rehabilitation in a manner to be
determined by the Commission.”

“Water is the prime condition for life in this country.
The Arabs know this as well as we do, and wiI1 make
every effort to prevent the development of the water
resources here. Israel cannot afford to lose a drop of
water. . . . We shall have to be prepared to defend our
water rights as much as our territory.”

65. The second one, resolution 111 (1956) of 19 January
1956, condemns Israel for its attack in the Lake Tiberias
area, describing the attack as a “flagrant violation of the

But defence, in the terminology of Israel, always means an
aggression.

2 Lieutenant-General E. L. M, Burns, Between Arab and Israeli
(Toronto, Clarke, Irwin and Co., Ltd., 1962), p. 113.

70. As I said, it would take me a very long the to
enumerate all the facts, and I have skipped at least twelve
7

are witnessing the unfolding of historical events. It is one of I
the basic duties of a statesman to discern the historical
sense of events. Failing to do that, we will always be dealing I
with palliatives-and that is one of the reasons why the
United Nations for the last twenty years has been unable to
I
do anything about the Palestine problem.
‘4
74. And here we wish to congratulate the Secretary
General for the remark he makes in one of his reports, that
underlying all these manifestations is the age-old Arab-Israet
conflicts.

pages of my written statement. But during the last series of
debates on this matter in the Security Council, the
Secretary-General was requested to submit reports on the
demilitarized zones. In fact, that request was first made in
ihe Council by the representative of Morocco in 1963, in
connexion with a complaint that was submitted then by
Syria against Israel. During the meetings of the Council that
I am referring to, the Secretary-General submitted a report
dated 2 November 1966 /S/7573/ entitled “Report of the
Secretary-General on the present status of the demilitarized
zone set up by the General Armistice Agreement between
Israel and Syria”. Significantly enough, this report is called
“part A”. We are still waiting for part B, which has not
been issued so far.

7.5. Our quarrel is with Zionism. But has Zionism changed,
or have the ambitions of Zionist-Israel leaders been satisfied? In spite of everything that has happened, let us hear
the answer from one of them. On 12 January 1967 Y71e
Jerusalem Post published this statement:

71. But when the issue of mobilization is raised, when
Syria complains that there is mobilization on the borders of
Syria, one must not listen only to the affirmations and
statements given by the Israel representative to the Sccretary-General, to be transmitted to the representatives of the
United Arab Republic and Syria. The above-mentioned
report shows clearly that military fortifications have been
built; that they constitute a continuous threat to, and a
continuous mobilization on the borders of Syria; and that
the various United Nations Chiefs of Staff have requested
that these fortifications be demolished. Yet up to now, in
1967, those requests, made as long ago as 19.55, 1957, 1960
and 1962, have not been implemented or respected in the
least.

“Mr. Shragai, head of the Jewish Agency Immigration
Department, told the Zionist leaders yesterday morning
that ‘the great tragedy of our generation and of Zionism
is that, despite the fact that “part” of the Land of Israel
has been returned to the Jewish people as a sovereign
State, we have not yet succeeded in bringing the people
back to the State’.”
And I call attention to the statement that what they liavc
taken is only “part of the Land of Israel”. And this is not
old history, this is the year in which we are living.
Secondly, I call attention to the statement that they “have
not yet succeeded in bringing the people back to the
State”. Thus, to us, Zionism, having found its fulfilment in
the Israel State, is, in view of what I have just quoted, a ‘i
continuous act of aggression, and, by confiscating and
occupying Arab Palestine, by killing, ousting and deporting
the people of Palestine, has to account for crimes of
genocide and for crimes of war.

72. But let me read one of the paragraphs of this report:
“The part of the central sector of the demilitarized
zqne which is on the eastern bank of the Jordan River is a
narrow strip of land, generally controlled by Syria, while
the western bank, generally controlled by Israel, is a large
area. On the western bank Arab villages have been
demolished, their inhabitants evacuated. The inhabitants
of the villages of Baqqara and Ghanname returned
following Security Council resolution 93 (1951) of 18
May 1951. They were later, on 30 October 1956, forced
to cross into Syria where they are still living. Their lands
on the western bank of the river, and Khoury Farm in the
same area, are cultivated by Israel nationals.” [S/7573,

76. The basic cause of the tragedy that we are dealing with
is the fact that the Arab people of Palestine-the party 1I
directly involved and concerned in this issue-have been
completely and deliberately forgotten and disregarded; and
unless this fact is fully and completely taken into considera.
tion, and the situation is remedied, the problem till ’
continue to live with us. This has consistently been the
stand of the Syrian delegation.

para. 16.1

This is law as conceived by Israel and by its representative,
who yesterday invoked the rule of law against Syria in an
attempt to gain sympathy.

77. In this connexion, I beg to quote here my statement in
the Security Council, on 14 October 1966, during debates
in the Council:

73. I come now to the concluding remarks of my
statement. The grave situation which we are facing and
discussing has been described as a “crisis”. Now, “crisis” is
one of the most pregnant words that could exist in any
language anywhere. A genuine crisis put us always, so to
speak, in the midstream of history. We are, in a way,
pierced by time. The past, the present, and the future
confront us with all the gravity they contain and the
responsibility they impose upon us. Many want to shun
those deeper aspects, want to stick to the present and the
immediate, and to come up with a quick resolution from
the Security Council. History, they claim, is old, monotonous, boring. But we are in the midst of history, an.d we

whenever we are discussing the problems of Israel
and the neighbouring Arab States, one thing is lost sight
of, which is absolutely necessary, and that is that besides,
beyond, outside and above either the Syrians, the
Egyptians, the Lebanese or the Jordanians, or the Israelis,
there is an Arab people of Palestine. The whole wretched
story that we hear time and again here is due to the fact
that these Arabs of Palestine have been forgotten. . . a
There is an Arab people of Palestine, and these Arabs of
Palestine are not different from any other people in their
determination,
will, attachment ‘and loyalty to their
homeland.” [1307th meeting, pare. 68.1
“

.

8

.

.

78. To deprive a people of its national identity by force,
whether military or otherwise, is in itself a grave violation
of the Charter. This is clearly stated in General Assembly
resolution 2160 (XXI) of 30 November 1966 which, in
sub-paragraph (b) of operative paragraph 1, states:

killed-killed
by aggression and retaliatory actions by
Israel-was six to one. General Burns, who wasat one time
Chief of Staff-and I quote him again-commenting on the
number of people kilIed as the result of Israel’s retaliations,
had this to say: “Israel’s retaliatory policy had piled up an
impressive balance of corpses in her favour,”

‘Any forcible action, direct or indirect, which deprives
peoples under foreign domination of their right to
self-determination and freedom and independence and of
their right to determine freely their political status and
pursue their economic, social and cultural development
constitutes a violation of the Charter of the United
Nations. . , .”

83. Israel must sooner or later account for war crimes and
crimes against humanity, against the Arab people of
Palestine and against the neighbouring Arab States. It is
deplorable to us that for the last twenty years Israel has not
only not been punished, but has been encouraged to pursue
this policy, primarily and basically by the Government of
the United States.

79. The plight of the Arab people of Palestine is not in
any way different from the plight of the people of South
West Africa or Southern Rhodesia, for in both cases, a
racist minority, a rebel rCgime of transplanted aliens, established an illegal re’gime and deprived the majority of the
population of their right to self-determination. Using force,
they deprived the people of their national identity. Where is
the Arab people of Palestine? Has it evaporated? And in
both cases Great Britain was and is responsible for the
problem-the
only difference being that, whereas the
indigenous people of South West Africa and of Southern
Rhodesia remained and are still on their land, the Arab
people of Palestine have been ousted from their homeland
by brutal force and sheer, ugly terrorism.

84. I listened very carefully yesterday to the statement
delivered here by the representative of the United States, I
read and re-read the statement. But I failed to find any
constructive approach. He said that we should preservethe
statusquo, which to us means: keep injustice as it is; keep
the criminal enjoying the freedom of the international
community. And then the representative of the United
States said: we want to treat both parties equally and
justly. But surely when we take into consideration that for
the last seventeen or eighteen years during which we have
been fighting within the United Nations just to withdraw
the income from the property of the Arab refugeesfrom
Palestine, to enable them to live decently as human beings,
the one and only delegation that has been fighting us-the
delegation that has been fighting us most of all-has been
the United States delegation.

80. I listened carefully yesterday to the statement of the
representative of the United Kingdom pleading for freedom
of navigation in the Gulf of Aqaba. Surely, Lord Caradon,
who is so very well acquainted with the history of the Arab
world, knows the particular history of the occupation of
Aqaba by Arab forces during the First World War. They
gave it as a prize to the Allies. It was the Arabs who took
Aqaba. And what was the reward? During the First World
War, especially among the population of Syria, amounting
to no more than 5 million persons at that time, 300,000
Arabs died of hunger. We have been amply rewarded by
Great Britain,

85. This can very easily be explained. As an example of
this official support of the United States Government, I
shall quote the following words of Vice-President
Humphrey-for when the President does not speak, the
Vice-President speaks: “Israel does not need a written
alliance with the United States; that alliance is there in
spirit.” The Vice-President said that on 8 May 1967, at a
dinner in the Washington Hilton hotel, when the VicePresident was presented the 1967 Histadrut Humanitarian
Award of the,I$tional Committee for Labor Israel and the
American Trade Union Council for Histadrut. Thus, there is
an a priori spiritual alliance between the United States and
Israel; no written alliance is needed.

81. The account which I gave today of the unprovoked
attack on Syria by Israel has established the fact that,
contrary to the claims by Israel leaders and spokesmen, not
only military targets were the object of their attack, but
innocent civilians and property where no military targets
existed whatsoever-according to the investigation of the
United Nations military observers. I need not quote the
Charter of the International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg. War crimes and crimes against humanity have been
very clearly defined. They are: any act of aggression; acts
committed to destroy a national, ethnical, racial or religious
group; inhuman acts against any civilian population, such as
murder, deportation, persecution; plunder or looting of
public or private property and wanton destruction of cities,
towns and villages.

86. We very much regret the fact that the American public
has been and continues to be deceived by the Israel Zionist
mass media machine, because no people can have anything
against any other people.
87. But what we would say is that there is a limit to how
much error human nature can accept; after that there is
revolt. One of the aspects of the crisis we are now facing is
that for the fast twenty years the Arabs have been
humiliated and unjustly treated, and those who have
imposed the humiliation have been able to get away with
their crimes. But this year, unlike any preceding year, the
Arabs stand united, and will continue to do so.

82. As a result of Israel’s continued aggression against
neighbouring States-not
to speak of the whole Arab
patrimony in Palestine that has now been expropriated by
the Israelis, which in itself is a war crime-the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization determined that,
between 1949 and 1956, the ratio of Arabs to Israelis

,88. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
the United Arab Republic.
89. Mr. EL KONY (United Arab Republic): In the Course
of my submission yesterday, to which the members of the
9

sion, which drafted the articles of the Convention, made
this clear in its report to the General Assembly covering the
work of its eighth session, and I quote paragraph 32 of the
report:

Council listened with patience, for which 1 am grateful, 1
endeavoured to underline, in as much detail as time would
allow, the political factors which have affected and still
affect the situation in the Middle East and which have led
to the present boiling point. In that respect 1 have not
failed to explain thoroughly the acts and actions performed
by the Israelis and their associates in changing the conditions in the area-not for the better, but most definitely for
the worse, by creating a state of turmoil and unrest.

“The Commission also wishes to make two other
observations which apply to the whole draft:
“I, The draft regulates the law of the sea in time of
peace only.“3

90. 1 also endeavoured to put before the Council the
irrefutable legal thesis upon which my Government bases
itself. This has been the consistent position of my Government since 1948, and as may be observed from the records
of the United Nations, we have never failed to substantiate
our stand with legal arguments and authoritative opinion
and to rest our case on the soundest juridical foundations.

96. Having referred to the debate of the Council yesterday, I cannot but register my regret that the level of
decorum in the Council was lowered by a small voice
coming from nowhere, intervening in the discussion, using
indecent language and slanderous expressions. In doing SO,
this voice was in fact expressing its masters’ policies. I
certainly shall not permit myself to sink to such a level. I
leave it to the Council to judge for itself.

91, In presenting the legal basis of the case, we have
spoken about the Charter of the United Nations. We have
referred to the decisions of the Security Council. We have
invoked the resolutions of the United Nations, We have
quoted the provisions of the General Amlistice Agreement.
We have cited principles of international law. We have done
so because we believe in the rule of law and in the principle
embodied in the Charter that the function of the United
Nations is to maintain peace and security in conformity
with the principles of justice and international law.

97. To conclude, allow me to reiterate the position of my
Government. We have acted within the limits of our
sovereign rights. We do not contemplate any offensive
action. But we hasten to add that we would not hesitate a
moment, in the exercise of our inherent right of selfdefence, to repel any aggression committed against us. As
you all know, in exercising our right of sovereignty, we
have initiated measures in our territorial waters. This we
shall continue to exercise: there has been no change in this
position.

92. During the debate yesterday, we listened with care and
attention to the interventions of the members of the
Council. We have noted that interest in the legal aspects was
lacking, for none of our arguments have been commented
upon, and that the sense of political expediency was
prevalent. At this juncture, I wish to submit to the Council
that the solution to any problem cannot be found unless it
is based on law and justice, and to emphasize anew that
disregard of the norms and rules of law, of the terms of
agreements, of the Charter of the United Nations and, in
particular, of the principle of the sovereignty of States will
not lead the Council to a fruitful outcome.

98. My Government is committed to the cause of justice
and stands firm by the principle of the total respect of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian Arab people. My
Government shall continue to do so, consistent with its
obligations to the people of Palestine in particular, and tc
the Arab nations as a whole.
99. Mr. TA3OR (Denmark): Since 1 last had the honour
to address this Council on the question of the crisis in the
Middle East, the Secretary-General has returned. We are
happy to welcome him back. My Government has full
confidence in U Thant, and fully supports his endeavours to
prevent an aggravation of the situation in the Middle East.

93. The policies of feit accompli have never been ours but
are those of others, those who blatantly disregard law,
those who have created a wedge in the midst of our region,
those who have implanted a bunch of aliens at the expense
of the original inhabitants of the area for the sake of
promoting the selfish ends of colonialism.

100. The Secretary-General’s report /S/7906/ leaves no
doubt in our minds that the situation is extremely serious.
Fortunately, there has been no outbreak of open hostilities;
but if the situation is allowed to linger on, 1 fear that the
outcome is bound to be disastrous-a fear that has only
been increased by listening to the speeches delivered by the
parties directly concerned.

94. 1 wish lo say that, in the whole of his intervention
yesterday [1343r(t meetirlg/, Mr, Goldberg, the representative of the United States, stressed one legal argument
only, and 1 feel it my duty, for the sake of his own peace of
mind, to say that the contention raised by him that the
United Arab Republic’s decision to ban Israel shipping runs
in contravention with article 16, paragraph 4, of the Geneva
Convention on the Territorial Sea and the Contiguous Zone
is unfounded,

101. The report of the Secretary-General clearly shows
how many dangerous elements there are in the present
situation, and the conclusions of the Secretary-General are
twofold. In the first place, he states that a peaceful
outcome to the present crisis depends upon a breathing
spell which will allow tension to subside from its present
explosive 1eveI. In the second place, the Secretary-General

95. This argument is categorically refuted by the absence
of any reference in the Convention to the consequences of
anncd conflict, Thus the said article is irrelevant and has no
application to our case. This view is substantiated beyond
any doubt by the fact that the International Law Commis-

3 See Yeurbook

of‘ the Interrlational

Law Commission, 1956,

vol. II (United Nations publication,Salts No.: 56.V.3, Vol. II),
p, 256.
10

believesthat the Security Council, with the co-operation of
ali parties concerned, must continue to seek, and eventually
to find, reasonable, peaceful and just solutions to the
prolJems behind the present crisis.

107. Let us never forget that the problem confronting
mankind today is, in the words of a Danish poet,
“coexistence or no existence, that’s the question”. Let us
therefore work together to prevent arms from giving the
answer to this crucial question.

102. My Government is in full agreement with that
assessment by the Secretary-General. Denmark firmly supports any bona fide effort from any quarter to relieve the
situation. I believe, however, that any country which
believes in the United Nations would also accept that the
primary responsibility should rest with the Security Council
in which the great Powers are represented, which in its very
composition reflects the entire spectrum of the world
community and in which the parties to a conflict may be
heard.

108. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America]: I shall
speak very briefly in exercise of my right to reply, and I
shall do so in terms of what I conceive the main function of
the Council to be at the present time-that is, not to say
anything that might exacerbate a situ:Jt.ion which is by
common recognition very tense, very grave, very serious
and menacing to the cause of world peace and security.
109. Our colleague, Mr. Tomeh, made reference to the
position throughout the past, as he put it, of the United
States in relation to the question of the regrettably
long-standing differences between Israel and the Arab
States. The import of his remarks was that the United
States in this matter has taken a one-sided position, has not
been impartial and has lined itself up invariably on the side
of Israel regardless of the merits of the particular dispute. I
say to Mr, Tomeh that the record does not bear out that
assertion. Indeed, we do not even have to refer to the very
ancient past; all we have to do is refer to the very recent
past, the recollection of which is very fresh in the minds of
all of us. The very last action taken by the Security Council
in reference to the problems in the Near East was taken on
the complaint of Jordan against Israel, and the expressions
of the United States and the vote of the United States on
that occasion were against Israel on that particular matter.

103. Our discussions seem to me to indicate that there is
among our members very broad agreement in principle that
the Council, in response to the Secretary-General’s call for a
breathing spell, ought to launch an appeal to the parties for
restraint. We agree that such an appeal should be made.
However, only if it were adopted with the greatest possible
majority, and preferably unanimously, would it appear as a
true expression of the collective will of our Organization.
My delegation, therefore, is prepared to co-operate with all
members of the Council in the wording of such an appeal,
which should be impartial, objective and urgent. We find
that in this respect most useful guidance is to be found in
the Secretary-General’s report.
104. The appeal, however, would only be the first step on
the road. The Council would still have to try to tackle the
problems of substance which underlie the present crisis and
find a solution based on law and justice. I would hesitate to
go into these problems today. I do not think that the time
is ripe for that. Let me merely remind the Council that the
Secretary-Gcncral in his report specifies the most dangerous
elements in the present situation-the
problems in connexion with the passage to the Gulf of Aqaba, the recent
tension along the border between Israel and the United
Arab Republic and sabotage and terrorist activities and
rights of cultivation in disputed areas in the demilitarized
zone between Israel and Syria, Those are some of the
problems which the Council, hopefully, could take up once
the immediate threat to the peace in the area has been
averted.

110. If I were to refer to the very distant past, I could
recall to the members of the Council what I scarcely need
recall, that on 29 October 1956, an historic day in the
history of the United Nations, it was the United States,
standing against old friends and allies, that brought the
matter of the Suez crisis to the United Nations. I shall leave
it to the judgement of the United Nations what the position
of the United States was in that area.
111. I am not going to burden the record of the Council
with a long history of the position of the United States in
this matter. I have it before me. Should the occasion arise, I
would have no hesitancy in referring to it. I have the record
of every resolution that has been discussed and voted upon
in the Council in relation to this troublesome area, and the
record of those resolutions amply demonstrates the consistent attitude of the United States to let the chips fall
where they may and to take the position which I asserted
yesterday in defence of the political and the territorial
integrity of every country in the Middle East.

105. We all know that there will be no easy solutions. This
is only another reason why we should already give thought
at this stage to the approach to follow in dealing with these
problems. To this end, it will probably be both appropriate
and necessary to resume the usual consultations among all
members of the Council.

112. It would be very illuminating to look at the record of
the past and see where my country has stood in relation to
the many, many problems which have arisen in that area. It
is a record of even-handed conduct between the parties. It
is a one-sided record in the cause of peace in the area and in
defence of the Charter. I readily concede that we have that
type of partisanship. We are partisan in the interest of
peace; we are partisan in the interest of pacifying the
situation in the area; we are partisan in the interest of
protecting the territorial integrity and the political indti
pendence of all Member States of the United Nations,

106. I feel convinced of one thing. If,we do not here and
now show the courage to deal with the problems confronting us with dedication, efficiency and urgency, we
shall indeed fail to fulfil the aspirations, the fervent hope of
mankind that this Organization can be an efficient instrument for the maintenance of peace. The result of such a
failure would also be a very serious crisis for the United
Nations itself, most serious indeed, in particular, for all the
smaller nations that are most dependent on an international
organization.
11

That is a fundamental principle which, when we addrc:<c
ourselves to the substance, I think we will have to talk
about. For 1 also notice in the Secretary-General’s report, a
report which concerns his visit to Cairo, a statement about
a desire on the part of the United Arab Republic to
reaffirm the validity of the General Armistice Agreement.
Here too it must be remembered we are equal-handed,
because I should like also to recall in fairness that the State
of Israel has not always recognized the complete validity of
the Armistice Agreement, saying for its part that the other
side does not recognize the validity of the Armistice
Agreement as a whole. I think that that is somet;ling we
should discuss.

which have been received in this body and which are
entitled to equal respect from all of us.
113. I do not apologise for the statements of VicePresident Humphrey or of any other American officiaI who
professes friendship for any Member of the United
Nations--because our country professes friendship for all
Members of the United Nations. In exercising the right of
reply, I shall not encumber the record with the longstanding position of the United States, which is sustained
in the records of both the Security Co~mcil
and the General
Assembly. This is in the interests of the impartial consideration of this particular problem.

117. But I can state the position of my own Government.
The position of my own Government has consistently been
and remains today that since there is an Armistice
Agreement which this Organization has endorsed, and of
which this Organization was the principal architect, neither
side therefore has the right to exercise belligerent rights.
That
is the legal position that I assert.

114. I should now like to say a few words about what the
able representative of the United Arab Republic said in his
remarks. I did not enter into a long legal discussion
yesterday about the problem of free and innocent passage
in the Strait of Tiran specifically because-and I made this
point-I thought that we had a short-range problem and a
long-range problem, I said that the short-range problem was
restoration of the stutcrs qlro alzte in the Strait of Tiran-the
status which has existed for eleven years-so that the
Council, enjoying the breathing spell, the cooling-off period
that the Secretary-General has suggested, could consider the
underlying problems and arrive at a fair, just and
honourable solution of these problems. Therefore, I said, as
the members of the Council will recall, that the problem of
the Gulf of Aqaba and of free and innocent passage in the
Strait of Tiran was a long-range problem and that it
deserved and required the attention of the Council. In my
view, and I maintain that view, we should unanimously
support the Secretary-General’s appeal for a cooling-off
period. And may I again remind members of the Council
that the Secretary-General included in that appeal the
avoidance of acts of belligerence, I said yesterday that I
thought that we ought to honour the ideas of the
Secretary-General, who has just come back from the area,
as to what course of action is indicated at this time, so that
we could proceed more deliberately to deal with the
long-range problem.

118. I again apologize to this Council. As I said, rtty
professional pride was slightly touched, I did not intend to
enter upon a substantive argument at this point. I think
that we will have to consider that matter when we embark
upon the necessary task of rebuilding the framework of the
Genesal Armistice Agreements. When we do, we obviously
will have to come to grips with the fundamental question,
and that question, which may be basic to the wh01~
question in the area, is: how does anybody assert rights of
conducting war against anybody else if there is an
armistice? Now does anybody assert belligerent rights if
there is an armistice? That is the question. We will have a
chance to talk about it, and I am sure that Mr, El Kony will
wish to say something more on ,that subject, which is a
complicated legal one. It could not be adequately explored
in the brief statement I made, I did not want to make a
legal argument yesterday. I was simply trying to say: let us
do first things first; let us have a cooling-off period; let us
restore the status quo ante; and let us then proceed to the
solemn task of rebuilding and revitalizing and reaffirlning
the Armistice Agreements.

115. But my professional pride was somewhat touched by
the reference made by my friend, Mr. El Kony, to the legal
question involved. I am not going to take the time of the
Council to discuss it, but shall say something very simple
about it. What I shall cite is not my views but the views
which the Security Council has held on this subject of the
assertion made by the represen,tative of the United Arab
Republic on behalf of his country regarding belligerent
rights with respect to free and innocent passagein the Strait
of Tiran and in the Gulf of Aqaba.

119. The PRESIDENT: Since no other member of the
Council wishes to speak at this time, I should like to mn kc a
statement in my capacity as the representative of CHINA.
120. Within the space of a few days we have seer1 the
withdrawal of the United Nations Emergency Force from
the Gaza Strip, the massing of troops along the armistice
lines between Israel, Syria, and the United Arab Republic
and the heightening of tension in the entire Middle F3s1
area. It seems that the world teeters on the brink 01
catastrophe.

116. The Security Council expressed itself as long ago as
1951 on the subject of whether belligerent rights could be
asserted in light of the Armistice Agreements, which this
Council has always endorsed, between the parties to the
dispute, Israel and the Arab States. Resolution 95 (1951j
contained the following passage:

121. There is also a moment of grave crisis for the L!rlitcl,
Nations. , This, therefore, is no time for intemperatl
rhetoric. In the midst of passions, it is the time w&r1 th
Security Council must remain calm. Above all, nothing w
say or do here should further aggravate the situation. Th
people of the whole world look to the United Natiorls fo
urgent and constructive action in this hour of peril. Wha
the Security Council may do in the present case wi

“Considering that since the armistice rBgime , which has
been in existence for nearly two and half years, is of a
permanent character, neither party can reasonably assert
that it is actively a belligerent . . ,“.

12

determine whether the hopes which the people of the world
have for the United Nations are justified or whether the
Organization is capable of doing the job for which it was
founded,

miscalculation. That is what the Council must exert its&f io
prevent. That is why a cooling-off period or, to use the
Secretary-General’s phrase, a “breathing spell”, is so necessary to allow tension to subside from its present explosive
level. The Council, of course, must see to it that the time
thus gained will be used for the reduction of tension and
not for the purpose of making military preparations for a
showdown.

122. The Secretary-General has described the Middle East
situation as “more disturbing, indeed . . . more menacing,
than at any time since the fall of 19%“. But he does not
believe that “we can allow ourselves to despair”. He thinks
that “in spite of the extreme difficulties of the situation”,
the United Nations, in particular the Security Council,
“must continue to seek, and eventually to find, reasonable,
peaceful and just solutions”. My delegation cannot agree
with him more in this respect. And we are encouraged by
the Secretary-General’s determination “to make all possible
efforts to contribute to a solution of the present crisis”.

124. The United Nations has for over ten years played a
vital role in the maintenance of peace in the Middle East,
There is no reason to believe that it cannot again exert a
moderating influence. Indeed, a limited form of United
Nations presence remains in the area. If the existing
machinery can be reactivated and strengthened as envisaged
in the Secretary-General’s report, it will be a forward step
toward keeping the peace for the future.

123. My delegation is aware of the fact that the present
crisis has its origin in Middle East history. The issues
involved are as complex as they are deep-rooted. There can,
of course, be no lasting peace in the area without serious
efforts being made to remove some of the basic causes of
conflict. These long-range problems, however, cannot be
resolved overnight. The immediate task of the Council is
how to prevent the heavily equipped military units of the
contending countries, which have been glowering at each
other across the borders, from embarking on actual
hostilities. My delegation, along with other delegations,
endorses the Secretary-General’s appeal for restraint and
moderation. We do not believe that the parties concerned
really want to involve themselves in a war in which there
can be no victors. But there is always the danger of

125. Speaking now as PRESIDENT, I should like to
inform the Council that three representatives have signified
their desire to speak tomorrow afternoon. I have informally
consulted members of the Council concerning the holding
of a meeting tomorrow. Eleven members favour holding a
meeting tomorrow, and four members prefer to hold a
meeting on Thursday. In the circumstances, because of the
preponderance of members who favour holding a meeting
tomorrow, if there is no further objection, I shall call the
next meeting of the Security Council for tomorrow, 31
May 1967, at 3 p-m,
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

13

HOW

TO

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

be obtained

Uniled
Notions
publicotions,may
the world.
Consult
your
bookstore
or Geneva

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Nations
entier.

Nations

Unies,

des venter,

KAK

IlOJlYYMTb

COMO

CONSEGUIR

or

from
bookstores
Notions,
to: United

write

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publicafions
dea
d&positoires
du monde
Section

PUBLICATIONS

Unies
rant
lnformez-vous
New

MIAAHMfl

York

DES

in U.N.

Price:

$U.S.

throughout
New York

les libroiries
et les agencer
libroirie
ou odrersez-vous
6:

ou GenBve.

DE LAS

06bEAMHEHHblX

NACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidos
estfin
en todas
portes
del mundo.
Consljlle
a su librero
Ventas,
Noevo
York o Ginebra.

Litho

distributors
Sales Section,

UNIES

en vent-z
dons
aupr&s
de votre

OPrAHM3A~MM

PUBLICACIONES

NATIONS

and

0.50 (or equivalent

HAMMR

UNIDAS

en venta
en libreriar
y coax
distribuidoras
o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unidas,
Secci6n

in other

wren&%)

de

04927-February

1971~-2,100
