--

UNITED NATIONS

S.ECURITY
O.FFICIAL
THIRTY-THIRD

NEW

COUNCIL
RECORDS

YEAR

YORK

CONTENTS
Pa:
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2070)

.. ..,.............,... .. ......

... ..... .. ... .........,......... .,.,..

1

Complaint by Zambia:
Letter dated 9 March 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12589)..........................,.........,....,...

1

Adoption of the agenda

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given,
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2070th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 17 March 1978, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Ivor RICHARD
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion. In accordance with the usual practice I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative to participate in the discussion, without the right
to vote, in conformity with rule 37 of the provisional rules
of procedure.

Besent: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Pham Duong (Viet
Nam) took the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2070)
3. Mr. LA1 Ya-li (China) (interpretation from Chinese):
First of all, I should like to express a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Mwale, Foreign Minister of Zambia, who
has come personally to participate in the deliberations of
the Security Council. We have listened attentively to bis
statement [2068th meeting] ; he exposed with irrefutable
facts the serious crimes of massive intrusion into Zambia
committed by the racist rCgime of Southern Rhodesia and
strongly condemned these crimes.

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Complaint by Zambia:
Letter dated 9 March 1978 from the Permanent
Representative of Zambia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12589)
T&E meeting was called to order at 11.30 a.m.

4. Recently, while frenziedly pressing forward with its
“internal settlement” fraud, the Smith racist r@ime has
been stepping up its repression at home and aggression
abroad, It has reached a new high in its reactionary
arrogance. Following its armed incursion into Botswana on
27 February, the Smith regime launched another large-scale
attack on Zambia by air and ground forces, causing heavy
losses in life and property among the Zambian people. But
Smith and his like have the effrontery to deny such an act
of naked aggression by saying that it is a “self-defence
operation”. This is gangster logic, Fascist logic, pure and
simple! Such a desperate act constitutes not only a serious
encroachment upon the sovereignty and security of
Zambia, but also a rabid provocation to the entire African
people and the people all over the world.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Complaint by Zambia:
Letter dated 9 March 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/12589)
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
taken previously by the Council, I invite the representative
of Zambia to take a place at the Council table and the
representatives of Botswana, Cuba, Egypt, the German
Democratic Republic, Ghana, Jamaica, Mozambique, the
United Republic of Tanzania and the Upper Volta to take
the seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

5. The present situation in Africa is excellent. The entire
African people are courageously fighting for the elimination
of the last bastions of colonialism and racism in southern
Africa. The armed struggles in Zimbabwe and Namibia and
the mass movement .in Azania are developing vigorously.
Supporting each other, these struggles and the mass
movement have converged into an irresistible revolutionary
torrent, ceaselessly pounding away at the Smith and
Vorster reactionary r&imes. Like the SW setting beyond
the western hills, the Smith r@ime, which finds itself in
dire straits,, is attempting to resort to military force to
coerce Zambia and other front-line countries into withdrawing their support for the just struggle of the Zimbabwe
people. This does not in any way show its strength, but
reveals precisely that it is feeble and is drawing near its

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mwale (Zambia)
took a place at the Council table and Mr. Tlou (Botswana),
h@. Alar& (Cuba), Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Florin
(German Democratic Republic), Mr. Boaten (Ghana),
Mr. Mills (Jamaica), Mr. Lobe (Mozambique), Mr. tilim
(united Republic of Tanzania) and Mr. Bamba (Upper
Volta) took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Quncil chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam in
1

0

southern Africa can be removed only by the replacement of
the illegal regime by an independent State of Zimbabwe
established on the basis of free and fair elections and
genuine majority rule. This is the goal which the United
States Government and the Government of the United
Kingdom, with the co-operation of the front-line States,
have been actively working for during the past year,
Ambassador Young expressed in his statement before the
Council on 14 March [2067th meeting] the United States’
belief that the Anglo-American plan, which was put forth
and discussed at length, offered the best hope for a peaceful
solution of the Rhodesian crisis and for a speedy transition
to independence on the basis of majority rule, and that
only in that way could the tragic pattern of conflict and
bloodshed be broken.

doom. The iniquitous acts of Smith cannot but further
rouse the African countries and people to strengthen their
common struggle against racism. So long as racism still
exists, the people of Zimbabwe will continue their resolute
and indomitable struggle for independence and liberation
until they win final victory, It is a sacred duty for the
front-lime countries and other African States to extend
support in military, political, economic and other fields to
the Zimbabwe people’s struggle in accordance with the
principles of the Charter and the resolutions of the
Organization of African Unity in order to realize the
complete emancipation of the whole African continent. NO
matter how the racists employ their schemes and intrigues
under the protection and support of one super-Power, and
no matter how the other super-Power that styles itself the
“natural ally” of the African people tries to meddle in and
undermine the liberation struggle of the people of southern
Africa, they cannot change the ignominious end of the
Smith racist regime, that of meeting its final doom. Africa
belongs to the people of Africa. The African people will
certainly be able to bring about a bright tomorrow of the
complete liberation of the African continent so long as they
strengthen their unity and exclude outside interference.

10. I noted with concern one aspect of the Foreign
Minister’s statement, and that was that seven United
States-manufactured Chinook helicopters were involved in
the Rhodesian attack on Zambia. I have been authorized to
state-and the United States Embassy at Lusaka has so
advised the Government of Zambia-that the United States
has never supplied, nor agreed to a third country’s
supplying, nor been aware of a third country’s supplying
the Chinook helicopters or any similarly configured helicopters to any country in southern Africa. To the knowledge of the United States Government, there have been no
such helicopters in the region. Furthermore, the United
States Embassy at Lusaka has offered its assistance to the
Government of Zambia in identifying any Rhodcsian
helicopters destroyed in the recent military action there.
The United States Government is prepared, if the Government of Zambia agrees, to send a representative of the
United States Department of Defense to examine, together
with representatives of the Government of Zambia, the
wreckage of the downed helicopters in order to determine
their type and to obtain any serial numbers or other
information that would assist in identifying their country
of origin.

6. The Chinese delegation strongly condemns the Smith
racist regime for its criminal acts of aggression against
Zambia, firmly supports Zambia and other countries in
southern Africa in their just struggle against colonialism and
racism, and expresses its great admiration for the just
position taken by the Zambian Government and people in
defying brute force and supporting firmly the struggle of
the Zimbabwe people. The Chinese delegation holds that
the Security Council should adopt a resolution sternly
condemning the criminal acts of aggression committed by
the Smith racist regime against Zambia, and commending
and supporting the just stand of Zambia.
7. Mr, McHENRY (United States of America): First of all
I wish to express the gratitude of the United States
delegation to Foreign Minister Mwale for taking time from
his busy schedule personally to assist the Council in its
work on this agenda item. Other representatives of the
United States and I have had frequent occasion to consult
with Mr, Mwale on developments in southern Africa, and
we have appreciated the opportunity to do so.

11. My Government is convinced that a peaceful solution
can be found in Zimbabwe and that the tragic events of
recent days need not recur, What is needed is a renewed
dedication to the goal to which we are all dedicated. As far
as the United States is concerned, I can assure members of
the Council that we will continue to spare no effort to
achieve an independent Zimbabwe,

8. The attack of 6 March by the forces of the Smith
regime on Zambia is but the latest in the continuing
Rhodesian tragedy, The United States fully shares the sense
of outrage that has been so eloquently expressed by the
Foreign Minister of Zambia [206&h mee&rg/ and by other
speakers. The United States expressed that view immediately on learning of this latest incident, We also share the
concern expressed by the Minister over the possibilify that
the escalation and spread of violence in the region could
have grave repercussions on the peace of the region and,
indeed, the peace of the world, The fact that during the last
three months the Council has witnessed armed attacks by
the Smith regime against Mozambique, Rotswana and
Zambia demonstrates the degree of the danger.

12. As we shall not have another opportunity to speak on
the draft resolution before us [S/12603],
the United States
would state that it will support the draft; however, as
members are aware, that will obviously not affect the
position that we have taken on previous resolutions that
may be referred to in the draft.
13. Mr. HUSSON (France) (interpretation from Frene?~]:
First of all I should like to bid welcome to Mr. Siteke
Mwale, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zambia, who has
honoured usby cominghereand participating in our debate
in person. France maintains friendly relations with his
country and we are well aware of the difficult circurnstancesin which Zambiafinds itself at the present time as
the result of incursionsinto its territory. Therefore, my
co~.Wry
consideredthe information on the recent events in
that country with greatsympathy and understanding.

9. Yet, the way out of the Rhodesia crisis is, in the view of
the United States, clear. The danger that the Smith regime
poses for the neighbouring African States and for peace in
2

21. Mr. HULINSKk (Czechoslovakia) [interpretation from
Russian): My delegation listened attentively to the Foreign
Minister of Zambia, on 15 March [2068th meeting] when
he made a statement in which he exposed in detail the
circumstances attendant on the most recent deliberate
bloody attack by the Southern Rhodesian racists on
sovereign Zambia and at the same time revealed in a
masterly manner the reasons for and objectives of the
aggressive acts of the illegal regime against independent
African countries,

14, The present debate in the Council is an extension of
the Council’s recent debate on Rhodesia. Indeed, just after
we began our consideration of the problem raised by the
announcement that a settlement had been reached at
S&bury on 3 March, the forces of the rebel rdgime entered
‘Zambia. It would have been difficult not to consider that
gestureas an act of defiance vis-a-vis our work. The Lusaka
authorities, victims of the attack, were fully justified in
asking that we should condemn that intervention, which,
no matter how it is viewed, constitutes a flagrant violation
of the sovereignty of an independent State Member of the
United Nations.

22. In the course of the discussions on the question of the
situation in Southern Rhodesia in various bodies of the
United Nations over a period of more than 12 years the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, together with a number of
other States, has repeatedly warned that the continuing
existence of the racist regime in that country represents a
constant threat to peace and security not only in that part
of’ Africa but throughout the world. The most recent
barbarous attack on Zambia by the racist army once again
vindicates those misgivings. It is obvious that until the
existing regime at Salisbury is entirely eliminated the
Security Council will be faced again and again with the
question of its open and incessant acts of aggressionagainst
the African population of Zimbabwe and also against
sovereign African States. As the heroic and legitimate
struggle of the people of Zimbabwe, led by the Patriotic
Front, becomes more intense, the Smith regime is attempting desperately and vainly and by any meansavailable to it
to stave off its inevitable defeat.

15. As soon as the facts, which brought about the
convening of our meetings, came to our attention, the
French Government, through its spokesman of the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs, denounced those events in these terms:
“The Security Council has been meeting since 6 March
on the Rhodesian problem, and the French Government
cannot fail to condemn the raids on Zambian territory
carried out by the army of the illegal regime of Ian Smith.
That military intervention represents an increased danger
to peacein southern Africa and cannot fail to impede the
efforts to achieve a peaceful settlement to which we have
been constantly ,devoted.”
16. The list of incursions by the forces of Ian Smith into
neighbouring States is unfortunately quite long, as many
speakershave already reminded us. The Council has already
dealt with similar raids against Zambia, in particular in
1973, but also against Botswana and Mozambique.

23. The Foreign Minister of Zambia, like the representatives of other African countries, has drawn attention
to the direct link between the manoeuvres of the illegal
regime in its attempts to impose the so-called internal
settlement plan upon the African majority and the most
recent acts of aggression committed by that regime against
Botswana on 27 February and Zambia on 6 March. According to the representative of Tanzania:

17. The Salisbury regime apparently clings to the belief
that suchactions will ensure its tranquillity. J$Iowever,in the
kind of situation that exists in Rhodesia, such actions can
only result in an increase of the already serious tension and
a risk of a broadening of the conflict. These actions also
causemany casualties and much resentment. They cause
death and destruction, forcing the country attacked to
mobilize resources that it would otherwise have been able
to devote to its own development.

“It simply means that, as far as the Smith regime is
concerned, the so-called internal settlement has changed
nothing. It simply demonstrates that the regime is
determined to continue its acts of aggressioninternally
and externally.” (Ibid., para. 77.1

18. The illegal rdgime at Salisbury must understand the
universal condemnation that such operations call down
upon it, It must realize that the restoration of peace in
Rhodesia cannot come about through hostile incursions
into neighbouring countries nor through a refusal to face up
to reality, but only through an understanding reached in
negotiations with all the Rhodesian parties. In our opinion,
that is one of the essential lessons to be learnt from the
precedingdebate in the Council.

24. The acts of aggression by the racist regime against the
front-line African States are clearly designed to discourage
the peoples of those countries from supporting the liberation of Zimbabwe, but at the same time undoubtedly also
represent an attempt to internationalize the conflict and
involve other States in the hope of enjoying the assistance
of countries who have their own political, military and
economic aims in that area, And it would appear that
Mr. Smith has some basis for counting on the support of
the Western countries which, by their connivance, bear
responsibility for the fact that his regime continues to
survive and to commit acts of adventurism. Surely this is
demonstrated by a number of warning signs that we have
seen recently in connexion with the so-called internal
settlement and which have indicated the encouragement
that Mr. Smith and his henchmen have been receiving
recently in their attempts to perpetuate their domination.
over Southern Rhodesia.

14. By sending his forces into Zambian territory, Ian
Smith has only drawn the attention of the world-as if that

werenecessary-to the overriding need for the transfer of
powerto the majority in his country, failing which the
cycleof violence can only continue.
20. The Council must resolutely condemn such operations
as that which has just been launched on the territory of
Zambia,My country will thus support the draft resolution
proposedyesterday by the representative of India on behalf
cf six States members of the Council [S/12603].
3

32. I need not reiterate the stand taken by the Federal
Republic of Germany against those who disregard the
integrity of sovereign neighbouring countries and the right
of peoples to self-determination and independence. I’can
only repeat that we strongly condemn such acts of
aggression. They endanger all our efforts to bring about the
necessary political changes in Zimbabwe by peaceful means.

25. The fact that the Security Council has been obliged to
deal in swift succession with a number of questions
connected with the new manoeuvres of the racist rdgime
within the Territory and also with its aggressive actions
against independent Zambia clearly shows that the situation
in that part of the world is extremely dangerous. At the
same time, this is confirmation of the fact that it is
necessary for the Council to take urgent and decisive
measures which would ensure the immediate elimination of
the racist regime and the rapid transfer of power to the
African majority.

33. We have deep sympathies with the people and the
Government of Zambia, which have again been the victim
of attacks by the illegal Smith rt5gime. The relations
between Zambia and my country are governed by mutual
understanding and friendship, A great number of political,
social, cultural and other organlzations in my country arein
continuous contact with their Zambian counterparts. Pedersl agencies as well as other public and private bodies are
contributing to the development of the Zambian economy
and infrastructure.
President Kaunda and his Foreign
Minister have been frequent and most welcome in visitors
to the Federal Republic of Germany. The political leaders
of my country attach special importance to the continuing
dialogue with these distinguished African politicians. In
view of this encouraging record of co-operation, I,should
like to take up the words spoken a few days ago in this
chamber by Mr. Mwale: we shall try to be “a friend in

26. The Czechoslovak delegation shares the view expressed
by the Foreign Minister of Zambia when he stated:
“If the world community does not act effectively to
arrest the rapidly deteriorating situation in our area, the
conflict will definitely escalate and proliferate. Moreover,
we believe that it is within the power of the United
Nations to help in the attainment of meaningful solutions
to the problems of Southern Rhodesia, Namibia and
South Africa,” [Ibid., para. 32.1
27. For its part, the Czechoslovak delegation believes that
one of the most important contributions the United
Nations could make to the struggle of the peoples of
southern Africa would be strict observance and strengthening of sanctions against the r@me at Salisbury and its
ally in South Africa.

need”.
34. Addressing myself to the sponsors of the draft
resolution before us [S/12603], I should like to add that, if
it is put to the vote, my delegation will cast a positive vote.

28. Mr. von WECHMAR (Federal Republic of Germany):
Mr. President, let me first of all join you in welcoming our
new colleague, the representative of Bolivia, Ambassador
Rol6n Anaya. My delegation is looking forward to developing with ltim, in our common endeavours here in the
Security Council, the same kind of friendly and intensive
relations as have existed for so long between Bolivia and the
Federal Republic of Germany.

35. Mr. ROLON ANAYA (Bolivia) (interpretation from
Spanish): I should like first of all to bid a special welcome
to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zambia, His Excellency Mr. Mwale.
36. By way of confirming the position expressed in the
Council by the delegation of Bolivia last January [2058fh
meeting], I should like briefly to explain the rejection of
neo-colonialism and racism by the people and the Govemment of Bolivia. But before doing so, I should like to
express our gratitude to the President of the Council, whose
sagacity Bolivia wishes to emphasize, and also to praise his
patience and effective work in the difficult and important
debate of the past week on the subject of the denunciation
of new violations by the r+ime in Southern Rhodesia. I
should also like to thank all our colleagues for their words
of welcome, especially those just expressed by the representative of the Federal Republic of Germany, and to
reiterate that Bolivia, representing the Latin American
countries in the Council, a role it is happy to share with the
land of the Liberator Bolivar-I refer to Venezuela-fmds
itself at a most propitious moment in its history to make a
practical contribution, which, we hope, will be realistic and
active. We do not intend to engage in the empty discourses
or mere declarations that seem to be flooding the world
these days, devaluating words and overwhelming everyone
with documentary inflation.

29. Only a few days ago [2067th meeting] I reiterated ir.
this room the policy of my Government on the question of
Southern Rhodesia. We condemned the violation of the
territorial integrity of countries bordering on Zimbabwe
and the loss of human lives this caused.
30. My delegation has since listened with great attention
to the detailed report of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Zambia [2068th meeting] on the latest
Rhodesian attack on Zambian territory on 6 March. Zambia
has indeed every reason to seize this organ of this complaint
and to ask us to pronounce judgement on these latest
developments, which again highlight the danger to peace
and security in that part of Africa.
31. I have time and again voiced our conviction that acts
of violence only bring about new violence and aggravate
rather than alleviate conflicts. We deeply deplore the
human suffering and damage inflicted upon the people of a
friendly nation and emphatically denounce this new act of
aggression. It is, as we know, only the latest episode in a
long series of military operations against Zambia and other
neighbouring countries, especially Mozambique and Botswana. This time, however, the minority r6gime at Salisbury
did not even try seriously to put forward any reasonable
argument for its unjustified action.

37. In our view, the present-day world is witnessing,
among other features, two fundamental movernentsnational and international, movements that are internal and
external to each society, to put it simply. While the internal
stratification manifested in the polarization of classes--a
4

stratification that today is admitted by all-has been
translated into international terms with the existence of
rich and poor countries, the phenomenon of foreign
domination of the colonial citadels has become national
and regionaf now that the prevailing colonialism of international, extracontinental and metropolitan subjugation in
economic, political or cultural spheres has taken hold
nationally under various cunning forms of concealment and
dissimulation. There is a new form of colonialism which is
difficult to recognize. Everyone calls it neo-colonialism, It
can be local or regional, but it is certainly always of great
and powerful international scope and more and more
extensive.
38. This new face, the masked countenance of this
phenomenon, which continues to pose a problem for entire
peoples and is a disgrace to all mankind, does not merely
show itself in the brazen seizure of the territory of others
and violation of the sovereignty of peoples, as illustrated
repeatedly, by the Rhodesian regime. Other manifestations
of neo-colonialism are racism, as, for example, in the
deprivation of individual human rights and the damage
done to the prices of the raw materials that are vital for
some peoples. The latter is almost like cutting off a human
being’s oxygen supply; this is what is happening in the
dumping of tin by which my country has been most
absurdly and unjustly affected at the very moment when
we are making a major effort to set up a form of democracy
with participation by all the people and without any
outside control. Another kind of neocolonialism is revealed
in the arrogant attitude of regional subimperialism that can
condemn an entire nation to being locked in an enclave,
once again like my country which over the past century has
been imprisoned in the Andes, while on every side people
speak of integration, fraternal understanding, equal opportunity for one and all and solidarity. It is difficult for the
Bolivian people to place much credence in all this.
39. In less than a century we have had four international
wars and 200 internal wars in which colonialism, which, in
the guise of racism, kept us segregated for centuries as in
“Indian reservations”, played an important role, to the
point where each confrontation had an economic implication in the plundering of raw materials. In Bolivia, we have
not only sacrificed our physical wealth-guano, saltpetre,
rubber, petroleum and tin-but also our lives.
40. We know what it is to be plundered and oppressed.
For this reason, our position is clear and consistent. On the
one hand, we reject colonialism in all its forms: racism, the
arms race, the activities of transnational corporations, the
dilatory and pseudo-juridical nature of a law of the sea
exclusively territorial and feudal, ideological and cultural
imposition, and even the arrogant intervention of countries
which, in the middle of the twentieth century, presume to
teach other peoples how freedom should be established,
while it has not been established in their own countries. But
this is indeed a time when it can safely be said that no one
can deceive anyone else.
41. There is solidarity among all those peoples fighting for
their own freedom and not for the affluence of the
industrial Powers, whose peoples in past centuries have
cared little for the fate of the human race on this planet.

With this solidarity we believe that, thanks to bodies such
as this, mankind will emerge triumphant and do away with
the subhuman conditions in which the approaching
twenty-first century could otherwise well still find us.
42. Bolivia, together with Gabon, India, Kuwait, Mauritius
and Nigeria, is sponsoring the draft resolution submitted to
the Council yesterday [S/12603]. We do so for three basic
reasons to which I shall now refer briefly. First, the draft
resolution reflects the spirit of resolution 432 (1978) and
other Council resolutions. Secondly, the case of the
Rhodesian regime has been dealt with time and again and
something must be done to ensure that this racist regime
and other, similar regimes will not continue to mock us
and, to put it bluntly, make us ridiculous in our own eyes.
Thirdly, we must put an end to these sinister interventions
that infringe on the life of the peoples, even if they appear
to be for their benefit. For solidarity is one thing and
intervention is another. In this day and age, intervention is
inadmissible in human societies, which must not be treated
with contempt. It makes no difference whether these
interventions are pictured as struggles for freedom or
against it. Liberty is possible only with dignity.
43. I should like once again to express my thanks to you,
Mr, President, and to my other colleagues here. I shall do
my utmost to make a realistic and constructive contribution to the work of the Council towards the maintenance of
peace and security throughout the world. I have watched
with sincere admiration the devoted efforts to that end
being made by each and every member.
44. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): I should like first
of all to address some words of welcome to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Zambia. His participation in the Coun
cil’s work testifies to the importance of the task now facing
the Council, that is, to ensure Zambia’s security in the face
of the incessant acts of aggression committed by the illegal
racist regime at Salisbury.
45. The Soviet delegation listened with the greatest
attention to the statement made by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Zambia (2068th meetingJ. He gave us a
detailed analysis of the situation that has resulted from the
acts of aggression by the Southern Rhodesian regime
against Zambia and other neighbouring African States. We
entirely share the view of these events set forth by
Mr. Mwale and by many other representatives who have
spoken in the Council.
46. As the Soviet delegation has repeatedly stated, the
continuing acts of aggression by the Smith regime stem
from the very fact of that regime’s existence and its
attempts to cling to power at any price. There is a direct
connexion between Smith’s attempts to impose the SOcalled internal settlement on the people of Zimbabwe and
the acts of aggression committed by Smith’s illegal rdgime
against the front-line States. The choice of the time for the
commission of this latest act of aggression was no coincidence. With the connivance of those who are responsible
for the fate of this colonial Territory, Smith and his
colleagues attempted to divert the attention of world public
opinion from the Salisbury deal two days after it had been

concluded in order to deflect or at least attenuate the
indignation of public opinion at this act. The aggression
against Zambia demonstrated once again Smith’s disregard
for those who were ready to go along in the signing of this
so-called internal settlement. He made of them virtual
accomplices in the crime committed against a fraternal
African people.
47. Thus, the Security Council’s present consideration of
Zambia’s complaint has become the lo&d extensiqn of the
discussion of the Rhodesian problem in the Council, the
logical extension of the condemnation of the illegal Smith
regime, and it is essential that effective measures should be
taken not only to put an end to the numberless acts of
aggression by the Rhodesian racists, but also to remove
those racists entirely from the scene.
48. The recent &tack on Zambia by the Rhodesian racists
has not only aroused the deep indignation of world public
opinion but also demonstrated with startling clarity that
the armed attacks and raids carried out by Smith against
neighbouring States are becoming ever more extensive and
serious. By systematically expanding the acts of aggression
against their neighbours, the racists wish to “internationalize” the problem of Zimbabwe, intimidate the frontline States and force those States to refrain from supporting
the just struggIe of the patriotic forces of the people of
Zimbabwe, led by the Patriotic Front. The course of events
has irrefutably shown, however, that the processes now
under way in southern Africa are irreversible and that no
armed provocations will halt the struggle of the peoples for
the final and total elimination of these remnants of
colonialism and racism and the hotbeds of tension and
conflict that still survive in that part of the world.

52. In our view, those statements contain a clear and
distinct programme of action for the Council.
53. The valiant struggle of Zambia and the other front-line
States to safeguard their independence and sovereignty
against any encroachments from outside have met with the
understanding and support of the Soviet Union, It is a
pleasure to be able to point out that the views of the Soviet
Union concur with those of Zambia on the questions
relating to southern Africa. I would remind the Council
that, in the joint Soviet-Zambian statement signed at
Lusaka last March, the parties supported the demand
submitted by the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe for the
immediate and unconditional transfer of power to the
legitimate representatives of the people. They categorically
condemned the repression by the Rhodesian racists of the
indigenous people of the country, as well as Salisbury’s
attempts to create a puppet government in Zimbabwe, The
parties also condemned the provocative armed actions
which had been undertaken-and which continue to be
undertaken-by the racist regimes of South Africa and
Southern Rhodesia against the neighbouring independent
African States of Angola, Botswana, Mozambique and
Zambia, The statement pointed out, too, that the parties
viewed these provocative acts of aggression as a threat to
peace and security not only in that area but also in Africa
and the world as a whole.
54. Recent events in southern Africa have fully confirmed
the soundness of these appraisals which also underlie the
attitude of the Soviet Union regarding the question now
being considered by the Council, The Soviet delegation is
ready to support the draft resolution of six non-permanent
members of the Council [s/12603] condemning the recent
act of armed provocation by the Southern Rhodesian
racists against Zambia, which represents a flagrant violation
of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of that country.
We believe that the Council should reconfirm the fact that
only by rooting out the system of apartheid in South Africa
and totally liberating Zimbabwe and Namibia will it be
possible to lay firm ,foundations for the elimination or
tension and the attainment of peace and security in thal
part of the world. The delegation of the USSR has
repeatedly stated in the Council that the task of liberating,
the long-suffering people of Zimbabwe from the colonial
yoke as early as possible could be accomplished by the
decisive application of the most effective sanctions against
the regimes of Pretoria and Salisbury in accordance wi&
Chapter VII of the Charter, including an embargo on the
delivery of petroleum products as proposed here by B
number of African representatives,

49. The just cause of Zambia and the other front-line
States that are confronting the armed forces of the racist
regime has met with broad support throughout the world.
Support for the front-line States has, for example, been
expressed by the Organization of African Unity. Suffice it
to recall that OAU, at the twenty-ninth session of the
Council of Ministers held at Libreville in June and July
1977, reconfirmed that any attack by the racist regime on
any front-line State would be considered as an attack on
independent Africa as a whole and that all OAU member
States would provide aill possible support and assistance to
the victim of such aggression.
50. The movement of non-aligned countries has also been
consistently at the side of the front-line States. Thus, in a
communique [see S/12.595] issued a few days ago by the
Co-ordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries regarding
the most recent act of aggression committed by the illegal
minority regime against Zambia, the non-aligned countries
call upon the Security Council to condemn the Illegal
Salisbury regime, whose existence represents a threat to
international peace and security, and to take all necessary
measures to remove that regime.

55. Mr. HARRIMAN (Nigeria): It is indeed an honour and
a privilege to greet Foreign Minister Mwale, who has come
all the way from his home and his comforts on yet another
occasion to lodge a complaint before the Security Council.
My delegation heard the Minister’s statement /2068f1s
meeting] with deep emotion.
56. This is not the first time that the Republic of Zambia
has been subjected to aggression by the racist regimes; n‘tp)c
is it the first time Zambia has complained to the Courthl.
Ever since its independence the Republic of Zambia
repeatedly been the target of threats and acts of aggressiurr

51. In the letter from the African Group to the Security
Council [S/12594], there is a demand that the necessary
measures should be taken to safeguard the rights of the
Republic of Zambia, a Member of the United Nations.
6

and other flagrant violations of sovereignty by the Portuguese colonial r&ime, which has now happily been removed, by the illegal Ian Smith regime in Southern
Rhodesia and by the uprtheid regime in South Africa. Over
the years the Portuguese regime received support, military
and material, from the Western countries for the purpose of
maintaining its supremacy in Africa, and many of the
armaments which sustained Smith in his unilateral declaration of independence came from,that source, judging by the
arsenals details of which have been published over the years
by the Institute of Strategic Studies of your country,
Mr, President, and by the Stockholm International Peace
Research Institute. The evidence is quite clear, not only
from those statistics but also from documents in the
archives of the United States Government, regarding this
collusion of racism and colonialism to stem the tide of
liberation which does not appear to have been abandoned,
judging by the performance of the Western Powers in recent
days when we discussed the question of Rhodesia.

action against the Pretoria regime to prevent it from
undermining the sanctions against the Smith regime. The
case for an oil embargo against South Africa is as clear as
daylight, but there is still resistance from the Western
Powers, I think it is certainly time they supported the oil
embargo or confessed their unwillingness to join in meaningful action to restore peace in southern Africa, an unwillingness they demonstrated in their actions and reactions here
earlier this week on the question of Southern Rhodesia,
62. Fourthly, as the march of freedom nears the borders
of South Africa, where external interests have built up a
huge stake, the Western Powers are increasing manoeuvres
and machinations to sow confusion and conflict. We see a
well-orchestrated campaign in the United Kingdom and the
United States to put the blame for the situation on alleged
divisions in the liberation movements rather than on the
intransigence of the racist regimes or the unwillingness of
Western European Powers and the United States to take
meaningful action,

57. For its steadfastness in support of African freedom,
for its hospitality to African liberation movements offered
in accordance with the resolutions of the United Nations
and the Organization of African Unity and other groups,
including the movement of non-aligned countries, the
Republic of Zambia has had a high price to pay. My
delegation wishes on this occasion to reaffirm Nigeria’s
great admiration for the Republic of Zambia and its
President, His Excellency Mr. Kenneth Kaunda, one of the
greatest fighters for human dignity of our age. During the
Lagos Conference, at which some of us here were present,
we heard him speak1 and had the privilege of listening to
his great and firm message of commitment and determination regarding the liberation of the continent of Africa.
This has been his unflinching determination and commitment since I first listened to him in the 1950s in the United
Kingdom, when he was speaking on the question of
independence for his country.

63. Hardly had Ian Smith announced a so-called internal
settlement than many politicians and newspapersin those
countries gave it full endorsement without even bothering
to hear from the people of Zimbabwe, It was in this
context that the Smith regime felt it opportune to unleash
its armed forces on Botswana and Zambia. The racist
r&irnes know that those African States have not built up
their armed forces since they have tried to utilize their
limited resources for the economic and social development
of their countries. The racist r&irnes feel they can commit
aggressions with impunity. But let it be known that this
situation will not last, Certainly it will not last.
64. The rebels at Salisbury have recently taken to this
kind of aggression as a reaction to the increased pressures
from freedom fighters who are now spelling the doom of
the tottering illegal rdgime. The seriousnessof these acts of
so-called hot pursuit by Smith’s gangster army does not lie
in the fact that they are committed in a normal processof
military confrontation with the gallant freedom fighters. It
lies in the nature of the raids and their targets. It is not only
cowardly in the military sense,it is almost against all the
principles and civilized norms of armed conflict to engage
in the destruction of the lives of defenceless civilianswomen, children, the infirm and the aged.

58. We believe that the Security Council must pay great
heed to the statement of the Foreign Minister of Zambia
and to those of the representatives of other front-line States
and consider why the racist regimes are able to commit and
continue with their aggressions. Otherwise it may merely
adopt one more resolution of condemnation that will have
aslittle effect as past resolutions.
59. First of all, it will be recalled that, when the so-called
Central African Federation was dissolved, the colonial
Power transferred the air force to the white minority
r&me of the settlers in Southern Rhodesia despite the
warningsof the Security Council.

6.5. I remember when 1 was privileged to speak in the
Council on a similar matter last year that I recalled [1985th
meeting] the evidence of no less a person than Senator
Dick Clark of Iowa, who went to the front to see the
so-called guerrilla camps that had been destroyed and found
a devastating and horrid sight of civilians maimed and
villages bombed in the name of “hot pursuit”. Information
from the International Red Cross, the World Health
Organization and the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF) and private conversations have revealed to me
that that was in fact the case,The degree of suffering on
the borders of Rhodesia and South Africa and the
dehumanization of newborn children with distorted personalities owing to hunger, aggression and insecurity have
been reported to me privately also by UNICEF officials.

60, Secondly, the Smith regime, which has the support of
hardly 1 per cent of the population, is little more than a
gatekeeper for the racists in South Africa. It is the Pretoria
rQime that has ensured the survival of the Smith regime,
provided it with military equipment and oiled its military
mfichine.
61. Thirdly, while we hear plenty of condemnations from
them, the Western Powers have constantly resisted effective
1 United Nations publication, Sales No. E.77.XIV.3, annex V.

7

P

66. My delegation has spoken out whenever we have had
the opportunity to do so in condemnation of those types of
raids on defencelesscivilian populations in the front-line
States which are not in any way connected with the
liberation war now raging in Rhodesia. Many African
countries have alsocalled on the Council to take immediate
steps to restrain the military excessesof Ian Smith. The
result of all those efforts hasbeen minimal or negligiblelike that of the efforts aimed at the decolonization of
Rhodesia.
67. The continued acts of aggressionby the Smith regime
have confirmed not only the justification for our disgust
and disdainbut alsothe urgent needto seethe end of them.
Our major obstacleto achievingthat hasbeenour tendency
to underrate the gravity of the tense situation in the
southern African region and the need for greater commitment on the part of non-front-line Statesof Africa to the
struggle in the near future. Or it is probably the lack of
moral and political courage to restore sanity in Southern
Rhodesia.
68. If the Security Council doesnot take effective action
to protect the front-line Statesfrom violent attacks, no one
can blame them if they are obliged to find other meansto
securethemselves.Nigeria has always been committed to
the objective of supporting defensive positions in the
front-line States, and I believe that the processhas been
goingon too long for usto stay aloof.
69. My delegation hasnoted with particular attention the
statement by the Foreign Minister of Zambia concerning
evidence that foreign military equipment wasusedby the
Smith regimein its latest aggression
againstZambia. Weare
very well aware of parallel “hot pursuit” operations in
Lebanon and of the Hebrew markings reported to have
been found on the aircraft that were shot down, We feel
that the Council must have before it all information and
demanda full explanation of the countriesconcerned.
70. My delegationonce againcallson the United Kingdom
and its allies-the word “al.liesY’is very interesting in times
of peace-to observe the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. Might is not right. The United Nations
must be respected.The WesternPowersmust cometo grips
with the fundamental problems of southern Africa. They
must disengagefrom a theoretical approach basednot on
reality or legality but on sheerpower. There is an antithesis
between power and principle. Power can only invoke
respect and prestige if it is not abused, asit has been in
southern Africa by the British, To put economic gains
before human values is to obey a base and abysmal
motivation in human and international relations. The
WesternPowersmust face up to their responsibilities;they
must decideon affirmative action-not negativereactionsas
we have seenhere too often for our comfort-to put an end
to Fascist settler colonial minority regimesin southern
Africa and respect the wishes of the exploited African
continent l’ur a ch.ange.
7 I. Mr. CARP10 CASTILLO (Venezuela) (interpretation
fion? &JO~I~S~~~:
First of all, I should like to expressour
pleasureat seeingwith us the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Zambia. His presenceis an indication of the gravity of

the situation confronting the countriesborderingon South.
ern Rhodesia. I assurehim of the solidarity of the
Government and people of Venezuelawith his.country and
the Zambianpeople.
72. Very briefly I wishto saythat our delegationconsiders
that the question at present on the Security Council’s
agendais part of the sameproblem posedby the existence
of the illegal regimeof Mr. Smith, which threatenspeace
and security in southern Africa. My country condemnsany
act of aggressionagainstany Member State, regardlessof
the reasons,especiallywhen the aggressionis accompanied
by brutality which converts it into an act of genocide
againstthe civilian population and results in a regrettable
lossof life amongchildren and defenceless
elderly persons.
73. For that reason we wish to reiterate Venezuela’s
position, as stated on a number of occasions,namely, that
we totally reject intervention in the internal affairs of other
States. We believe that in this case an internal conflict
causedby the rebel racistsin Rhodesiahas been internationalized and this constitutesa situation of graveconcern
to my country. We are awareof the link existing between
the persistenceof regimeslike that of Mr, Smith, aparrheic
and acts of aggression
suchasthose of which the Zambian
peoplehave just beenvictims.
74. On this occasion,we shouldlike to announcethat we
support the draft resolutionsponsoredby six membersof
the Council [S/12603] and that, consequently,we shall
vote in favour of it.
75. The PBESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Ghana, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to makehis statement.
76. Mr. BOATEN (Ghana): I am very grateful to you, Sir,
and to the other membersof the Council for permitting me
to participate in this debate.
77. On 7 March lastthe world wasshockedby a statement
from the illegal regimeof Ian Smith to the effect that his
Government’sforces had crossedinto Zambia and carried
out a raid on one of the Patriotic Front basesof Joshua
Nkomo. This, we are told, wasto securethe boundariesof
Zimbabwe. We are told, further, that at least 38 of the
Zimbabwe nationalists fighting for independence died.
Under what international law, if 1 may ask, is a country
permitted to attack an independentcountry? Under what
international law does one country attack another, say,
with the purposeof securingits boundaries?Assumingthat
the country whoseboundariesarebeingimperilled does not
find itself capableof carrying out sucha raid, what doesit
do? It probably doesnothing. In suchcircumstances,what
prevailsis force of arms.The world, in that instance, will go
full circle back to the law of the jungle.
78. In this instance, however, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Zambiatold the Council last Wednesday12068th
meeting/ that at 0945 hours two bombswere dropped at
low altitude in LuangwaDistrict to divert the attention of
the air defence unit from Kavalamanja.He further told the
Council that 22 Zambianslost their lives and IL) were
injured, This act of naked aggression
on Zambia should be

condemned by the Council and the international
munity.

com-

both inside and outside Rhodesia, including those with
whom he recently concluded his so-called internal agreement.

79. What is puzzhng is why Ian Smith decided to stage this
attack, when he had concluded an agreement with a section
of the nationalists. Was it Ian Smith’s way of securing
acceptance of the agreement concluded with the Reverend
Muzorewa, Ndabaningi Sithole and Jeremiah Chirau? Or
wasthe intention to have that agreement rejected? If his
reason for staging the attack was the former, then Ian
Smith is a poor judge of human nature. If his reason was
the latter, he could have achieved it without the attack. By
this attack Ian Smith has, so to speak, moved away from
the negotiating table.

83. The Government of Ghana is opposed to attacks of
this nature and vehemently condemns them when they take
place in an independent country. As the Council is aware,
this is not the first time Ian Smith has carried out so
unprovoked an attack on a sovereign country. On 9 August
1976, the air force of the illegal regime attacked a refugee
camp at the village of Nyazonia in Mozambique and killed
over 600 defencelesspeople, including women and children.
In late October and mid-November 1976, the illegal regime
carried out further acts of aggressionwith impunity against
Mozambique. These constituted a full-scale operation
against the provinces of Gaza and Tete. There were more
than 300 killed. Botswana also has been the victim of
Smith’s aggression. We all have an obligation to give
assistance of diverse forms to those countries that have
become victims of the violence committed by the regime of
Ian Smith.

80. We cannot accept the argument that the action was
taken in self-defence. The procedures for negotiations had
been laid down in Security Council resolution 415 (1977).
If for some reason it wasnot possible to proceed according
to them, one would have expected Ian Smith and the other
African leaders with whom he had negotiated the agreement to conduct further negotiations with Mr. Nkomo and
Mr.Mugabe before signing it, since any acceptable agreement should be accepted by the people of Zimbabwe as a
whole,

84. By these wanton acts of aggression,Mr. Ian Smith is
proving to the world at large that his minority regime is a
source of serious threat to international peaceand security.
There is therefore an urgent need to take all necessary
measures to end Ian Smith’s regime and establish a
government based on majority rule.

81. In this connexion, permit me to quote at some length
the statement we made last year in the Fourth Committee
of the General Assembly:

85. The criminal actions of Ian Smith’s minority regime
are designed to exert pressure not only on Zambia but also
on the front-line States and their peoples who are actively’
and solidly supporting the peoples of Zimbabwe and
Namibia in their just struggle for national liberation. By its
open military aggression against sovereign and independent
neighbouring States and its oppression of the people of
Zimbabwe, the Smith clique is increasingly jeopardizing the
security of free African States, The people of Africa will
not, however, be deterred from their support of the just
struggle of the People of Zimbabwe to achieve independence based on majority rule. Ghana considers that such
armed attacks carried out anywhere in the world are a
flagrant breach of international law and represent a serious
threat to world peace and security, They are fraught with
dangerous international consequencesand must therefore
be condemned.

“The Security Council and the General Assembly have
long recognized the legitimacy of the liberation struggle.
Circumstances and the intransigence of its armed opponents, most recent instances of which we have just
noticed, have forced those engaged in that legitimate
struggle to take up arms. And, if the Maputo Declaration
is anything to go by, the legitimacy of the armed struggle
has also been recognized by all except a few countries.
But oppression by an armed minority on such an
appalling scale as occurs in Southern Rhodesia may surely
be resisted legitimately by armed self-defence, especially
where negotiations and even mandatory sanctions have
proved ineffective for so long; and in such circumstances
nothing in the letter or spirit of the Charter forbids
self-defence; nor should we fail to recognize that it is not
the so-far ineffective and feebly applied sanctions, nor
intermittent and fruitless dialogues without teeth or
leverage, which have brought Smith now to the point of
willingness to negotiate more seriously. My Government
is therefore convinced that the correct policy is to
support them to the full and also to maintain them at the
maximum,+

86. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. I invite him
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
87, Mr. PHAM DUONG (Viet Nam): Mr. President, I
should like to express my thanks to you and to the other
members of the Council for giving me the opportunity to
participate in this important debate,

Westill stand by this.
82. In this regard, it behoves the international community
to condemn unreservedly the so-called self-defence argument of Ian Smith in his recent premeditated and unprovoked attack against Zambia from 6 to 8 March this
year.That act, I am sure, has embarrassed his supporters,

88. Our delegation has been following with great attention
the situation in southern Africa and especially the signing
of the so-called internal settlement followed by the
barbarous military attacks by the illegal racist minority
regime in Southern Rhodesia. We have listened attentively
to the statement delivered by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Zambia /206&h meeting), in

2The official records of the Fourth Committee are published in
wmmaryform. See OffictrZ Records of the General Assembly,
fiWsecond Session, Fourth Committee, 28th meeting, para.35.
9

which he gave details on the attacks perpetrated by the
Smith forces against Zambia.
89. The recent wanton and barbarous acts by Smith’s
infantry troops and warplanes carried out from 6 to
8 March last have resulted in great losses in Zambian lives
and property. That attack and those perpetrated by the
Smith regime against Botswana and Mozambique have
inflicted grave consequences on those front-line countries.
90, Those attacks once more reveal the aggressive and
arrogant nature of the Smith regime, which, supported by
the imperialists, has been trying to destabilize the region by
sowing dissension among the people of southern Africa,
thus creating a permanent threat to peace and security in
that part of the world.
91. The Vietnamese delegation expressesits indignation at
the barbarous acts carried out by the racist Smith regime
against Zambia, and energetically condemns those attacks
against the people of the Republic of Zambia who love
peace and freedom. We also joined with the Co-ordinatmg
Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries in issuing a communique
dated 10 March [see S/12595], in order to raise our voice
in condemnation of that flagrant violation by the Smith
regime against the Republic of Zambia.
92. During the deliberations in consecutive meetings of
the Security Council on the situation in Southern Rhodesia,
many representatives have come to the conclusion that that
situation is due to the existence of Smith’s illegal racist
minority r&ime, which ought to give place to genuine
majority rule.
93, Everybody will recall that there have been many
resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and the
Security Council in which it has been urged that thisillegal
racist minority Smith regime should be ended, but so far it
still exists and is becoming more and more cunning and
arrogant. This racist minority regime is seeking by every
means to ensure its existence and its domination over the
people of Zimbabwe. The so-called internal settlement
recently created by Ian Smith is proof of that.
94. Since the “interpal settlement” was reported by the
press, it has been categorically rejected by the people of
Zimbabwe and by its leadership, the Patriotic Front of
Zimbabwe. It has also been rejected and condemned by the
majority of States Members of the United Nations. The
Security Council, in the resolution it recently adopted,
considered it illegal and unacceptable [resolution
4.23 (197811. My delegation joins its voice to those of other
delegations in rejecting and condemning this so-called
internal settlement.

for the immediate elimination of the illegal
racist regime in Southern Rhodesia and for the attainment
of genuine independence and self-determination. We real.
firm our continued solidarity with the Government and
people of the Republic of Zambia and other front-line
States in their resolute stand against the illegal racist
minority r&me in Southern Rhodesia and highly commend
their selfless assistance to the people and Patriotic Front of
Zimbabwe, despite the heavy sacrifices that they must
undergo. We call upon the Council to adopt the most
effective measures to stay the bloody hands of the Smith
regime and to put an early end to the illegal regime at
Salisbury.
Zimbabwe

97. The PRESIDENT: We shall now proceed to vote on
the draft resolution contained in document S/12603.
A vote was tuken by show of hands.
fie draft resolution was adopted unanimously.3

98. The PRESIDENT: I should now like to make a
statement in explanation of vote in my capacity as
representative of the UNITED KINGDOM.
99. Of all those who have spoken in this debate, I have
listened with the greatest attention to the Foreign Minister
of Zambia [2068th meeting/. Mr. Mwsle made vividly cleotr
the death and destruction caused by the armed attack
against his country. I believe that none of us can be under
any misapprehension about what happened. It is clear thal
there was a planned, premeditated attack in some strength
mounted by the forces of the illegal regime at Salisbuv.
This I condemn and condemn in the strongest terms. 1%
have already communicated to the illegal regime our strong
views on this matter.
100, I also wish to express to the Government and people
of Zambia our sympathy and sorrow at the losses they have
sustained, We are very conscious that Zambia has suffeed
more than any other country as a result of the tragic events
in Rhodesia over the past 12 years. We are particular&
aware of the heavy economic sacrifices it has made, )1Y’r3
have borne in mind its special circumstances when co&&ring our programme of aid in Africa. Zambia can rely upon
the United Kingdom to play its full part in helping Zanrb&
in the future and in encouraging others to do likewise.
101. There are, of course, other strong reasons fi~r
condemning this attack and others like it which the ille
regime has launched against Botswana and Mozambique,
Such attacks make much more difficult the efforts that %sapr
in progress to bring about a peaceful resolution of tiae
conflict. They poison the atmosphere and harden tic
attitudes of those concerned. Some speakers have sncrr+&l
at the aim of pursuing a peaceful solution. But I notice t.l%~i,
those countries that have to live closest to this app;tllirn%
problem do not sneer at efforts to achieve a peacrgul
transfer of power. I assure the Council that our efforts ~31
continue to this end.

95. We hold that so long as the illegal racist minority
rdgime continues to exist in Southern Rhodesia, there is a
danger of aggression and domination, and peace and
security cannot be assured in the region.
96. The Vietnamese people, who have experienced a
struggle against imperialism and for national salvation, fully
and consistently support the just struggle of the Zimbabwe
people under the leadership of the Patriotic Front of

102. I have also heard many speakers repeat that alt,?e&a
of this kind will be brought to an end only by the renr-~~a~
3 Seeresolution 424 (1978).
10

-

of the illegal regime. I agree. I have also heard many go on
to argue at length that the United Kingdom has done
nothing to bring about such removal. I disagree. I do not
intend to repeat what I said here three days ago [2067th
meeting], but the fact is that we have worked hard, with
our United States colleagues, to bring about an agreement
which would effectively mean an end to the minority
regime. I urge all members of the Council and Members of
the United Nations not to indulge in historical recriminations, particularly of the sort we have had to listen to
sometimes this morning, as they are frequently wantonly
inaccurate; and recriminations, however enjoyable and
self-indulgent, are hardly constructive. I would urge those
with influence to use it rather better to further our efforts
to promote a meeting of all those now engaged in this
struggle.

sufferings of all Zimbabweans in that unhappy country; it is
the only thing that could decisively eliminate the dangers
arising from frequent acts of aggression against neighbouring front-line States. Indeed, it is the only way to avert
an internationalized war in southern Africa.
108. Zambia is grateful to the members of the Council for
adopting the resolution unanimously. This act should serve
as a warning signal to the rebels in Southern Rhodesia. We
should naturally have preferred a prescription for action
which would end the problem immediately, but we are
realistic enough to know that a resolution should be not an
end in itself, but a means to an end, the end in this case
being the attainment of genuine independence for Zimbabwe.
109. I would refer very briefly to one point that was
raised this morning by one of the members of the Council. I
have taken note of the statement by the representative of
the United States, Ambassador McHenry, regarding the
identity of some of the aircraft shot down by Zambian
troops during the recent Rhodesian attack. I want to point
out that my Government is still investigating and that our
military people are quite able to identify the markings and
sources of supply of some of these weapons. Indeed, as
soon as the investigations are completed the world wil1
know the truth.

103. For reasons which will be clear from what I have
already said, my delegation considered it appropriate and
necessary to join in the vote and accept the resolution
which has just been debated. In so doing, I must note that
in recalling resolution 423 (1978)~and indeed resolution
326 (1973)-it is also to be recalled that my delegation
abstained on that resolution, that our position on the
legitimacy of the struggle is well known and that the eighth
preambular paragraph of the resolution just adopted constitutes a reaffirmation of substantive resolutions on the
subject, As to paragraph4, I would observe that my
Government has already made certain proposals to this
effect, proposals which require the co-operation of all
parties concerned.

110. The Council should remain seized of this problem
beyond this debate because the situation in southern Africa
is deteriorating day by day, As we have already indicated,
the minority regimes are escalating the conflict as well as
expanding their forces of oppression. In this regard, do not
be deceived by the emergence of “black Smiths” in
Rhodesia who have joined hands with Ian Smith in the
so-called internal agreement. The United Nations community should indeed be guided by resolution 423 (1978)
which rejected Smith’s manoeuvres.

104. In my capacity asPRESIDENT I give the floor to the
Foreign Minister of Zambia, who has asked to speak.
105. Mr. MWALE (Zambia): I have listened very attentively to the deliberations at this series of meetings of the
Security Council to consider my country’s case concerning
the acts of aggression committed by the illegal racist
@.rne. On behalf of the Government of Zambia, I thank in
particular those who have spoken in support of Zambia and
in condemnation of Smith’s premeditated and unprovoked
invasion of Zambia between 6 and 8 March last. My
delegation was deeply touched by the expressions of
solidarity with Zambia. This is indeed very reassuring.

111, Finally, I wish again to urge the United Kingdom and
its Western allies to deal more decisively with the illegal
r&ime in Rhodesia. I am quite aware of your personal
concern about this, Mr. President, having known you
personally, and I have no doubt in my mind that you are
genuine in your approach to the problem. Therefore, if I
mention once again that there is need for Her Majesty’s
Government in London, with the co-operation of other
Western countries, to put more pressure on Smith, this does
not mean that we are not aware of your personal concern in
the matter.

106. Your noble words, Mr, President, and those of the
other members of the Council will be conveyed to the
people of Zambia and to all those who have lost their kin in
this invasion. This is the time for me to express our
gratitude to you personally for your understanding and
ability to weather the storm. Please convey the sentiments
expressedhere to your Government in the hope that the
message may trigger the necessary positive action in
Whitehall. I wish also, through you, to reiterate my
delegation’s gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
untiring efforts to bring about an improved situation in
southern Africa,

112. The West should not expect Africans to continue to
engage in open-ended meaningless talks about talks, some
of which have only helped to delay positive action, thereby
buying time. The problem is that, should the West fail to deal
decisively with the Rhodesian problem, as it has since 1965,
it will have to face the consequences of its omissions and
blunders. Free Africa and our friends will redouble their
efforts to free Zimbabwe and Namibia.

107. At the expense of repeating myself, I shall say that
my delegation still feels that the immediate removal of
Smith and his instruments of oppression remains the crux
of the matter in resolving the problem of Rhodesia. The
removal of Smith is the only thing that would end the

113. The council should be aware that from the evidence
before it there is no way at this stage, and particularly in
this war situation with Rhodesia, for the Rhodesian
problem to be solved without the participation of the
11

of “one man, one vote” and all the slogans he has been
using, the following day he attacks Zambia, Botswana or
Mozambique. For us it does not make sense. If those who
have influence on Smith really want any progress towards a
negotiated settlement, they must stop him from raiding
Zambia, Mozambique and Botswana.

Patriotic Front, In other words, because there is a war
situation there can be no solution without the involvement
of the people who are fighting. The Patriotic Front has for
rear bases the front-line States and, indeed, the Organization of African Unity. It is quite obvious that the
Anglo-American proposals and, indeed, any other positive
suggestions and proposals put before Africa cannot succeed
without the involvement of the front-line countries. It is
therefore logical that, unless and until the illegal rdgimes in
Rhodesia and South Africa stop attacking these front-line
States and killing and maiming their citizens, it will be very
difficult for those of us who are on the spot to respond
favourably to any such discussions or proposals. It is as
simple as that. We believe that Smith is not serious when he
says that he would like to have a negotiated settlement. He
is not serious because, just when he has given the world the
impression that he is interested in discussions on the basis

114. What I have stated is not a threat at all; it is just a
timely, friendly warning from those of US who bear the
brunt. We Africans are now sick and tired of receiving
promises which are never fulfilled. The litmus test for
success in southern Africa will be the independence of
Zimbabwe and Namibia and genuine majority rule and
freedom.
The meeting rose at 1.15 pm.

12

HOW

TO

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

N&ions
publications
throughout
the world. Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
Unitei

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans Ies Iibrairies
et les agences
depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire
ou adressex-vous
B : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
e&n
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

W.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

NAClONES

UNIDAS

en venta en librerias
y casas distria su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones

in other

currencies)

78-70005January

1980-2,100
