UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL

1890”

MEETING:

16 MARCH

1976

, :,

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
agenda (S/Agenda/ 1890) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Request by Mozambique under Article 50 of the Charter of the United Nations
in relation to the situation which has arisen as a result of its decision to
impose sanctions against Southern Rhodesia in full implementation of the
relevant decisions of the Security Council:
Telegram dated 10 March 1976 from the Minister for Foreign. Affairs of
Mozambique to the President of the Security Council (S/12009) . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

S/PV. 1890

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of stich a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol Sl . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The ,date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in’ yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Cmncil.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1890th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 16 March 1976, a 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Thomas

S. BOYA (Benin).

has arisen as a result of its decision to impose sanctions against Southern Rhodesia in full implementation of the relevant decisions of the Security Council:
Telegram dated 10 March 1976 from the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Mozambique
to the President of the Security Council (S/12009).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin; China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of Ameiica.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The Security Council has just included on its agenda
the question submitted by the Government of Mozambique in a telegram dated 10 March to the President of
the Council from the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
His Excellency Mr. Joaquim Albert0 Chissano, who
has come to New York to present in person the views
of his Government in the Council. In accordance with
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure, I propose,
therefore, with the consent of the Council, to invite
him to participate,
without the right to vote, in the
Council’s discussion.

agenda (S/Agenda/l890)

of the agenda.

Request by Mozambique
under Article 50 of the
Charter of the United Nations in relation to the
situation which has arisen as a result of its decision
to impose sanctions against Southern Rhodesia in
full implementation
of the relevant decisions of
the Security Council:
Telegram dated 10 March 1976 from the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Mozambique
to the President of the Security Council (S/12009).
The meeting

At the invitution
of the President. Mr. Chissano
(Mozambique)
took a”place at the Council table.

was called to order at 4.25 p.m.

Expression of thanks to the retiring

4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
In addition, I have received letters from the Permanent
Representatives of Egypt, Jamaica, Kenya and Zambia
containing requests to be invited to participate, under
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure, in the
discussion. Consequently,
I propose, in accordance
with the usual practice and the relevant provisions of
the Charter, to invite the representatives
I have just
mentioned to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote. In view of the limited number of places
available at ‘the Council table, I invite the representativ’es to take the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber, on the usual understanding
that they will be invited to take a place at the Council
table-when it is their turn to address the Council.

President

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
Before turning to the item on the agenda of our
meeting today, I shquld like to discharge a very
pleasant duty. As everyone knows, Ambassador
Daniel Moynihan,
who has just left us to take up
another important post, presided over the work of the
Security Council in February. In particularly delicate
circumstances,
Ambassador
Moynihan
conducted
the proceedings of the Council, both in public meetings
and in the long and arduous consultations that were
held, with great distinction
and competence. Therefore, on behalf of all Council.members,
I would request
Ambassador Bennett to be good enough to convey to
Ambassador Moynihan our most sincere gratitude.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Abdcl Meguid
(Egypt), Mr. Thompson (Jamaica), Mr. Maina (Kenya)
and Mr. Kumana (Zambia) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

2. I should like to take this opportunity,
too, to
express the great appreciation
of the Council for the.
great efforts which Ambassador Bennett himself made
last month.
Adoption

5. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
front French):
I should like to draw the Council’s
attention
to
certain recent documents of the Council relevant to
this item: S/12004 and Add.1, in which the SecretaryGeneral has transmitted the texts of communications
which he has received on this subject; S/12005, which
reproduces the text of the address made on 3 March
by the President of Mozambique proclaiming the impo-

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Request by Mozambique under Article 50 of the Chaiter
of the Unifed Nations in relation to the situation which
I

sition of sanctions against the illegal regime of Southern
Rhodesia; and S/12008, which contains the text of the
statement made by the Government
of Nigeria on
certain developments
relating to this matter Furthermore, I should like to draw attention to the text of
a draft resolution [S/12013] prepared in the course of
previous consultations.

gression in our country since 1965. Rhodesia knew
from the nature of the struggle of Mozambique that our
country was going to constitute a strong State that
would immensely contribute to the liberation of the
rest of Africa still under colonial and racist domination. After the defeat of Portuguese colonialism,
Smith, blinded by his fascist ignorance,
tried to
intimidate the people of Mozambique
by launching a
series of provocations that culminated in an open and
heavy attack on our national territory on 23 and
24 February, in the villages of Paftiri and Mavue.
The President of the People’s Republic of Mozambique, Comrade Samora Machel, described the details
of this attack in the statement he delivered on 3 March.

6. The first speaker..is the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Mozambique,
on whom I now call.
7. Mr. CHISSANO
(Mozambique):
May I start my
statement by saluting you, Mr. President and members
of the Council, and by expressing my country’s appreciation for your positive response to Mozambique’s
request for the convening of this meeting to discuss the
critical situation prevailing in our region of Africa.
I should particularly like to salute you, Mr. President,
not only for your personal friendship for my delegation,
but also for your country’s stand of solidarity with
Mozambique and with the cause of African liberation.
Mozambique and Benin have, since our independence,
marched together in support of the just causes in
Africa and elsewhere in the world. I am certain that,
under your wise leadership, the Council’s deliberations
will be crowned with success.

11. With such aggressions, Ian Smith intends to divert
the world’s attention from the heroic struggle being
waged by the people of Zimbabwe for the liberation
and independence of their motherland and the eventual
establishment
of a society in which the power will
belong to the majority.
12. At the same time, Ian Smith intends to make our
people depart from their determination
to fulfil in an
exemplary
manner their internationalist
duty of
backing the just struggle of the peoples for their
complete liberation. In so doing, the minority regime
of Ian Smith is not only challenging United Nations
principles and resolutions, particularly those adopted
by the Security Council, but also threatening intemational peace and security. The armed struggle being
waged by the people of Zimbabwe a direct consequence
of the blind intransigence of Smith’s minority regime.
In the light of the numerous resolutions of the Organization of African Unity and the United Nations reaffirming the legitimacy
of the armed struggle and
calling on all nations to help that struggle of Zimbabwe,
Mozambique
can have no alternative but ‘to support
the struggle of the people of Zimbabwe.

8. We are likewise grateful to the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Kurt Waldheim,
for the interest with
which he has always attended to the problems of
Mozambique. We are sure that in the difficulties which
face us today he will show the same interest to help
us to find a quick solution and that the confidence
which we have always put in him will serve as a
guarantee for meaningful results.
9. The problem that we are discussing mvolves the
decision of my Government
to carry out its intemationalist duty and the decision of the United Nations
to help the people of Zimbabwe to achieve their right
to freedom and independence.
We are here, in particular, to discuss the difficult problems that face my
country as a result, of its decision to implement fully
the policy of this Organization and of the Organization
of African Unity with regard to the minority,regime
of
Ian Smith in Rhodesia. In order to make it easier for
the Council to understand the problem, I would like
to recall here the strong economic dependence of
Mozambique
on the neighbouring
countries in the
south, namely, Rhodesia and South Africa, which
has always existed. Portuguese
colonialism,
the
weakest ally of those racist regimes, created economic
infrastructures
meant to serve the interests of the
colonial and fascist bourgeois class of South Africa and
Rhodesia, thereby installing
in Mozambique
such
economic dependence as I have already mentioned.

13. We in Mozambique
believe that our liberation
will not be complete while other brother peoples in
Africa and in other parts of the world continue to be
dominated, humiliated and exploited. We shall therefore not fail to support the people of Zimbabwe in their
struggle until victory is won. As I have already
indicated, this support is also in accordance with
United Nations resolutions, as exemplified by Security Council resolution 253 (1968), which in its paragraph 13
“Urges all States Members of the United Nations
to render moral and material assistance to the people
of Southern Rhodesia in their struggle to achieve
their freedom and independence”.
14. Consequently,
the Mozambican
people, led by
their experience of 10 years of struggle and following
the principle of relying, before everything else, upon
their own strength, decided, in support of the struggling
people of Zimbabwe, to organize their own defence
against any aggression and all types of subversion

10. It is in the context of this economic situation
in Mozambique
that the illegal regime in Salisbury
strove to prevent the emergence of yet another independent African State near its borders. To that end,
the illegal regime has committed
various acts of ag2

carried out by the minority racist regime. They further
decided to create a Bank of Solidarity to which all
the population of Mozambique
cor+ibute
one day’s
salary each month with a view to supporting materially
those peoples still struggling for their liberation.

as we have already mentioned,
is due to the tight
complementarity
of the colonial economy we inherited
with the economies of the minority racist regimes of
South Africa and Rhodesia, rkgimes which Portugal
had as unconditional
allies in the colonial exploitation
of Mozambique.
In fact, under Portuguese domination
our ports and the whole complex of our means of
communication
were dedicated to the service of
Rhodesia and South Africa. Our agriculture as well as
our industry were reserved to sdpply raw materials
and fuel to those countries, getting from them almost
all financial means, technical support and equipment.
Our country was the natural market for South African
and Rhodesian products, especially in the food sector.
Finally, our manpower was exported in degrading
conditions to the inines as well as to the agricultural
and cattle farms in South Africa and Rhodesia,
eventually
constituting,
with whatever funds such
migrants sent back, one of the main sources of
means of payment for Mozambique.

15. We realize also that the condition necessary for
the existence of a strong rearguard for the liberation
struggle of Zimbabwe rkgimes is that we consolidate
our independence.
For that purpose, the Bank of
Solidarity will also help to provide material support
for the national
reconstruction
of Mozambique.
However, as~has been the case in the past, Mozambique counts on international solidarity for the defence
of its threatened
independence
and for national
reconstruction,
especially from those countries which
helped it to achieve this independence,
as we11 as
from other friendly countries.
16. Many of the best children of Mozambique
gave
their lives in the struggle for national independence.
Today, for the defence of that independence,
the
people of Mozambique are prepared to make sacrifices.
However, in order to cope with this situation which
has been imposed upon us and to repel all aggression of which it is. a victim, Mozambique
needs
material support.
17. On 3 March, the People’s Republic
bique announced the full implementation
Nations
sanctions against the illegal
Rhodesia.

21. Therefore the effects of the sanctions on the
economy of Mozambique
greatly surpass the direct
effects which I shall mention. It is a whole economic
structure being shaken. Therefore Mozambique
needs
material .support to convert its economy within the
general plan of national reconstruction.
Suffice it to
mention that over 5,000 railway workers and stevedores will become unemployed
as a result of the
steps taken. The wages paid by the railway and port
services of. Mozambique
were their only source of
maintenance.

of Mozamof United
rigime
in

18. The sanctions now applied are a logical consequence of our historic pr&ess of liberation and an
implementation
of resolution 253 (1968) and other
relevant resolutions on Rhodesia, an implementation
which Mozambique
defends and fully assumes. They
are not, as claimed in some quarters, a result of the
aggressions of which Mozambique
has been a victim.
As early as the thirtieth
session of the General
Assembly, during which Mozambique
participated for
the first time in the work of the Organization,
my
delegation had the opportunity to appeal’ to all States
to apply the sanctions against Rhodesia. At the same
time my delegation reaffirmed the determination
of
FRELIMO
[Ftwnt .fiw the Lihewtion
of Mozmthiqtre]
and the Mozambique
Government to assume all the
responsibility
to fulfil their internationalist
duty. In
accordance with that duty, Mozambique
has now
assumed its obligation.

22. This is only one of the effects. I should, however, mention more instances, without going into
details.
23. The ports and railway services, for instance;
will lose more than one third of their revenues
-about $42 million. Our airlines in their internal and
external flights will be burdened by the need to make
several deviations from their normal routes, thereby
incurring extra expenses. They will also lose revenue
as a result of the suspension of flights to Rhodesia.
In cases of emergency they will need alternative airports to those they used, since such airports are in
Rhodesia. Hence we shall need to build and equip
new airports for that purpose.

19. In making the decisions announced bv its President, the People’s Republic of Mozambiqie
knew it
would have to bear sacrifices for the cause of human
freedom.

24. About 80,000 Mozambique
workers who are in
Rhodesia run the risk of losing their employment,
and
this will substantially reduce the entry of hard currency
into our country. Viewed from another’angle,
this will
mean that their families in Mozambique will lose their
source of maintenance, with the social and economic
disruption that will folldw in their lives.

20. The application of economic sanctions against
Rhodesia, the closure of the borders, and the suspension of all forms of communication
with that country
-all
have had heavy effects on some fundamental
sectors of the economy of Mozambique.
This fact,

25. Products of many of our industrial
units-of
extraction
as well as of transformation-suddenly
lose their almost exclusive buying market. The acquisition of some raw materials for our industry becomes
complicated
by the impossibility
of buying such
3

materials from Rhodesia. The costs of production
of some important
industrial units, even our own,
will rise considerably, because of the impossibility
of
transporting
the raw materials
across Rhodesia.
Certain export products, because of the impossibility
of transporting them across Rhodesia, will become
more expensive, and many will cease to be competitive in the international
market.

and railways, these debts amounting to about $8 million; (e) a compensation
for the maintenance of the
prices of all products previously imported from Rhodesia, besides maize. The value here will have to be
calculated on the basis of the total imports from
Rhodesia, which amounted to more than $18 million
without the value of the maize. Therefore the annual
compensation should in principle be at least $49 million,
besides the $8 million owed by Rhodesia.

26. All these problems and difficulties, the quantification of which is difficult, especially when we are
dealing with indirect effects, require that new struttures be urgently established in order to create new
sources of employment,
so as to upgrade and correctly utilize our resources and hence to ensure
respect for Mozambicans.

.

3 1. We have now laid our case before this body. We
have indicated our willingness to do our part in the
struggle for the liberation of Zimbabwe. We regard that
struggle as part and parcel of our own struggle. We
will, therefore, not shirk that responsibility,
whatever
the price to ourselves. Yet we have come to you to
appeal for assistance. We believe that, just as we were
assisted by the international community in our struggle
for the freedom of Mozambique,
we shall receive
similar support in our present situation. We believe
that the’ United Nations and all peace-loving people
will not let us down.

27. ‘All this requires investments. We have projects
but we lack technical know-how and financial means.
The lack of resources is aggravated by the mobilization
of men and by ‘other means forced upon us for the
defence of our country against the aggression by the
minority and racist rCgime of Smith.

32. The PRESIDENT
(infctpt-efarion
from French):
The next speaker is the Minister for External Affairs
of Jamaica, I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

28. 1 should like to remind the Council that the
effects of the sanctions existed prior to our decision
of 3 March. The losses suffered by our country started
with the British blockade of the coast of Mozambique.
To evade the blockade the Smith rkgime merely created
alternative routes for some of its commodities,
which
caused losses to the traffic through Mozambique.
Our
country was more affected still by the courageous
decision taken by Zambia when that country closed
its frontiers with Rhodesia.

33. Mr. THOMPSQN
(Jamaica): Mr. President, my
delegation wishes to express our warmest congratulations to you, Sir, in your capacity as President of the
Council for the month of March. During this month
the Council will be discussing matters of crucial
importance
to the indigenous peoples of southern
Africa, and it is therefore most appropriate to see the
Council presided over by a distinguished
son of
Africa. I wish to express my appreciation for being
given this opportunity to address the Council on such
an important matter, for the liberation of Zimbabwe
has been of constant concern to the Government and
people of Jamaica.

29. Today it is practically
impossible
to indicate
accurately the amount of losses suffered by Mozambicolonial
Government
que, since the Portuguese
maintained
clandestine
relations
with Rhodesia,
hiding the data required for a correct calculation.
30. In view of ail this, we request the Council to
give the Secretary-General
the necessary authority to
study with us the most adequate technical and financial
ways and means of implementing
projects that may
allow us to create new structures and new employment. However, because such evaluation
will of
necessity take some time, we request that the following
be urgently guaranteed to Mozambique:
(a) the annual
volume of revenues from the ports and railway services
which came from Rhodesia, amounting
to about
42 million; (b) compensation for the rise in prices of
the annual importation
of 30,000 tons of maize
previously imported from Rhodesia, the balance of
which is calculated at about $2 million; (c) the drawing
of the equivalent
of all revenues from the usual
exports from Mozambique
to Rhodesia, which are
calculated at about $5 million, until such time as it will
be possible for Mozambique
to find alternative
markets or reconvert its economic structures; (d) the
compensation
for the debts owed Mozambique
by
Rhodesia for services rendered by Mozambique
ports

34. Just about one year ago, in the city of Kingston,
Jamaica, the heads of Government
of the Commonwealth-consisting
of some 35 States, big and small,
developed and developing,
representing almost one
quarter of the world’s population,
both black and
white-met
in conference to promote stability, peace
and soc.ial justice for all. Among the many solemn
undertakings made by that Conference and issues as
part of the official concord of Kingston
was a
constructive
contribution
towards resolving
the
problems of southern Africa.
35. Among the objectives emphasized was the early
independence
for Zimbabwe, otherwise known as
Southern Rhodesia, based on majority rule, and the
achieving of this objective by peaceful means if at all
possible. Those heads of Government
unanimously
and voluntarily undertook to bring considerations
of
active assistance for the liberation of Zimbabwe to the
attention of the entire international
community.
They
4

agreed to take positive action at the international
level for reinforcement and extension of.sanctions as
previously directed by the United Nations. They also
emphasized
the importance
of taking immediate
practical steps to assist Mozambique
on its attainment of independence in applying sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia in terms of Articles 49 and 50 of
the Charter of the United Nations.

40. The eighth report of the Committee* contains not
only an account of the investigations of specific violations of the sanctions, but also a summary of the
internal discussions of the Committee on its work and
on the need for unrelenting pressure to be placed on
the illegal minority racist regime in Zimbabwe. Mozambique has now placed such a pressure in full accordance
with the Charter and is appealing to all of us for cooperation and support.

36. Viewed today in the context of the current situation in Mozambique,
the Conference, under the chairmanship of Jamaica’s Prime Minister, Michael Manley,
can be seen to have acted with keen foresight and
determination.

41. My delegation notes with concern the continued
importation into the United States of certain materials,
particularly
nickel
and chrome,
from Southern
Rhodesia, with the offtcial approval of the Govemment of the United States under the Byrd Amendment. This breach has continued up to today despite
the objections by prominent
individuals
within the
United States itself. Here we would recall General
Assembly resolution 3397 (XXX) which, inter alia,
condemns
such importation
and calls upon the
.Govemment
of the United States to repeal speedily
all legislation permitting
such importation.
It is the
fervent hope of my delegation that there will be an
early positive response on the part of the United
States for very serious reasons which I shall later
express.

37. The Security Council is meeting once again to
consider the question of Zimbabwe, but the circumstances under which it is meeting are far different
from those of previous meetings on the subject. For
several years the Council, and, indeed the General
Assembly, has discussed the question of Zimbabwe
in an atmosphere of frustration. The impotence of the
international
community
to deal adequately with the
situation has been exposed. For years the members of
the third world have listened with bitterness and
disillusionment
to pious statements being made on the
subject by representatives
of certain Governments.
Many of these in fact have been supporting the
existence of a minority racist regime representing the
interests of merely 275,000 persons of one race while
subjugating 6 million persons of another race who are
the indigenous peoples of the territory.

42. Jamaica supports the views of those members of
the Committee who have called for the widening of the
sanctions against the illegal tigime to include all the
measures which are set out in Article 41 of the Charter.
In this connexion, it is the hope of my Government
that the Security Council will accede to the request of
the General Assembly contained in paragraph 5 of its
resolution 3397 (XXX), which was overwhelmingly
adopted without a single negative vote; there were,
however, abstentions by the traditional
imperialist
Powers.

38. We have protested in vain against the actions of
those who support that illegal regime; we have adopted
measures to bring about the downfall of that regime
only to see those measures flouted indiscriminately.
Time has now run out; we can no longer afford the
luxury of further delay.

43. The patient flow of negotiations over tortuous
years has culminated
in the sanguinary flood which
marks the success of liberation
movements
up to
date in southern Africa. With the independence’ of
Mozambique and Angola and the increased activity of
the freedom fighters of Namibia,
the prospects are
propitious for act&s
by these countries similar to
those which were adopted by Zambia some time ago.

39. The Security Council, in its resolution 253 (1968),
adopted provisions
which established
mandatory
sanctions against the illegal racist regime in Zimbabwe.
In order to monitor the implementation
of those sanctions the Council established a committee
which is
sometimes
referred to as the Council’s
sanctions
Committee on Southern Rhodesia. In the view of my
Government
that Committee
has been doing an
excellent job through its intensive investigations
of
specific cases which involve the circumvention
of the
mandatory sanctions. There should, however, be more
publicity on the work of the Committee,
particularly
on the results of its investigations.
By exposing to the
harsh glare of the media those who flout the sanctions,
the Committee could keep the situation in Southern
Rhodesia continuously before the eyes of the intemational community.
My Government wishes to place on
record its recognition of and appreciation for the work
of that Committee
and to extend congratulations
to
Mr. Salim, the representative of Tanzania, the chairman of the Committee for 1975.

44. It was refreshing, indeed, to listen just now to the
words of the distinguished
Foreign Minister
of
Mozambique.
It was in harmony with what I heard
personally when I had the honour to attend as a guest
Mozambique’s
independence
celebration
last ‘year.
This was, indeed, an independence celebration with a
difference. Mixed with the spontaneous joy of a
liberated people one heard the serious intent to share
their freedom with other deserving brothers and sisters
of Africa. In other independence celebrations I have
witnessed the fireworks of joy. In Mozambique
there
were no fireworks. Instead, the army fired blank
ammunition
so that neighbouring Rhodesia would not
mistake the warning. In Mozambique
there was no
5

joyous cry of “Uhuru”,
or “Freedom”;
their cry was
“A luta continua”,
“The struggle continues”.
The
glorious
FRELIMO
celebrated
in battle-stained
uniforms which reeked with the smoke of recent
victory. They meant what they said then. They have
followed this up at great cost with their courageous
action in closing the border.

which are members of the United Nations system,
with the Secretary-General
playing a full, co-ordinating
role.
’

45. With the recent decision by the Government of
Mozambique
to impose full sanctions against the
rebellious colony of Southern Rhodesia, an iron noose,
indeed, a noose of black iron, has begun to encircle
the racist regime of Ian Smith. My Government
applauds the decision of the Government of Mozambique, which has acted in full accordance with Articles 25 and 41 of the Charter. It is an example which
should be emulated by all members of the international
community.

49. For many years represe.ntatives of the third
world have warned of the danger of a race war in
southern Africa. Recent events indicate that such an
occurrence could be imminent.
For too long the
indigenous peoples of southern Africa have been subjugated by racist minorities;
for too long we have
listened to pious statements calling for peaceful solutions to the racist abomination which exists in southern
Africa. We are now considering this question of the
liberation
of Zimbabwe at the moment just before
midnight.
Now the time has come for the racist
minorities to decide to liberate black Africans now or
accept the inevitable
alternative
of their own
extinction.

46. The concord of Kingston emphasized the importance of taking practical steps to assist an independent Mozambique in applying sanctions against the
Smith regime and directed that an initiative should be
taken by Commonwealth
Governments at the United
Nations to establish a programme of assistance for
Mozambique
in terms of Articles 49 and 50 of the
Charter. On 4 March, that is, the day following the
announcement by the Government of Mozambique of
its imposition of sanctions against the British colony
of Southern Rhodesia, the Commonwealth
Sanctions
Committee held an emergency meeting to discuss ways
and means of implementing
the decisions embodied in
the concord of Kingston. The Sanctions Committee
has authorized the Secretary-General
of the Commonwealth to contact the Government of Mozambique
concerning possible areas of assistance. Subsequently,
the Government of the United Kingdom announced its
intention to provide economic assistance to Mozambique, and we welcome this announcement.

50. Lovers of freedom everywhere, and particularly
members of the third world, are tired of hopeless
negotiations conceived in insincerity and protracted
to frustration time and time again. Once more the
indigenous peoples of Africa see themselves subjected
to greed, viciousness and murderous intent against
them. The most serious effect is bound to be the spread
of a new type of war, which even now is not merely
a “bush fire” war or haphazard border incident.
Already the minds of black people all over the world,
and indeed of all freedom-lovers
all over the world,
after weary years of intransigence on the part of the
white autocrats of southern Africa, are forced to
contemplate
the forbidding
prospect that the only
means for achieving liberation will be through massive
carnage. The implications
of this will extend well
beyond territorial boundaries. Let all those who have
been supporting, or who may be tempted.to continue
to support, the white racist minority
regimes in
southern Africa take note of this fact.
51. Mozambique
has taken this vital and d.ecisive
step to tighten the noose. It cannot do it alone. The
cost of this, as we have heard, is more than it can
bear. It deserves the support,and co-operation of the
entire international
community.
Let the Council
appeal to all members of the international community,
and in particular to the big Powers, immediately
to
apply maximum pressure, both political and economic,
on the Smith regime to bring about speedily majority
rule in Zimbabwe. Only an early capitulation
by the
Smith regime can avert the impending holocaust. Time
is running out for Ian Smith. Indeed; it has run aut.

47. The Government of Jamaica is currently in touch
with the Secretary-General
of the Commonwalth
and
intends to fulfil its obligations as soon as it is called
upon to do so.
48. Having reviewed the actions taken so far by the
Commonwealth,
we are most anxious to see the
establishment
of a wider multilateral
programme of
assistance to Mozambique,
as it is the duty of the
entire international
community
to render such assistance. Indeed, all States Members of the United
Nations are obliged to do so under Article 49 of the
Charter. My Government notes with appreciation the
statement of the Secretary-General
of the United
Nations to the press on 4 March that he is confident
that the United Nations will respond favourably to any
request for assistance which the Government
of
Mozambique may make in order to offset the economic
consequences of its application of full sanctions against
Rhodesia. We hope that appropriate assistance will
be forthcoming
from the international
organizations

52. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next speaker is the representative
of Kenya,
the current chairman of the African Group at the United
Nations. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
53. Mr. MAINA
(Kenya):
Mr. President,
may
I, first of all, express may gratitude to you and to all
the members of the Council for inviting me to par6

senses and agree to take part in peaceful change.
We confess that we can see no evidence of this. The
options are few and clear. The struggle must continue,
and unfortunately,
no end is in sight to the suffering
of the people of southern Africa.

ticipate in this debate in my capacity as chairman of
the African Group for this month. I should also like to
thank you for taking swift action to convene this
meeting of the Council to deal with this urgent problem.
May I express to you also my sincere pleasure and
satisfaction at seeing you, the distinguished representative of Benin, preside over this important debate.

59. As I have said, this is one of the few occasions
when it is easy for the Council to speak with one
voice. The problem is well known, and therefore there
is no need to dwell on its history loo long. We believe
what is required is a decision by the Council to call
on all Member States to join in condemning the illegal
regime of Southern Rhodesia and, more important, to
join hands in giving economic assistance to Mozambique to enable it to enforce the sanctions. The extent
of the economic problems has been outlined by the
Foreign Minister
of Mozambique.
We know that,
apart from the effects of the long colonial war, Portugal
did little for the economic development of its colonies,
and the little that was done had the effect of tying
Mozambique
to the economies of Portugal’s
allies
-Southern
Rhodesia and South Africa. It will be a
long and painful struggle for Mozambique
to disentangle its economy from those of its odious neighbours.
Of course, the situation would change overnight if the
problems created by these regimes were resolved
tomorrow.

54. The Security Council meets this afternoon to
consider the problems created by the illegal regime in
Southern Rhodesia. These problems are many, and
they affect many nations and peoples. The immediate
problem, however, is armed aggression by the illegal
regime against Mozambique,
which this Council ought
to condemn. The second problem is the economic
hardships occasioned by the action taken by Mozambique in applying United Nations economic sanctions
against the illegal regime of Southern Rhodesia.
55. This is one of the few occasions on which the
Security Council can speak with one voice and take
concerted action on a common problem. In its resolution 253 (1968) it called upon all Member States to
apply sanctions against Southern Rhodesia. We all
know that these sanctions have never been effective,
mainly because the racist regime of South Africa and
the former oppressive dictatorship of Portugal have
never implemented
them. Many other Member States,
through one pretext or another, have never applied the
sanctions. The defiance or neglect by many Member
States not only renders the sanctions ineffective,
but also makes the burden on those who.do apply the
sanctions too painful and too long-lasting.
No one
doubts that had the sanctions been fully and effectively
applied the illegal regime would have been brought to
its knees long ago. Because the sanctions have been
neglected the regime has grownmore defiant,, and the
pain of applying sanctions hurts only a few Member
States, notably Zambia and now Mozambique.

60. In conclusion, I should like to join others in calling
on all peace-loving Member States to give material
economic assistance to Mozambique,
either bilaterally
or through the United Nations, in order to reduce its
burden and to make the sanctions more effective.
61. I should also like to appeal to the United Nations
to mobilize all its agencies, in particular, the Economic
and Social .Council, the United Nations Development
Programme, the World Bank and all other specialized
agencies, to assist Mozambique in its present economic
difficulties.
An appeal should also be made by this
Council to individual Member States and organizations
to assist Mozambique
at this critical time of liberation
of southern Africa. We call on all friends of Africa
to continue to support the struggle with the same
commitment
and dedication. The action taken by the
Government of Mozambique requires the support of all
true friends of Africa.

56. It is because of our realization that the sanctions
are ignored, particularly by the immediate neighbours,
who make no pretence about it, that we call for
widening the sanctions to include those who defy the
United Nations.
57. We know Mozambique
inherited an economy
ravaged by a long war and colonial exploitation.
But,
in keeping with its commitments
of supporting the
total liberation of Africa, the Government of Mozambique took a bold decision to put its economic
considerations aside to fight for the defence of freedom
and human justice. The action taken by the Govemment of Mozambique must be supported and applauded
by all peoples and Governments
that are committed
to ridding Africa of racism and colonial oppression.

62. Today the eyes of all the world are focused on
the Council to see what it can do. We are confident that
the Council will not fail Mozambique.
63. The PRESIDENT
(inte,pretcrtioti
from French):
The next speaker is the representative
of Zambia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

58. This is a time when action by al1 those who call
for and urge peaceful solutions to serious intemational problems to show what they can do. We have
been told many times that the misguided and deaf
racist regimes in southern Africa will come to their

64. Mr. KAMANA
(Zambia):
Mr. President, my
delegation is grateful to you and the other members
of the Council for the opportunity
given to us to
participate in this crucial debate. Naturally, we wish to
begin by congratulating
you upon your assumption of
7

the presidency of the Council for the month of March.
The commitment
of your great country, the sister
Republic of Benin, and your personal commitment
to the liberation of southern Africa-which
is really
the issue before the Council-will
no doubt be
invaluable in determining
an appropriate Council response to the legitimate hopes and expectations of the
brave and principled people of Mozambique.

on FRELIMO
is an attack on the United National
Independence. Party. Together, Mozambique
and
Zambia will fight for the cause of justice. This is a
moment of unity and total dedication amongst frontline countries in the interests of all mankind.
“We therefore salute the people of Mozambique.
We hail the courageous decision of FRELIMO
under President Samora Machel, and together we
will forge into the future with even greater confidence
until victory is won.”

65. The personal participation
in this debate by the
Foreign Minister of Mozambique
is significant in two
important ways. First of all, his very presence here
serves to indicate the gravity of the situation and
the great faith that the Government and the people of
Mozambique
have in the United Nations and, in
particular, in the Security Council. Secondly, by his
personal participation
the Foreign
Minister
has
authoritatively
enlightened us on the situation. His
eloquent and extremely
important
statement must
surely move and inspire those who believe in the
principles and ‘purposes of the United Nations, as
enshrined in the Charter, and, in particular, in the
right of all peoples to self-determination
and independence.

68. When we in Zambia decided to close our border
with Southern Rhodesia and to apply full economic
sanctions against the Smith rebel regime, our action
was hailed internationally
and many pledges of solidarity and support were made. This response of the
international
community
was, of course, heartening
to us and we naturally appreciated it. For, after all,
we interpreted it as based on an awareness of our
economic plight and a realization that by our action
we were shouldering a heavy responsibility
on behalf
of the international community, and in particular of all
States Members of the United Nations, which have a
duty, individually
and collectively,
to bring to an end
the rebellion in Southern Rhodesia and to assist the
people of Zimbabwe in their struggle for selfdetermination and independence. Needless to say, it was this
very Council which decided on a sanctions policy
against Southern Rhodesia.

66. It should surprise no one that Zambia is participating in this debate. I believe that it would not be
immodest of me to say that. we in Zambia uniquely
understand the importance of the decision the Govemment of Mozambique
took to impose full economic
sanctions against the British colony of Southern
Rhodesia and the tremendous sacrifice inherent in
that action. The economies of both Mozambique
and
Zambia were very much interwoven with that of
Southern Rhodesia, because of the colonial past. We
both have long common borders with the rebel colony.

69. The closure of the border between Mozambique
and the rebel colony of Southern Rhodesia has followed
exactly the same scenario as in the case of Zambia.
It was preceded by acts of aggression against Mozambique by the rebels, very much similar to those carried
out against Zambia. As in the case of Zambia, the
intention of the rebels in Southern Rhodesia was to
divert attention from the ever-growing pressure on
them by the Zimbabwe nationalists and to use Mozambique as a scapegoat. It was also a desperate attempt
by the rebels to blackmail
Mozambique
out of its
commitment
to the cause of freedom and independence in Zimbabwe under majority rule.

67. Speaking
on -the same day -- -Mozambique
announced the closure of its border with Southern
Rhodesia and its decision to apply full economic sanctions against the rebels, my President, Mr. Kenneth
Kaunda, said, inter din:
“The decision of FRELIMO,
under the illustrious
leadership of President Samora Machel, to close
the border between Mozambique
and rebel Rhodesia is an act of outstanding courage and commitment to the cause of freedom and justice for all
mankind.
We in Zambia understand in full the
implications of this act of real courage and dedication
on the part of FRELIMO.
It means it is an act of
great sacrifice which no country in the world can
share with the people of Mozambique.”
Furthermore,
in welcoming
bique, my President said:

the decision

70. As we did in Zambia, the Government and people
of Mozambique
have refused to sacrifice on the altar
of expedience principles and commitment
to the ideals
of the United Nations. They have chosen to be a
faithful Member of the Organization
and to sacrifice
their economic development
for the people of Zimbabwe. No doubt, words will not be lacking in commendation and support of this extraordinary
act of
courage by this young nation.

of Mozam71. To say that international
economic assistance
to Zambia, in response to our needs following3 the
closure of the border with Southern Rhodesia, has
been inadequate would be an understatement.
The
truth of the matter is that it has been almost negligible
as compensation for the overall bill that we..have had
to incur. This, of course, is not to say that we do not

“We will stand by Mozambique
in the sun of
success and in moments of sacrifice until victory
is won by the people of Zimbabwe. The cause
of Mozambique is the cause of Zambia, an attack on
Mozambique
is an attack on Zambia, and an attack
8

appreciate the assistance we have received. A number
of friendly
countries
have made most generous
responses. We have also benefited from the United
Nations system and the specialized agencies. The
Secretary-General
and his colleagues in the Secretariat
have always gone out of their way to assist us.

and his henchmen are today panic-stricken.
No doubt
they will feel the pinch of the Mozambique
action
with each passing day. They will now, more than ever
before, be dependent on South Africa for their survival.
The QpQrthcid regime of Pretoria persists in its refusal
to apply United Nations sanctions against Southern
Rhodesia. This blind act of solidarity with the Smith
regime by South Africa, a Member of the United
Nations, deserves the strongest condemnation.

72. I have cited the example of my own country in
order to draw a distinction between words and deeds.
Mozambique
is a newly independent
country. Its
economy is still experiencing the strains of a long and
costly war with the Portuguese fascists and colonialists.
When we closed the border with Southern Rhodesia
in 1973, we had been independent for eight years.
Yet one cannot minimize
the severe strains and
economic ‘dislocation we have suffered.

77. I cannot fail to mention here that there are other
Member States, even in the Council, that still see fit
to trade with the rebels in Southern Rhodesia, while
paying lip-service to the United Nations sanctions
policy. My delegation hopes that these countries will
live up to expectations
as Members of the United
Nations and desist forthwith from any dealings with the
rebel regime in violation of the sanctions. If Mozambique, a newly independent country and a neighbour
of Southern Rhodesia, can make the sacrifice, there is
absolutely no justification
for continued trade with the
rebels by countries economically
stronger and far
away. It should be noted that at least one of these
countries is a permanent member of the Security
Council.

73. Because of our own experience we know for a fact
that Mozambique
will need more than words of solidarity and empty promises of support, comforting
as these may be. They will need the actual translation
.of these words into concrete forms of assistance. On
behalf of my Government,
I therefore wish to stress
that it will be important for the Security Council to
treat the problems of Mozambique as real and to leave
no doubt in its action that it regards the decision of the
Government
of Mozambique
to apply sanctions
against Southern Rhodesia as a burden it is carrying on
behalf of the United Nations, for which it therefore
deserves full compensation.
In this regard my delegation hopes the Council will be unanimous in adopting
a draft resolution
that will spell out concrete and
effective measures of assistance to Mozambique. .As is
well known, this was lacking in the case of Zambia.

78. I wish to stress that we in Zambia have no
illusions about sanctions, given the refusal of South
Africa to apply them and also given the deception
practised by some Member States. From the very
start, we have had serious misgivings about their
effectiveness. We had opposed the very idea of sanctions and had urged the United Kingdom to use force
in order to re-establish its authority in its colony of
Southern Rhodesia. Time has proved us right: the
sanctions policy has not, to date, brought the Smith
regime to heel.

74. I wish at this juncture to commend the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, for the important initiatives he has already taken to assist Mozambique.
As
I said earlier, my Government is very familiar with the
genuine concern of the Secretary-General
and the
keen personal interest he takes in alleviating
the
problems of those of us in the forefront of the liberation
struggle in southern Africa.

79. In our view, sanctions are nevertheless an important aspect of the struggle for the liberation of
Zimbabwe. They must, therefore, be applied by all
self-respecting,
law-abiding
and faithful
Member
States. That said, I think it is important to stress here
that sanctions are only complementary
to other efforts
that must be made to put an end to the illegal regime
of Ian Smith. The-kind
of assistance we are today
seeking for Mozambique
would not have been
necessary if Zimbabwe were free. Therefore, the best
and permanent form of assistance to Mozambique
would be the immediate
realization of majority rule
and independence in Zimbabwe. This is the real issue.

75. Similarly, my delegation is consoled by the swift
action of the Commonwealth
of Nations, -whose
members are actively seeking ways and means of
giving assistance to Mozambique.
We are indeed
happy in this regard that the Minister for External
Affairs of Jamaica is participating
in this debate. He
has just delivered an extremely important and encouraging statement. The decision of the Commonwealth
heads of State, at their meeting at Kingston, Jamaica,
was certainly an act of great foresight and seriousness
of purpose.

80. Efforts have been made to no avaii to bring ‘about
majority
rule in Zimbabwe
peacefully.
Far from
wanting to surrender honourably, Ian Smith and his
gangsters have remained arrogant, intransigent and
plainly naive; they have abused the patience and
goodwill of the people of Zimbabwe.

76. As I have tried to show, it is vital and urgent
that generous assistance be given to Mozambique
by
the international
community.
The people. of Mozambique have decided to make a tremendous sacrjfice
for the liberation
of Zimbabwe.
Their action has
already had repercussions in the rebel colony. Smith

81. The United Kingdom has refused to use force
against the Smith regime. It certainly is no longer
necessary to insist that Britain must use force. What is
9

now clear is that force ,will be used anyway to bring
about change in southern Africa. Its consequences
will be greater than if Britain had agreed to use force
as far back as immediately
after the, unilateral declaration of independence in 1965. There would have been
less bloodshed then. This time, the onus for the use of
force will not be .on Britain, but on the people of
Zimbabwe themselves, .who have waited so long for
the fulfilment of their rights and have explored every
other alternative to no avail. Surely they will launch
their armed struggle with a clear conscience,
knowing fully that this is the only option left for them.
82. There are a number of other Western countries
which have repeatedly opposed violent change in
Southern Rhodesia. Some to this day continue to
make statements which are ambivalent in their support
for the principle of majority rule in Zimbabwe. Some
of these statements have tended to give the impression
that they were in fact in support of the status quo in
Southern Rhodesia. .‘They have, indeed, been so
interpreted by the illegal regime of Ian Smith, whose
spokesmen have expressed appreciation
for those
statements. One can only hope that those who have
given comfort and encouragement to the minority racist
regime in Southern Rhodesia, by both their words and
deeds, will seriously examine their consciences and
support the cause of the majority before the chips
are down.

85. Mr. SALIM (United Republic of Tanzania): ,Sir,
let me first of ail extend to you my congratuIations
upon your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. .You represent a brotherly
African State whose commitment
to the struggle of
oppressed people is exemplary. So it is only fitting that
you should be guiding our work as we gather here
today to discuss the important step which our brothers
in Mozambique
have taken in the struggle for the
liberation of Zimbabwe. My delegation will extend its
full co-operation to you in the spirit of brotherhood
and of the excellent relations which happily exist
between Benin and the United Republic of Tanzania.
86. Allow me also to pay a tribute to your predecessor. As President of the Council for the month of
February, the former Permanent Representative
of
the United States effectively and constructively
conducted the Council’s deliberations,
particularly
the
private consultations, which were quite considerable.
In this regard, we therefore offer our congratulations,
to him and, of course, to the entire United States
delegation. Since this is the first meeting of the Council
following the formal appointment
and swearing in of
Ambassador
Scranton, I should like to take this
opportunity
to address to him, through Ambassador
Bennett, our warm welcome and to assure him of our
full co-operation as he assumes his important reponsibilities in the Organization.

83. As for the position of Zambia, I can do no better
than quote President Kaunda, who only last Friday
said:

87. It is, of course, a great pleasure for me to
welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the
People’s Republic of Mozambique
to the Council
today. The important statement he. made will not only
facilitate our work but also reflects the indefatigable
commitment
to the cause of African liberation which
we in Tanzania,
and indeed the Members of the
Organization
in general, have come to, expect and
respect from our brothers of Mozambique
under the
dynamic leadership of FRELIMO.

“In relation to the question of majority rule in
Rhodesia, we have ,more than demonstrated
that
we are not bloodthirsty.
We have shown our good
faith to the world. By our patience and perseverance
we have done everything to give peaceful change an
opportunity,
in accordance with the resolutions we
set ourselves in the Manifesto on southern Africa.3
In the last few years we have urged the minority
regimes to see the writing on the wall. We tried
negotiations
in Angola and Mozambique;
they
failed. Armed struggle brought down the Portuguese
fascists. In Rhodesia, too, we have consistently
urged the whites to be reasonable and to accept a
peaceful transfer of power to the majority of the
people. The Rhodesian whites refused; they spumed
this hand of friendship. Freedom in Zimbabwe must
now be achieved by force of arms.

88. So, as we meet today, let me, on behalf of
Tanzania, commend
the courageous action of the
brotherly people of the People’s Republic of Mozambique, announced by His Exctllency President Samora
Machel, to impose sanctions against the illegal minority
and racist regime of Ian Smith. In this strugg1.e
Tanzania, as has always been the case, stands resolutely behind. Mozambique,
for the struggle of Mozambique is the struggle of Tanzania. Our peoples have
together shared the vicissitudes of the struggle in
common.
We have shared the deprivations
of the
freedom struggle of Mozambique,
and when victory
was achieved we rejoiced together. We view Mozambique’s problems as our own. That is why the Government of Tanzania is very concerned at the provocative
and aggressive acts of the desperate men in Salisbury
violating the territorial
integrity of the People’s Republic of Mozambique.

“Rhodesian
whites, led by the infamous Rhodesian Front, have now only themselves to blame.
They must now squarely face the bitter consequences of the battlefield on which majority rule
must be decided.”
84. In conclusion,
I wish to reiterate that we in
Zambia will do everything in our power to assist the
people of Mozambique,
our own economic difficulties
notwithstanding.
We sincerely ,hope that others in the
international
community will do the same.

89. I do not believe that anyo.ne can doubt that the
continued existence of the illegal minority racist regime
10

Mozambique
for all the sacrifices that its people are
making in the cause of freedom and justice-the
cause
of the United Nations.

in Zimbabwe is a serious threat to the peace of the
region, with serious repercussions on international
peace and security. President Sampra Machel made
this point forcefully in his address when he declared
the imposition of sanctions on 3 March. In that historic
speech the President of Mozambique enumerated the
many acts of provocation
committed
by the illegal
regime in Rhodesia against the territorial integrity of
Mozambique.
He further explained the motivations
of that rigime in committing
those blatant acts of
provocation. President Machel effectively showed why
it is in the nature of the regime in Salisbury to commit
those acts with a view to.stamping out the struggle for
the liberation of Zimbabwe and enabling it to continue
a fascist tyranny in Zimbabwe.

94. Yet, the United Nations can arid should make a
decisive contribution to dealing with the economic and
social difficulties involved. This is the minimum that
should be expected from the Organization.
This is a
responsibility which the international community must
undertake in fulfilment
of Article’s 49 and 50 of the
Charter. We are not called upon to give charity or
disinterested
assistance to Mozambique.
We are
required by our Charter obligations to afford assistance
to that fraternal State so that in living up to its
responsibilities
as a Member of the Organization
it
does not suffer utiduly as a consequence. Assistance
to Mozambique is also imperative in order to enhance
the country’s capacity to carry out Security Council
decisions on sanctions.

90. Indeed, throughout the lo-year period that the
illegal rkgime has been in existence such has been its
normal attitude. It co-operated in the unholy alliance
between fascist Portugal and racist South Africa to
fight against the liberation
of Mozambique.
The
collapse of Portuguese colonialism
in Mozambique
was apparently not a sufficient lesson to the racist
authorities, and they have continued with the acts of
provocation
against that newly liberated
African
State.

95. I have already stated that this assistance is not
disinterested.
We in the Council, as indeed in the
entire United Nations system, have a vested interest
in bringing changes in Rhodesia so that the forces of
freedom and justice there can triumph. It does not
require an expert on southern Africa to recognize
that by reinforcing the forces of freedom in Mozambique, as represented by FRELIMO,
we will in fact
be making a singular contribution
to the struggle for
majority rule in Zimbabwe.
In this connexion the
Council cannot but salute the firm stand of the Government of Mozambique
and welcome with appreciation
the renewed pledge made by President Samora Machel
that Mozambique,
under FRELIMO,
is dedicated to
carrying out its internationalist
duty towards the
people of Zimbabwe.

91. Certainly the international
community
cannot
tolerate the continued existence of that rigime. The
legitimacy of the struggle of the people of Zimbabwe
was already been recognized by the United Nations,
and as the Zimbabwean
freedom fighters have
intensified their armed struggle, they merit not only
our admiration
for their courage and sacrifice but,
above all, our unrestricted support for and solidarity
with their noble cause.
92. In 1968 the Security Council, in resolution 253
(1968), and later in other relevant reso!utiohs, began
taking the necessary measures to bring down that
tigime. In so doing, the Council committed
itself to
the eventual achievement of the downfall of the illegal
minority rkgime in Rhodesia. We are in duty bound,
therefore, not only to commend the action taken by
the Government of the People’s Republic of Mozambique, but also to see to it that in the carrying out of
this international obligation the burden on the Government of Mozambique
is minimized.
In taking such
measures we shall only be doing what we have already
committed ourselves to’achieve, that is, to help bring
about the downfall of the illegal minority rt$gime of
Ian Smith and see the realization of majority rule in
Zimbabwe.

96. Our commitment
to the struggle in Zimbabwe,
in which the United Nations posit&n has been made
abundantly clear, demands that we should do everything possible to support Mozambique
with all the
available resources within the United Nations system.
It is also incumbent on all Member States to provide
assistance on either a multilateral
or a bilateral basis.
Here I should like to welcome warmly the statement
made by the Secretary-General
on 4 March. Equally
welcome is the decision taken the same day by the
Commonwealth
Sanctions Committee,
which was a
logical follow-up of the commitment
given by the
Commonwealth
heads of Government at their meeting
at Kingston last year.
97. This, then, brings me to the oth‘er aspect of the
problem that we are now discussing. Throughout
the
period of the existence of the illegal minority regime in
Rhodesia, Tanzania has made it clear that sanctions
alone would not bring down the illegal rkgime qf Ian
Smith so long as the rrpcwtheid rt?gime of South Africa
was giving it the necessary support. Yet, as we have
also said, those sanctions are nevertheless useful since
they constitute a political verdict on the unacceptability
of the illegal rigime. Furthermore, sanctions have also

93. We have listened with the utmost interest to the
serious, eloquent and in-depth statement made by our
brother Joaquim Chissano, the Foreign Minister of
Mozambique.
He has presented to the Council the
difficulties which his country faces. The social and
economic problems facing Mozambique are enormous
indeed. It would be presumptuous to believe that the
international
community
can adequately compensate
- .

II

-

.

been an important contribution
in making life more
difficult for Ian Smith and his collaborators.
It is in
that context that we have called for tightening sanctions against Rhodesia as well as expanding their scope.
98. The illegal regime, however, has somehow
managed to evade the full impact of those sanctions.
In fact, with the co-operation of the racist rigime in
South Africa, it has embarked on acts of aggression
against the neighbouring
independent African countries. In 1973 the illegal minority regime, with the
assistance of South Africa, committed
aggression
against the sister Republic of Zambia. At that time the
Security Council justifiably
condemned such action.
Now we have that same regime murdering civilians,
children and women of Mozambique.
99. Yet nothing can halt the tide of liberation
in
Zimbabwe. The people of Zimbabwe have taken their
own fate in their own hands, and they will not rest
until their objective has been won. The aggressive
tactics of the regime of Ian Smith will not succeed.
These are tactics of desperation employed by very
desperate men. They are tactics designed to export
the contradictions
of the regime to a neighbouring
African country whose independence we all welcomed
with such happiness only recently. The international
community should therefore fully support Mozambique
in its efforts to defend itself, and the Council cannot
but condemn the aggression committed by the illegal
minority regime against Mozambique.

102. The situation confronting the People’s Republic
of Mozambique
and arising from its courageous
decision to close the border with the minority racist
regime and to apply fully the Security Council sanctions against that regime is one which requires immediate and concerte,d tackling by the international
community.
The draft before the Council addresses
itself specifically to this problem. Therefore, the main
thrust of the draft is the provision for immediate
financial, technical and material assistance to Mozambique. This assistance is conceived in terms of contributions by individual States either on a bilateral or on
a multilateral
level, as provided for in operative paragraph 4 of our draft resolution. It is also envisaged as
being offered in the context of the United Nations
family of organizations,
as mentioned in operative
paragraph 5. In operative paragraph 6, the Security
Council would request the Secretary-Generai,
in
co-ordination
with the relevant organizations of the
United Nations system, to organize and co-ordinate
that assistance. Here I should like to underscore the
urgency of international
action. Thus it is the expectation of the sponsors of the draft resolution
that
immediately
following its, adoption, the SecretaryGeneral will initiate the necessary action for the
implementation
of the resolution. Above all, I should
like to take this opportunity in the name of the sponsors
to launch. an appeal to all Member States .to respond
favourably and without delay to the needs of Mozambique, thereby making an important contribution to the
overall struggle for freedom, justice and human dignity
in southern Africa.

100. We are now discussing matters of great importance for the southern African region. The situation
there is explosive. For some time in the United Nations
and in other forums we have repeatedly said that the
continued presence of the racist regimes there is a
grave threat to the peace of the region. As we meet
here, the situation continues to be tense. That is why
we must act by strengthening the forces of freedom in
the area. We may not get another chance to act under
these circumstances. For us in Tanzania the choice is
clear. The struggle must go on, and I reaffirm here
before the Council what my President has already
declared in no uncertain terms: Mozambique’s
struggle
is our struggle; the cause of Mozambique
is the cause
of Tanzania. It is in that spirit that we approach the
current discussion in the Council.

103. The draft resolution
also addresses itself to
another aspect of the problem, the provocative and
aggressive acts of the Smith regime against the People’s
Republic of Mozambique.
In condemning such acts,
the draft resolution serves to emphasize its opposition
to the desperate and wild policies of the ilIega1
authorities in Salisbury. It is also a reaffirmation
of
United Nations support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of Mozambique, whose Government’s
action in severing eeonomic and trade relations with Southern Rhodesia is
rightly commended in operative paragraph 1.
104. There is only one last observation I wish to
make in commending this draft for adoption, and that is
that its sponsors clearly perceive the developments
in Mozambique and the actions taken by the Government of Mozambique
in the over-all context of the
struggle for majority rule in Zimbabwe. Thus, in the
preambular
paragraphs of the draft resolution,
the
Security Council would rightly reaffirm the inalienable
rights of the Zimbabweans to self-determination
and
independence and the legitimacy of their struggle to
obtain those rights.

101. Having concluded my statement, I now have the
pleasure to introduce on behalf of the delegations of
Benin, Guyana, Italy, Japan, the Libyan Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden and the
United Kingdom
and my own delegation the draft
resolution in document S/12013. If we have taken the
decision to introduce this draft resolution at this very
early stage of our deliberations,
it is because the
sponsors are all agreed, and I believe all the members
of the Council will not fail to concur in this, that the
situation in the area is urgent and the problem we face
requires an urgent solution.

105. In conclusion I should like to express the confidence of the 11 sponsors of the draft resolution
before us, sponsors who represent the broadest
possible cross section of Council membership, that the
12

draft will enjoy the unanimous support of the members
of the Council. Only by acting with such unanimity
will the Council be sending a clear message-the
message that the Security Council, living up to the
purposes and principles of the Charter, will always be
in the forefront to provide legitimate support to those
countries which stand in the forefront in defence of
United Nations objectives and in the safeguarding of
the Charter principles. The significance of the message
will also not be lost on the racist authorities
in
Salisbury. They need to be reminded that the days of
the minority regime in Rhodesia ‘are numbered. They
need to realize that the Mozambicans’
action in
closing one of the major loopholes in the sanctions
has brought even nearer the day of reckoning for
those who wish to defy the will and determination
of
the international
community.

tugal’s rule in Africa, and little more than a year
later the new independent Government of Mozambique
took its rightful place as a member of the international
community.
When Commonwealth
heads of Govemment met at Kingston in May 1975, they addressed
themselves
to the forthcoming
independence
of
Mozambique,
as the Minister for External Affairs of
Jamaica has reminded us. In paragraph 22 of their
communique
they unanimously
emphasized “the importance of taking immediate practical steps to assist
an independent Mozambique
in applying sanctions”,
since, as they noted, the great bulk of Rhodesia’s
exports and imports depended upon Mozambique’s
transit facilities. The Commonwealth
heads of Govemment were likewise unanimous in favour of providing
immediate
financial assistance to the new Govemment, and they endorsed the recommendation
that an
initiative should be taken by Commonwealth
Governments at the United Nations to establish a programme
of assistance to Mozambique
in terms of Articles 49
and“50 of the Charter.

106. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom):
Mr. President, it is a great pleasure for me to welcome yo.u to
the presidency of the Council for the present month.
The Council has a busy two weeks ahead of it. We are
sure that under your wisdom and guidance we shall
arrive at the right decisions.

111. Members of the Council will have seen the note
by the ,Secretary-General,
circulated as document
S/12004, in which a cable from the Secretary-General
of the Commonwealth,
Mr. Ramphal, is quoted in
full. As I understand it, Mr. Ramphal is on his way
to Maputo,
at the invitation
of the Mozambique
Government,
to discuss Mozambique’s
aid requirements. He will be ascertaining
possible areas of
assistance to the Mozambique
Government,
as envisaged in last year’s Kingston communique,
so that
the Governments of Commonwealth
members will be
in a better position to provide the assistance that
Mozambique
needs.

107. I also wish to. take this opportunity
to pay a
tribute to the President of the Council for February,
Ambassador Moynihan.
He guided our work with a
mixture of skill, impartiality
and good humour, and
I should like on behalf of the United Kingdom delegation to thank him and to wish him well.
108. Before I turn to the matter before us, I should
also like to pay a tribute to those speakers whom the
Council has already heard this afternoon. The Foreign
Minister of Mozambique
has painted a very clear
picture of his country’s needs in the present critical
situation. The Minister for External Affairs of Jamaica
has reminded us all of the international
nature of this
problem and of the important decisions taken by the
heads of Government of the Commonwealth
at their
meeting at Kingston last May.

112. I am sure that it has not been easy for the
Government of Mozambique
to take the decision to
apply sanctions against Rhodesia. For many years
the economies and communications
of the countries
of southern Africa have been closely linked. Indeed,
we all know the acute difficulties
which faced the
Government of Zambia in the years after the unilateral
declaration of independence, and therefore we appreciate all the more the courageous step it took in 1973
in breaking off its communications
with Rhodesia.
I should also like to assure the Foreign Minister of
Mozambique
that we fully understand the gravity of
the decision taken by his Government
to impose
sanctions against Rhodesia. We likewise recognize how
difficult it would have been for the new State of
Mozambique
to impose sanctions immediately
after
independence, when so many other problems required
the Government’s
attention.

109. I need not, therefore, dwell at great length on
the decisions taken by the Commonwealth
heads of
Government
on that occasion,
since Senator
Thompson has already reminded the Council of what
transpired. I should, however, like to express my
conviction, as the representative of a Commonwealth
country which took an active part on that historic
occasion, that the decisions taken at Kingston were
indeed a landmark in the continuing efforts made by
the international
community to bring pressure to bear
upon the illegal regime in Rhodesia by peaceful means
and through the application of economic sanctions by
all Member States of the Organization.

113. My own Government’s commitment
to sanctions
as the means of bringing about a peaceful transfer of
power to the Rhodesian majority remains unaltered.
Mozambique’s
action underlines once again the fact
that time is fast running out for the minority rkgime in
Rhodesia itself. Urgent decisions are needed, and we
for our part hope that Mr. Smith will have the courage

110. If for many years sanctions have proved less
effective than we had all hoped, this is largely because
two countries,
South Africa and Portugal,
have
declined to apply them. The fall of Mr. Caetano in
April 1974 hastened the inevitable collapse of Por13

to take them, even at this eleventh hour. The talks
between Mr. Smith and Mr. Nkomo, which are still
continuing,
may well offer to all Rhodesians their
last chance of securing a peaceful and rapid transition
to majority rule in that country. Although we ourselves
are not involved in those talks we hope, indeed we
pray, that they will be successful, for the alternative
for the Rhodesian
people is indeed dreadful to
contemplate.

presiding over the Security Council for the month of
March. It is a good omen for the questions, relating
mainly to decolonization
and racial discrimination,
which will be examined by the Council this month
under your wise guidance.
118. Allow me also to express my delegation’s warm
greetings to Mr. Chissano, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the People’s Republic of Mozambique,
presiding
over the delegation of his brotherly African State
representing the valiant people. of Mozambique during
the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda.

114. My own Government
is committed
to giving
assistance to Mozambique,
and we shall do so, in
conformity
with the decisions taken last year at the
Commonwealth
Conference at Kingston. The United
Kingdom will, therefore, co-sponsor the draft resolution that has already been circulated to the members
of the Council. It is, of course, for each Government
to take its own decisions on the amounts and the form
of such assistance. As the Foreign Minister of Mozambique is aware, we hope to discuss in the near future
an offer of assistance to Mozambique’s
economy
in fulfilment of our Commonwealth
undertakings, and
we shall make an announcement
at the appropriate
time, when our discussions are completed. I should
like to add, while I have the opportunity,
that my
Foreign Secretary has recently held discussions with
the Foreign Ministers of Zambia and of Zaire. We are
very conscious of the economic problems which face
both of those countries because of their extended lines
of communication,
and therefore we have announced
in Parliament our decision to give additional aid both
to Zambia and to Zaire. It goes without saying that,
in view of my Government’s
continuing responsibility
in Rhodesia, we shall be prepared to look seriously
at ways in which we can help that country should
an agreement be reached for an orderly transfer to
majority rule in a brief period.

119. My delegation listened with great interest to
the statements made by Mr. Chissano before the
African Group this morning and to the Council this
afternoon. We have also studied very carefully the
statement made by Mr. Samora Machel, President of
the People’s Republic of Mozambique,
on 3 March,
and the telegram dated 10 March from the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Mozambique
to the President
of the Council.
120. We all know that Mozambique,
which proclaimed its independence
a bare nine months ago,
inherited a war-torn economy already ravaged by
colonial greed and exploitation;
but, true to its commitment of helping in the total liberation of Africa, in
accordance with the Dar es Salaam Declaration,
the
Government
of Mozambique
has put economic considerations aside and stood up in defence of freedom,
justice and human dignity.
121. While discussing the question of Southern
Rhodesia in the Fourth Committee during the thirtieth
session of the General Assembly, my delegation stated:
“The presence of Mozambique
in the United
Nations is an important
factor- which should be
‘taken into account when considering
the implementation of stronger measures against the Smith
regime. The recommendations
formulated
by the
Special Committee4
during the meeting held at
Lisbon in June 1975 to the effect that a specific
programme
of assistance, on the bilateral on a
multilateral
basis: should be initiated to enable the
Government
of Mozambique
to apply fully and
effectively sanctions against the Smith regime, is
one which should be put into practice immediately.“5

115. In making this’statement
I am very conscious of
the general wish of the Council that our debate should
be a brief one so that we can take urgent decisions
which will provide the essential framework for programmes of international
assistance to the Govemment and people of Mozambique.
I have, therefore,
deliberately
confined my remarks to the item on the
agenda. There is, of course, much else that could be
said. For the present, I would wish only to underline
once more our grave concern at the situation that is
developing in Rhodesia and our conviction that the
closing of Mozambique’s
border may prove to be the
last chance for white Rhodesians to take the decisions
which are not only inevitable,
but right and indeed
overdue.

122. The Government of Egypt highly commends the
courageous actions announced on 3 March by President
Samora Machel on behalf of the heroic people of
Mozambique
and their determination
to support the
sacred struggle of their African brothers and sisters,
the people of Zimbabwe.

116. The PRESIDENT
(interpretcrtion
from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Egypt, whom
I invite to take a place at the Council table and to
make a statement.

123. In his historic address earlier this month,
President Machel declared that the People’s Republic
of Mozambique
has closed all its borders and has
forbidden all forms- of communication
with the terri-

i 17. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID
(Egypt): Mr. President,
permit me, in beginning my statement, to congratulate
you, my distinguished African brother from Benin, on
14

tories dominated by the racist regime of Ian Smith in
Southern Rhodesia. The Government of Mozambique
also decided to deny passage through its territory and
its airspace of any person or goods to or from Southern
Rhodesia.

decision to apply fully the United Nations policy .of
sanctions against the illegal regime in Southern
Rhodesia.
127. The Security Council should request the-Se&etary-General
to appoint a coordinator
of United
Nations
assistance in Mozambique.
The Council
should also request the Economic and Social Council
to consider periodically
the request for economic
assistance to Mozambique
in implementation
of the
resolution to be adopted by the Security Council on
this question.

124. This ‘timely
action by the Government
of
Mozambique directly applies the sanctions demanded
by the United Nations, by virtue of its Charter and
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council, against the illegal regime of
Southern Rhodesia. It is a courageous action which
commands the support of all Governments and peoples
who believe in freedom.

128. 1 need not say that Egypt, which extended its
full and unreserved support for the people of Mozambique through FRELIMO
for many years before
independence, continues with the same commitment
and dedication to co-operate fully with the Govemment of Mozambique
on a bilateral basis and also by
implementing
all the relevant resolutions
of the
Organization of African Unity and the United Nations.
Similarly,
Egypt has always underlined,
both at the
General Assembly and in the United Nations Development Programme,
the need to give special attention
to the needs of the newly independent
African
countries.

125. However, by closing its borders and severing all
its trade relations with Southern Rhodesia in response
to the resolve of the United Nations and all humanity
to live free from colonial and racist domination,
the
Government
of Mozambique
has, at the same time,
taken a decision to sacrifice its own economic interests.
ConsequentIy,
the United Nations and its Member
States have a clear obligation to assist Mozambique
in overcoming the adverse economic consequences and
the special problems which, it is expected, will confront
Mozambique
as a result of the closure of its borders
with Southern Rhodesia. Under these conditions, any
assistance to be provided to Mozambique
cannot be
viewed as support to Mozambique
itself, but rather
as mutual assistance in carrying out measures decided
upon by the Security Council itself in accordance with
Articles 25 and 49 of the Charter.

129. My delegation would like to avail itself of this
opportunity
to reaffirm the commitment
of the
Egyptian Government to continue to co-operate with
the newly independent States as well as the national
liberation movements in all fields, including those of
economic and technical co-operation.

126. It is with this view in mind that my delegation
urges the Council to take immediate
measures to
relieve the burden to be borne by the economy of
Mozambique as a result of the application of sanctions
against the illegal regime of Southern Rhodesia.
Accordingly,
and in recognizing that the decision of
the Government
of Mozambique
to close its borders
with Southern
Rhodesia
will entail considerable
economic hardships, we believe that the Council
should condemn all acts of aggression and provocation
by the Rhodesian illegal regime against the People’s
Republic of Mozambique
and commend the Govemment of Mozambique
for its decision to impose sanctions against the illegal minority regime in Southern
Rhodesia in compliance
with the Charter and the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council, and urge Member States, the United
Nations, the specialized agencies and other intemational organizations to allocate substantial additional
assistance to Mozambique
‘as a matter of priority,
with a view to helping it solve the special economic
problems that may confront it as a result of its decision to carry out the decisions of the Security Council
to apply sanctions against the illegal regime of Southern
Rhodesia. The needs of Mozambique
in maintaining
alternative systems of trade and of road, rail, air and
sea communications
should be given special attention
so that Mozambique
can maintain its normal flow of
traffic and enhance its capacity to implement
its

130. My delegation
is honoured to state that an
increasing number of Egyptian experts are being sent
into the field in Mozambique
and other newly independent countries. A substantial number of fellowships for the benefit of those countries.and of national
liberation
movements
still struggling
for selfdetermination
and independence are also being implemented in Egyptian institutions under bilateral and
multilateral
United Nations programmes.
131. The Egyptian
Government
received
with
appreciation
the declaration of the United Nations
spokesman that the Secretary-General
is confident
that the Organization
would respond favourably to
the request by the Government
of Mozambique
for
assistance in order to .offset the economic consequences of its application
of full sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia.
132. My Government also hailed the outcome of the
emergency meeting of the Commonwealth
Sanctions
Committee
on 4 March,
which welcomed
the
announcement
by President Samora Machel ,concerning the full implementation
by Mozambique
of
United Nations sanctions against Rhodesia and agreed
to study, as a matter of urgency, areas of assistance
to the Government of Mozambique under the terms of
Articles 49 and 50 of the Charter.
15

133. Egypt calls once again on all friends to mobilize
all moral, material and political assistance to Mozambique, either bilaterally or multilaterally,
in order to
offset the economic consequences of its application
of full sanctions against Southern Rhodesia.

the Organization
of African Unity. The negative
attitude of the racist regime has assured us once again
that the peaceful message of Africa and peace-Iovling
peoples everywhere has fallen on deaf ears.

134. In documents S/12005 and S/I2009 the Govemment of Mozambique drew the attention of the Security
Council to the fact that the racist minority rigime
of Ian Smith is pursuing its traditional policy of aggression against the people of Mozambique,
taking a new
step in the criminal process of escalation and launching
an outright war of aggression against Mozambique.
In the opinion of the Government
of Egypt, this
aggression constitutes a threat to peace and security
not only in Mozambique
but also in Africa and in the
world.

139. Egypt is convinced that the armed struggle in
Zimbabwe will be waged in accordance with the Dar
es Salaam Declaration and will be won by the valiant
people of Zimbabwe. We in Egypt believe that the.
racist rkgime in Zimbabwe, depritied of all direct and
indirect assistance, would not only accept the principle
of majority rule, but would also seriously negotiate for
it with the people of Zimbabwe under the leadership of
the African National
Council. That is why Egypt
strongly urges all peace-loving peoples to unite their
efforts towards increasing the isolation of the racist
regime by all possible means.

135. Egypt appeals to the Security Council to take the
necessary steps to help the people of Mozambique
to
defend themselves by every means against the aggression to which they have been subjected by the rebel
Ian Smith and his white minority regime.

140. As far as the Governmentof
Egypt is concerned,
the battle
for liberating
southern
Africa from
the racist rigime has begun, and there will be no
turning back. The struggle may be, long and bitter, but
history has assured us that victory is certain.

136. The proposals made by the delegation of the
sister country of Mozambique
are all valid in the view
of the Egyptian Government.

141. As an African, I call-on all friends of Africa to
continue with the same commitment
and dedication,
because the cause they are supporting is right and
history will not forget them.

137. I add my voice to that of the Secretary-General,
who announced that the measures taken by the
Government
of Mozambique
against
Southern
Rhodesia emphasized the gravity of the situation and
the urgent need for a solution for the Southern Rhodesian problem.

The meeting

rose at 6.30 p.m.
Notes

I Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session.
Plenary Meetings, 2375th meeting.
2 Oficial Records of the Security Council, Thirty-first Year,
Special Supplement No. 2.
3 OJkial Records of the Generai Assembly, Twenty-fourth Session, Annexes, agenda item 106, document A/7754.
4 Special Committee on the Situatisn with Regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndepelidence to
Colonist Countries and Peoples.
s Official Rerords of the General Assembly, Thirrieth Session.
Fourth Committee. 2137th meeting. para. 2.

138. Ian Smith, backed by the racist rt?gime of
South Africa, is continuing to increase his military
strength and arrogantly
resisting the constructjve
efforts of some African leaders to convince him that
he should enable the people of Zimbabwe to realize
their right to self-determination
and freedom in accordance with the resolutions of the United Nations and

16

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

L.es publications
des Nations Unies sent en vente dans les librairies et les agences dipositaires
du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAI-C

IIOJIYWZTh

COMO

CONSEGUIR

ll3AAHMII

OPl-AHH3A4HH

PUBLICACIONES

OIYbEJUiHEHHhIX

DE LAS NACIONES

HAUZltI

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas es& en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccibn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

00400

83-60801-May

1984-2.200
