S/2020/594

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 July 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 26 June 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the video-teleconference of the Security Council
convened on 23 June 2020 under the agenda item entitled “Children and Armed
Conflict”. Enclosed herewith are copies of the briefings provided on that occasion
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Virginia Gamba; the Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s
Fund, Henrietta Fore; and Mariam, the civil society briefer; as well as copies of the
statements delivered by the representatives of Council members Belgium, Estonia,
France, Indonesia, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (on
behalf of the Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa and Tunisia),
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of
America and Viet Nam.
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for
this video-teleconference, the following delegations and entities submitted written
statements, copies of which are also enclosed: Afghanistan, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brazil, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, the European
Union, Fiji, Georgia, Greece, Guatemala, India, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan,
Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Morocco,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Norway,
Pakistan, the Observer State of Palestine, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, the Republic of Korea, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, Uruguay
and Yemen.
Pursuant to the procedure described in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from the
President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of the
members of Security Council (S/2020/372) and agreed in the light of the extraordinary
circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the enclosed briefings
and statements will be issued as an official document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Nicolas de Rivière
President of the Security Council

20-08906 (E) 200720 310820

*2008906*
*

Reissued for technical reasons 27 October 2020

*

S/2020/594

Annex 1
Statement by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, Virginia Gamba de Potgieter
[Original: English and French]
On behalf of the Secretary-General, I would like to thank France for
organizing this open debate on children and armed conflict. I commend France for
the important role it played in the establishment of this mandate, and I welcome its
continued support.
Before I turn to the content of this year’s report (S/2020/525), I would like
to mention three positive developments on the children and armed conflict agenda
in 2019.
First, through the direct engagement of the United Nations on the ground,
supported by my Office, parties to conflict adopted over 30 action plans, road maps,
command orders and other measures to better protect children, including in the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan, Syria
and Yemen; others, such as Somalia and the Sudan, recommitted to action plans.
This is the highest number of mutually agreed measures in any one year. At the same
time, while accountability remained slow, perpetrators in several situations were
prosecuted for violations against children, for instance in Myanmar, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Central African Republic.
Secondly, the search for peace in 2019 yielded seven different peace dialogues
and processes in children and armed conflict situations, such as the one in the Central
African Republic. The guidelines on ways to include child protection language in
peace processes, which were developed by my Office and presented to the Council
in February, are now beginning to be applied.
Thirdly, as a result of advocacy by the United Nations, including in the context
of peace agreements, some 13,200 children were released by parties to conflict
in 2019.
I now turn to the report before the Council. The number of grave violations
verified by the United Nations, although showing a decrease from the previous year,
remains very high. Much more work needs to be done to bring those figures down.
I ask Member States and parties to conflict to put child protection at the centre
of their action. In 2019, actual violations committed against children amounted to
24,422, but our monitoring teams were also able to belatedly verify an additional
1,241 violations committed prior to that date. Thus, the overall verification in 2019
amounted to more than 25,000 grave violations. This represents 70 grave violations
against children per day. Country task forces conduct late verifications when access
to children has improved, often as a result of enhanced engagement with parties,
increased capacity and improved security.
In 2019, 7,747 children, including 668 late verifications, were verified as
having been recruited and used, the vast majority of those being attributable to
non-State actors. On a positive note, action plans and enhanced engagement led
to increased access to verify the presence of children within the ranks of conflict
parties and to the release of those found. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Central African Republic, hundreds of children were released as a direct
result of engagement with parties by the United Nations.
That same year, while a decrease in child casualties was verified, resulting
from mitigation measures in the conduct of military operations and the establishment
of action plans and/or peace processes, the erosion of respect for international
2/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

humanitarian law still led to high numbers of children being killed or maimed:
10,173 child casualties were verified, including 534 late verifications, a decrease
of nearly 2,000 casualties as contrasted with previous years. Killing and maiming
remain the highest verified violation in the annual report.
Lastly, there was also a decrease in abducted children. Over 1,600 children were
verified as having been abducted in 2019, mostly by armed groups — a considerable
decrease. My Office is preparing a technical guidance note to better assist our
country task forces in monitoring and reporting on this violation. I encourage the
United Nations system and international and regional bodies to continue to work,
within their respective mandates, to better understand and address this issue.
While the introduction of measures, peace dialogues and enhanced engagement
by child-protection actors have led to decreases in some violations, it has not been
the case for all violations, starting with sexual violence, including rape. In 2019,
over 730 cases of sexual violence were verified. However, this violation continues
to be disturbingly underreported, including when perpetrated against boys, owing
to the fear of stigma and retaliation, the involvement of powerful perpetrators and
a lack of services for survivors, all of which discourage children and their families
from reporting violations and seeking justice. More disturbing still, the number of
cases attributed to State actors and non-State actors are similar and to not seem to be
dropping, despite an increasing number of parties having signed commitments with
the United Nations to end this violation. Stronger accountability mechanisms and
systematic care services for survivors are needed to decisively address this scourge.
It is also critical that armed forces strengthen their training for the prevention of
this violation and that prevention be adequately reflected in national legislation
criminalizing sexual violence.
I am equally troubled by the persistently high number of attacks on schools,
hospitals and protected personnel. In 2019, monitors were able to verify 930 attacks,
and verified attributions to State forces doubled. I call on all parties to respect the
civilian nature of school and health infrastructure. State armed forces have a specific
duty to protect them. In that connection, I recall the Safe Schools Declaration and
encourage States to endorse and implement its guidelines. When schools are used for
military purposes, their sanctity as safe spaces is eroded and teachers and students
are at risk of attack. The targeting of schools by armed groups using extreme violence
needs to be better understood in order to engage in effective prevention. Equally, we
need to explore the linkages between attacks on health facilities and coronavirus
disease lockdowns, which might be a disturbing new trend.
During the reporting period, 4,400 incidents of denial of humanitarian access
to children were verified, an increase of over 400 per cent from 2018 and, indeed,
other previous years. That is overwhelmingly the violation that showed the greatest
increase in 2019, with most denials attributed to non-State actors. Violence against
humanitarian workers, assets and facilities included, among other things, killings,
abductions, assaults and arbitrary detentions. I plead for States and armed groups
to facilitate the access of humanitarian workers to deliver much-needed assistance
to children.
Finally, I would like to underscore my serious concern at the detention of
more than 2,500 children for their actual or alleged association with armed groups,
including those designated as terrorist by the United Nations, and on national
security charges. States must treat these children primarily as victims. Detention
should be used only as a measure of last resort and for the shortest period possible,
with respect for their fundamental rights, due process and international juvenile
justice standards.

20-089063/137

S/2020/594

With the support of the Security Council, we have achieved a lot, but not
nearly as much as we need to. Here, I wish to make a special plea to all Member
States: the monitoring and reporting mechanism is only as strong as the resources
and capacities available for its functioning. Having well-trained, specialized and
dedicated child-protection advisers in peace operations, as well as in country offices
of the United Nations Children’s Fund, is essential to ensure that the mandate is
effective. If Member States want to assist in better protecting children, resources
must be provided to maintain and strengthen child-protection capacity on the ground.
The Council and the Fifth Committee should ensure that, when a new peacekeeping
or political mission is set up or the budget of existing missions is negotiated, enough
child-protection capacity is mandated and retained. I further plead for an increase
of the financial support to UNICEF so that it can conduct its children and armed
conflict-mandated functions, as well as its other child-protection work, on the ground.
I wish to end my statement by talking about the children. Behind the figures
are boys and girls with stolen childhoods and shattered dreams, as well as families
and communities torn apart by violence and suffering. The only thing children
and communities have in common today is their hope for peace, a better life and
a better future. We must rise to meet that expectation. We can do that by engaging
all parties to ensure better protection for conflict-affected children, by pleading for
their immediate release and by assisting them in their reintegration into normal life.
The efforts of all the Groups of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict can make a
real difference in that regard.
Another way to assist is through supporting effective reintegration programmes,
as called for in resolution 2427 (2018) and the Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups — the Paris Principles. Reintegration
programmes must be long-term, sustainable and gender- and age-sensitive and must
provide children with access to health care, mental health, psychosocial support,
education and vocational training, civil registration and justice. I call on States to
endorse and implement the Paris Principles in order to make reintegration a reality
for children, and I encourage them to join our advocacy for adequate and sustainable
child reintegration, including through the Global Coalition for the Reintegration
of Child Soldiers, which I launched in 2018, together with UNICEF and other key
actors, some of whom are here today, including your country, Mr. President, as
co-Chair of the Group of Friends of Reintegration.
I further ask the Council’s assistance in rolling out the campaign Act to
Protect Children Affected by Armed Conflict, which was launched last year, and
I look forward to working with everyone present to find opportunities for roll-out.
We find ourselves looking back at another year of challenges in the quest
for better protecting children in conflict. We need to deliver concrete results, and
I count on everyone present to support that work. We must advocate for children,
like Mariam, who will speak today through the good offices of Save the Children.
We must support our child-protection experts and advisers. We must strive for
dialogue and peace. And we must support UNICEF and its civil society partners
in reintegration efforts so that children can move away from conflicts that they
neither started nor chose. Let us give children a real chance at childhood. Let us give
children the ability to dream again.

4/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 2
Statement by the Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s
Fund, Henrietta H. Fore
I thank France for convening this debate, and I welcome Mariam, our young
civil society briefer. We look forward to learning from her experiences.
There are few children as vulnerable as those living through armed conflict
situations. Whether they are trapped by the fighting, on the move as migrants,
refugees or internally displaced persons, part of the fighting itself or being detained
because of perceived or actual links to armed groups, these children are, first
and foremost, victims of circumstances beyond their control. They are, first and
foremost, children.
The voice and support of the Security Council can be instrumental in
supporting those children. It can help return what has been so cruelly taken from
them by conflict — the simple gift of a normal childhood.
Fifteen years ago, the global community gathered around those needs.
Resolution 1612 (2005) and the establishment of the children and armed conflict
agenda and the monitoring and reporting mechanism represented a milestone in
living up to our commitment to protect all children. The United Nations Children’s
Fund has been there from the start, pushing the agenda forward and co-chairing
country task forces on monitoring and reporting in 14 countries. Along with the
Secretary-General’s annual report, we, together, are protecting children and holding
parties to conflict to account.
Since then, tens of thousands of children have been released from the ranks of
armed forces and armed groups. In the past three years alone, UNICEF has helped
release nearly 37,000 of them and supported them with release and reintegration
programming in 19 countries. Child survivors are finally getting the services they
need to recover and reintegrate.
Our work has also created a new space to engage with parties to conflict to
prevent and end grave violations against children. Over the years, parties to conflict
have signed 32 action plans to end and prevent grave violations against children. Our
efforts have raised public awareness — and, often, public alarm — about the plight
of these children and the need to support them.
Together we have sent a clear message to those who would violate children’s
rights: such actions are illegal, immoral and unacceptable, and the global community
is committed to holding them to account. The culture of impunity must end.
Countries now have a number of tools and normative frameworks to guide
their work in that area. The Convention on the Rights of the Child is now joined by
a number of important instruments: the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, ratified by 170
countries; the Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces
or Armed Groups — the Paris Principles; the Vancouver Principles; and the Safe
Schools Declaration, endorsed by 104 States.
Guided by those frameworks, many States have gone one step further and
brought those commitments to life in their laws and regulations. Just last week,
the Central African Republic adopted the new Child Protection Code, which also
criminalizes the recruitment and use of children. Last year, the Philippines adopted
the Children in Situations of Armed Conflict Law. It criminalizes the six grave
violations, provides special protections for children in armed conflict and establishes
penalties for violations. In at least five countries, including Denmark, the United
20-089065/137

S/2020/594

Kingdom and New Zealand, military manuals and directives now reflect the Safe
Schools Declaration and Guidelines. But these instruments are only as effective as
the global will to use them. We therefore call on all States to endorse and reflect
them across their legal frameworks, because we have more work to do.
We continue to see appallingly high numbers of verified violations against
children. Over the past 15 years, the monitoring and reporting mechanism on
children and armed conflict has documented a shocking 250,000 grave violations
against children in armed conflict, including the recruitment and use of over
77,000 children, the killing and maiming of over 100,000 children, rape and sexual
violence against over 15,000 children, the abduction of over 25,000 children, nearly
17,000 attacks on schools and hospitals, and nearly 11,000 incidents of denial of
humanitarian access. These are just the verified cases. The actual numbers are
certainly much higher. The coronavirus disease adds a new urgency to this work.
As the pandemic spreads, health-care facilities have been damaged or destroyed by
conflict. Services have been suspended. Children are missing out on basic medical
care, including vaccinations. Water and sanitation systems have been damaged or
destroyed altogether, making it impossible for children to wash their hands.
Some 1.5 billion children are out of school. In conflicts, these children are
at a double disadvantage, missing out on an education and finding themselves at
increased risk of violence, abuse, child marriage and recruitment to armed groups.
Crowded conditions in camp settings, informal settlements or densely populated
urban areas and detention centres make physical distancing impossible. Far too
often, parties to conflict are using the pandemic and the need to reach and support
children, particularly those on the move, for political advantage. Children are not
pawns or bargaining chips. This must stop.
To address these growing needs, we need the support and united voice of the
Council to call for action in five key areas.
First, we need the influence of Member States to urge the 50 parties to conflict
that have not yet signed action plans to do so. We need action, not words, and signing
these plans is a demonstration of real commitment. I ask Members to help the United
Nations create space for dialogue to bring these plans to life. These plans should
increasingly address all six grave violations, instead of primarily recruitment and
use. The action plan signed in South Sudan is a good model to follow.
Secondly, we call for the immediate release of all children in detention for
their recruitment, use or alleged association with parties to conflict. These children,
including those who may have committed crimes, are victims first and foremost.
They are also at acute risk of contracting COVID-19 and must be handed over to
child-protection actors, such as UNICEF.
Thirdly, UNICEF calls on Member States to bring nationals and their children
home and to repatriate them. These children have a right to access protection, basic
services, education and reintegration services. This includes the thousands of
children stranded in north-east Syria — young lives who are shunned and deprived
of liberty because of perceived or actual links to groups designated as terrorists.
After all they have experienced, they need protection and support. Instead, they are
met with ostracization and rejection. They are locked up. Some have had their right
to nationality denied or stripped away altogether. This is unacceptable. We must
support these children.
Fourthly, we call on Member States to invest in education and vocational
training for reintegrated children. This is not only their right, it is the right thing to
do. Education provides a pathway to hope, a better life and social cohesion. Beyond
investments, we also call for all attacks on education facilities to stop. Last year
6/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

saw 927 verified attacks on schools — among the 13,000 since the monitoring and
reporting mechanism began. Once again, these numbers are likely much higher. We
must protect this essential infrastructure.
Fifthly, we call for urgent action to respect and protect water and sanitation
infrastructure. Water is a basic human right, and sanitation is the first line of defence
against diseases like the coronavirus disease, but also cholera, as well as malnutrition.
UNICEF urges the Council to use its influence to build on the many successes
over the past 15 years and give every child the protection and support they deserve,
because they are children first and foremost. If we fail them, we fail the future, we
fail humanity and we fail in our duty to leave the world a better, more peaceful place
than we found it.

20-089067/137

S/2020/594

Annex 3
Statement by the civil society briefer, Mariam
[Original: English and French]
I would like to begin my speech by thanking the French Government for
having organized this meeting of the Security Council. I also thank the Council
for giving me the opportunity to represent civil society organizations, especially
children. I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and the Executive Director of UNICEF for their engagement
and advocacy for children.
My name is Mariam, I am 15 years old. I am a member of the National Children’s
Parliament of Mali. I am committed to the protection and well-being of children. I am
particularly sensitive to the situation of children who have been internally displaced
by conflicts. It is for this reason that we have started a fundraising campaign to
distribute clothes, toys and food to these children.
In 2019, it was verified that 7,747 children around the world, some as young
as 6 years old, had been recruited and used by armed groups, according to the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2020/525). Exactly four years ago, Mohamed, a native
of Bankass, located in the Mopti region in central Mali, was enjoying his childhood.
He lived surrounded by his parents, his friends, happiness and joy. One day, an
armed group attacked his village, killing people, burning houses and taking all the
property. As a result, Mohamed became an orphan, not knowing where the other
members of his family were. As if that were not enough, he was recruited by force
by an armed group when he was only 10 years old.
He accompanied the armed group and participated in the atrocities. One day
he was forced to witness the massacre of an entire family. This was a huge shock
for him, and in the evening he decided to run away and take refuge in a family.
Fortunately for him, this family helped him come to Bamako to one of the centres
for internally displaced persons.
Having no more consideration for his person, and no longer having confidence
in others, he does not know what the future holds for him — his future in a world
where leaders seem deaf to the most poignant evils. No child should experience
this kind of experience, because it takes away not only his innocence but also all
his dreams.
I ask leaders to make decisions and take actions to prevent other children from
finding themselves in the same situation as Mohamed.
The consequences of wars and conflicts for children are enormous. Many
children have become gangsters or thieves, and some have fallen into alcohol and
drugs. In conflict and war zones, children feel frustrated and in danger because they
tell themselves that their lives can change at any time. They can be killed, abducted
or forcibly recruited by armed groups.
Thousands of children are out of school because of war. In Mali, 1,251 schools
were closed in March of this year, depriving thousands of children of one of their
fundamental rights, which is education. Aminata, a 12-year-old child who lives in an
internally displaced persons camp, told me this:
“Before, I was happy to go to school because I had friends with whom I had
fun and I was learning a lot of things. I loved my teacher so much that I wanted
to be like her in the future. One day, people came to my school and burned the

8/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

benches because they do not want to see formal schools open. I am wondering
how I am going to be a teacher now, because I am not in school anymore.”
Conflicts separate family members. Bakary, aged 14, went on vacation to
Mopti in 2017 to stay with one of my uncles. One day when they went out on an
errand with one of his friends, they were kidnapped by armed groups. His parents
remained without news of him for several months. Afterwards, the armed groups
contacted them by phone to give them news of Bakary, and they talked to him. No
one has heard from him for over two years. Because of this, his mother has gone mad
and can no longer take care of Bakary’s little brothers and sisters. What are Member
States doing to ensure that Bakary and other abducted children are found and rejoin
their families?
Girls and boys are victims of rape. Fatou, aged 12, lived in the Gao region
with her parents. One day the armed men went to her house. They murdered her
father in her presence and raped her. It happened in the presence of her mother,
who did not survive. After being raped and losing both her parents, Fatou suffered
psychological trauma. She was afraid of people, especially those of the opposite
sex. She no longer wanted to continue living. She was supported by a neighbouring
family who welcomed her and helped her to go to one of the youth reception centres,
where she received psychological care.
I tell myself that it could have been me. What would have become of me if I
had experienced this situation? I have no answer to that question.
I speak with a tearful heart because I know that children suffer and that they
simply never should, especially in times of conflict and war. In my country, thousands
of children lose their enthusiasm for life and, at the same time, their dreams. There is
an urgent need for justice so that victims do not grow up by wanting to take justice
into their own hands.
I ask States Members of the United Nations to take actions to protect children,
including in times of conflict and war. As fathers, mothers, uncles and aunts, I know
that no one would want their children or loved ones to be victims of conflict. I am
convinced that all children, regardless of race, colour, ethnicity or religion, have
the right to enjoy their childhoods and their rights. I urge Member States to take
the necessary measures to protect and guarantee the future of children, including in
times of conflict or war, because, as we say in Bambara, Djamana ka Sini nyè sigi bé
a dewn bolo — the future of a country is in the hands of its children.
Allow me to say that we children want to participate in decision-making that
concerns us, because we also have a voice and ideas to propose in order to reduce the
impact of armed conflict on children. I ask decision-makers, States members of the
Council, to help us improve our living conditions and not to be victims of conflict.

20-089069/137

S/2020/594

Annex 4
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the
United Nations, Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve
This year marks the fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1612 (2005), which
established the monitoring and reporting mechanism on children and armed conflict
and the Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. This
year also marks the twentieth anniversary of the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict.
However, despite progress in the implementation of the mandate, there is
little to celebrate. Last year, more than 25,000 grave violations against children in
19 country situations were verified by the United Nations. The violation of denial
of humanitarian access has seen an exponential increase. The steady erosion of
international humanitarian law, international human rights law and respect for
civilian lives, in particular of children, continues. The numbers of incidents of rape
and other forms of sexual violence and of attacks on schools and hospitals do not go
down, even where action plans are adopted and measures are taken. The coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) further exacerbates the situation. We must step up our efforts.
It is fitting that we hold today’s open debate under the French presidency of the
Security Council, as France was the first Chair of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. Belgium, as the current Chair of the Working Group, stepped
into the shoes of its predecessors with ambitious goals. We aim for the Working
Group to adopt conclusions on all of the 14 country situations with listed parties
within our two-year term. We agreed with Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Gamba de Potgieter to increase the frequency of country reports, shortening
the reporting periods and increasing their relevance, as more timely conclusions of
the Working Group are being adopted.
The Working Group is also mainstreaming the topic of children and armed
conflict in the work of the Council. For example, video-teleconferences are held
with country task forces on monitoring and reporting ahead of mandate renewals of
United Nations missions. This illustrates the importance we attach to sufficient childprotection adviser capacity in United Nations missions, whether they be peacekeeping
operations or special political missions. The tireless and often dangerous work of the
child protection teams and the country task forces on monitoring and reporting on
the ground forms the basis of the children and armed conflict mandate and should
be acknowledged and safeguarded. In addition, more attention has been paid to the
follow-up and implementation of previously adopted conclusions.
In February, Belgium organized a Security Council debate on children and
armed conflict, with a statement by the King of the Belgians (see S/PV.8721). On that
occasion, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2020/3) calling for
the dissemination and use of the United Nations “Practical guidance for mediators
to protect children in situations of armed conflict”. In the light of the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a global ceasefire in response to COVID-19, it is now more
relevant than ever that child protection should be a central focus in ceasefire and
peace negotiations.
Time and again, the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict manages
to find consensus on the protection of children, even in country situations about
which the Security Council is often divided. This reflects the Council’s continued
strong support for the children and armed conflict mandate. This unity illustrates
the importance of maintaining the strengths of the mandate, including the integrity
and impartiality of its listing mechanism. Evidence-based listing and delisting,
accurately reflecting the data collected and verified by the monitoring and reporting
10/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

mechanism, according to the formal criteria included in the Secretary-General’s
annual report on children and armed conflict of 2010 (S/2010/181), are key. The
listing mechanism provides leverage to the United Nations to work with listed parties
to improve the situation of children on the ground, and is therefore a precious and
powerful tool. Delisting parties prematurely takes away that leverage, including for
the Working Group, as it is the basis on which it works.
Accountability for all violations and abuses against children is at the heart of
the mandate on children and armed conflict.
Furthermore, we share the concern, expressed in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2020/525), related to children in detention for association with armed
groups, including those designated as terrorists by the Security Council, or on
national security-related charges. Those children should be treated primarily as
victims and in line with international juvenile justice standards. Detention should
be used only as a measure of last resort and for the shortest appropriate period of
time. Reintegration is key, and reintegration programmes must be gender- and agesensitive, include mental-health and psychosocial support, education and vocational
training, and access to civil registry, identification documents and to justice.
As His Majesty King Philippe said before the Security Council in February,
“The year 2019 marked the end of a very challenging decade for children
in conflict zones. It is up to us all to ensure — with just and concrete
measures — that 2020 marks the start of a decade of hope for all children.”
(see S/PV.8721, p. 8)

20-0890611/137

S/2020/594

Annex 5
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
We thank all briefers for sharing their views today. We also thank France for
organizing today’s debate, which addresses the key building blocks of the Security
Council’s work on children in armed conflict.
The report of the Secretary-General before us (S/2020/525) confirms the
continuing immense need for the Council’s attention to children and armed conflict —
and not only today. The protection of children is relevant to every situation on our
agenda and should be included in all our discussions on peacekeeping and special
political mission mandates as well as in the work of the sanctions committees.
The conclusions and discussions of the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict provide valuable input for this and should be drawn
upon systematically.
The continued high level of verified violations against children also points
to the continued failure by parties to comply with international law, including
international humanitarian law and international human rights law.
We support the Secretary-General’s call for strong national accountability
measures for grave violations against children and for cooperation with relevant
international accountability mechanisms, including the International Criminal
Court. As a party to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, Estonia calls on countries
not yet having done so to ratify the Protocol.
Likewise, we welcome all initiatives that aim to strengthen the protection of
children in armed conflict. Estonia joined the group of over 100 countries endorsing
the Safe Schools Declaration earlier this year.
We are deeply concerned about the high number of child casualties —
over 10,000 children killed or maimed — with the number of attacks climbing in
Afghanistan, Mali and Myanmar. We are alarmed by the increase in the denial of
humanitarian access to children, and unlawful attacks against schools and hospitals,
in, among other places, the Syrian Arab Republic, the occupied Palestinian territory,
Afghanistan and Somalia.
We are deeply concerned about the continued underreporting of cases of
sexual violence, and the lack of accountability and access to services, including
sexual and reproductive health services, in this regard.
The monitoring and reporting mechanism on children and armed conflict is a
unique and valuable mechanism created by the Council for the collection of timely,
objective, accurate and reliable information. That data, along with the consistent
application of the criteria laid out in the report of the Secretary-General contained
in document S/2010/181 to guide the Secretary-General’s annual reporting, provide
an essential tool for the Council for addressing and preventing violations against
children in conflict.
The mechanism cannot deliver without sufficient human and financial
resources. We strongly support ensuring continued dedicated child-protection
capacity in United Nations missions, including in situations of transition and
drawdown. Estonia continues to support UNICEF and the Office of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict through voluntary contributions.
We are concerned about the increased vulnerability of children in armed
conflict due to the coronavirus disease pandemic, including in terms of recruitment
12/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

and the denial of humanitarian access. We reiterate our strong support for the
Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire, aimed to protect the most vulnerable
among us.
We extend our deep appreciation to all actors on the ground ensuring the
continued work of the monitoring and reporting mechanism. We note with concern
the potential gaps in reporting due to the limitations imposed by the pandemic and
the possible impact on the implementation of the Council’s mandate on children and
armed conflict.
Finally, we express our strong appreciation to Belgium as Chair of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict for ensuring the continued functioning of
the Working Group despite the challenges posed by the pandemic.

20-0890613/137

S/2020/594

Annex 6
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: English and French]
I add my voice to the acknowledgements given to our briefers of the day. I
would like to thank Mariam in particular, and through her the youth of Mali and all
those who work daily on the ground to improve the situation of children.
Fifteen years ago, the age of Mariam, my predecessor Ambassador De la
Sablière and his counterpart from Benin submitted an ambitious and innovative draft
resolution to the Council. Resolution 1612 (2005) structures our collective action to
put an end to the infamy that brings us together today. Since 2005, our efforts have
resulted in the release of more than 150,000 children, thanks to the commitment of
the Security Council, successive Special Representatives of the Secretary-General,
UNICEF and civil society.
Our discussions have highlighted this collective success, which illustrates
what the multilateral system can do best when the Security Council is vigilant,
united and equipped with effective tools. However, grave violations against children
continue at alarming levels, fuelled by the escalation of conflict. That is why we
must make the best use of the tools that the Security Council has put in place. Its
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict must continue to meet regularly,
develop contacts with those involved in child protection, and carry out field visits. In
this respect, I pay tribute to Belgium for its dynamic chairmanship of the Working
Group. Since 2001, the Council has also asked the Secretary-General to release an
annual infamous list. It is a heavy responsibility that is to be exercised on the basis
of rigorous and objective criteria.
For its part, France will continue to play an active role and promote the universal
endorsement of the Paris Principles and Commitments. In the field, France supports
projects for children in emergency situations. In particular, through UNICEF and the
Education Cannot Wait Fund, we support projects in Lebanon and the Sahel.
Protecting children from recruitment and indoctrination by terrorist groups is
imperative. Empowerment, through education and training, is one of the best ramparts
against these forms of exploitation. This is why France has made education a priority
of its external action. It has significantly increased its bilateral aid in this area and
actively supports UNESCO, in particular in strengthening the resilience of young
people in the face of violent extremism in the Sahel. France has also strengthened
its support to the Global Partnership for Education with a historic contribution of
€200 million.
Since girls are particularly vulnerable, France supports the establishment of
a protective environment for girls in schools. This is one of the objectives of the
“Priority for Equality” initiative, which operates in the Sahel countries.
Finally, in the face of the unacceptable increase of mutilation and sexual
violence, our action includes a section devoted to care. This is why we support, for
instance, several projects in Iraq as well as the Mukwege-Murad fund for survivors
of sexual violence.

14/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 7
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
I would like to thank France for organizing this timely open debate on children
and armed conflict. I also thank Special Representative Virginia Gamba de Potgieter,
Executive Director Henrietta Fore and Mariam for their updates on this issue.
Today’s debate is a vital contribution to the overall efforts to halt and reverse
the negative impacts on children caught up in armed conflict. For Indonesia, ensuring
children’s well-being is a priority to which we are abidingly committed. We, the
international community, cannot stand by silently as children’s lives are cut short by
the blunt force of armed conflict.
It is an unfortunate fact that children and conflict are consistently mentioned
in the same breath. In 2019, over 25,000 grave violations against children were
reported and more than 10,000 children were killed or maimed.
While reiterating our continuous support to the Secretary-General’s call for
a global ceasefire during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, Indonesia
has three points to underscore today.
First, child protection has become even more urgent during this pandemic.
The COVID-19 pandemic has further jeopardized children’s lives in conflict areas.
They are facing higher risks of health issues, violation and exploitation. Through
our peacekeepers on the ground, Indonesia maintains its concrete contribution on
child protection. Our rapidly deployable battalion in the Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of Congo continues to engage communities within civilmilitary coordination activities, including by supporting children to understand
how to address the pandemic in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We need to
ensure that our efforts against the pandemic take the rights and needs of children
into account. That includes their access to health care, quality education and the
delivery of a timely COVID-19 response.
Secondly, it is imperative to stop using children in armed conflict. We should
continue to sustain actions to end the recruitment of children as well as address the
root causes of conflict. Fifteen years since the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005),
we are pleased to hear a “success story” of 13,200 children released from armed
groups last year, including in Afghanistan, Colombia, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Myanmar. However, we cannot be complacent. Our full support
towards enhanced engagement by all parties to conflict on child protection should
be consistently maintained.
Thirdly, the process of reintegrating children should be given greater
attention. As member of the Group of Friends of Reintegration, Indonesia believes
that the protection of children’s rights must start with family or caregivers. Providing
children with a safe and nurturing environment in the family is the best way to break
the cycle of their involvement in armed conflict.
A conducive environment will not only prevent the re-recruitment of former
child soldiers, but also prevent children from being exposed to terrorist groups in
conflict areas. Therefore, positive engagement and commitment from all stakeholders
are critical for the reintegration process. That includes the role of United Nations
peace operations, particularly by involving women peacekeepers, who are wellpositioned to protect children. Today there are 159 Indonesian women peacekeepers
in various missions, who have been trained to engage and protect children.

20-0890615/137

S/2020/594

This year also marks 20 years since the adoption of the Optional Protocol
to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of
children in armed conflict. There are many international instruments related to the
well-being of children. But, as Henrietta, the Executive Director of UNICEF, clearly
alluded to, all those instruments are only as effective as the global will to use them.
It is up to us to implement faithfully all protocols, agreements and legislation on
children. It is the duty of our generation to give meaning to the Protocol. Our legacy
for children is to ensure that their natural constitution is preserved to adulthood.
Children are neither soldiers nor victims; they are our future.

16/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 8
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Gennady Kuzmin
We thank France for convening today’s meeting. We further thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and other briefers for their contributions to
today’s discussion. The topic of child protection is of paramount importance to the
Russian Federation.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/525) confirms that children in
different countries around the world involved in armed confrontations continue to
encounter brutal violence. One of the main reasons for their plight is that parties to
armed conflicts ignore the rules of international humanitarian law and armed groups
make open use of barbaric methods of warfare. The Security Council cannot remain
indifferent and should make unfailing efforts to protect children in armed conflicts.
Almost 15 years ago, the Security Council adopted the milestone resolution
1612 (2005), with a noble aim: to protect those most vulnerable in armed conflict —
children. The Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, created by that historic
decision, is a unique mechanism, which has facilitated more effective protection for
children in conflict. We would like to take this opportunity to acknowledge the hard
work for the sake of children trapped in various conflicts all over the world.
Efforts by the Group would be incomplete without the crucial work done
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. We would like once again
to express our sincere appreciation to Special Representative Gamba de Potgieter
for her hard daily work in pursuing her mandate and making a tangible difference
for children in situations of armed conflict. We are open to further cooperation
between the Russian Federation and the Office of the Special Representative in the
field of the protection of children in armed conflict. Russia continues to support her
important initiatives — raising awareness of the problems of child victims of armed
conflict, information campaigns on the reintegration of children, and preventing
their recruitment, among others.
In various countries around the world engulfed in hostilities, children continue
to endure brutal violence and hardship. And now their plight has become even harder
due to the unprecedented global health crisis posed by the coronavirus disease.
Unfortunately, even this crisis has not led to the rejection of unilateral coercive
measures, which affect essential health care services, social infrastructure, food
security and other aspects of life. These affect ordinary people, especially children,
directly, despite all the reassurances about so called “humanitarian exemptions”
that we have heard so many times in the Council. We regret that the SecretaryGeneral has not mentioned this key issue in his report. We call on the SecretaryGeneral and Special Representative Gamba de Potgieter to pay special attention to
the detrimental effect of illegal political sanctions on children in armed conflict and
include a relevant section in future reports.
Terrorists present a major threat to children in armed conflict. They do not
shy away from using even small children and bringing them into their ranks. No
child caught in such a devastating maelstrom should be marginalized by society.
Children have the right to, and should, become full members of society once again.
Their rehabilitation and reintegration are a crucial aspect of the children and armed
conflict agenda today.
The Russian Federation fully supports and concurs with the SecretaryGeneral’s call on all Member States concerned not yet having done so to take steps for

20-0890617/137

S/2020/594

the voluntary repatriation of children stranded in conflict zones, including children
actually or allegedly associated with the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
We understand the importance of reintegrating children affected by conflict.
Since 2018, the Russian Federation has ensured the return of Russian children from
battlegrounds in Iraq and Syria, and their ongoing rehabilitation. More than 150
Russian children have already successfully been evacuated from Iraq and Syria.
Although the current pandemic has slowed down this work, it will be continued.
Our hope is that there will be more examples of the successful reintegration of
child combatants, addressing the plight of children in conflict and better protecting
their lives. Our overall efforts in the Security Council should foster progress to that
end and develop strategies to prevent grave violations for the benefit of children and
our future.

18/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 9
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines to the United Nations, Halimah DeShong
It is my honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the three African countries
that are members of the Security Council plus one (A3+1) — the Niger, South Africa,
Tunisia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. We express sincere thanks to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, and UNICEF’s
Executive Director, Henrietta Fore, for their insightful briefings.
They say that a child shall lead us. To Mariam, we extend a special word of
gratitude for her courage, guidance and wisdom. Ensuring children’s participation
matters because solutions crafted with and for them are more likely to succeed.
As the Security Council marks the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1612 (2005), the A3+1 welcomes this opportunity to reflect on key
developments and priority actions towards the protection and empowerment of
children globally.
Notwithstanding the challenges related to collecting data on the six grave
violations against children, we have registered significant progress in the monitoring
and reporting mechanism processes. Those improvements supported the emergence
of evidence-informed, country-specific action plans on child protection, national
child-focused legislation and child-centred policies.
Moreover, mechanisms for collaboration across the United Nations system
and the wider international community underpin a number of important initiatives,
including the presidential enactment of the Child Rights Protection Law prohibiting
bacha bazi and the recruitment and use of children in Afghanistan; the adoption
of the Child Protection Code in February 2020 criminalizing the recruitment and
use of children in the Central African Republic; cooperation on the protection of
children during military operations in the Sahel; and the widespread inclusion of
child-protection actions within the various United Nations peacekeeping and special
political missions’ mandates.
The protection of children in armed conflict should be addressed at all levels,
including through preventive diplomacy, mediation in peace processes, at all stages
of peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and as a key dimension of the protectionof-civilians mandate. We wish to recognize the work, commitment, advocacy
and overall contribution of UNICEF and of local civil-society organizations to
these developments.
As we continue to witness worrying levels of recorded violations against
children, coordinated leadership among global governance institutions, regional
and subregional organizations, national Governments and civil society will continue
to prove crucial in ending such unconscionable harms globally. In that regard, the
A3+1 recognizes the child-protection programme in the African Union’s Peace and
Security Department, in collaboration with the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, and the commitment
made by African Union leaders to eradicate the burden of conflict and thereby
prevent it from affecting future generations and to focus on prevention efforts as
part of the Silencing the Guns by 2020 in Africa and the wider Agenda 2063.
In addition, we appeal for full compliance with internationally recognized
juvenile justice standards, focused on the release, rehabilitation and reintegration
of child victims. We regard the indiscriminate criminalization and incarceration
of children, particularly those recruited and used by violent extremist groups, as
compounding their victimization. Educational and vocational training as well as
20-0890619/137

S/2020/594

psychosocial and socioeconomic support by the international community, the State,
local communities and families should form part of wider actions to protect and
support children in these contexts.
The African Union’s Youth Envoy, Aya Chebbi, reminds us that education is
the most powerful instrument for peace and that the success envisioned under the
Silencing the Guns in Africa initiative requires quality education for children, with
a specific focus on girls’ education. Internally displaced children and refugees, who
are made particularly vulnerable, also deserve access to a quality education.
The A3+1 denounces attacks on education and urges all parties to conflict
to adhere to their obligations under international law to protect children, educators
and educational institutions from violence and destruction. We also call for an end
to impunity by extremist armed groups and other perpetrators of such attacks,
including kidnapping and gendered and sexual violence in schools or along school
routes, where girls are particularly targeted. We support the enactment of existing
commitments under the Convention on the Rights of the Child, its Optional Protocol
on the involvement of children in armed conflict, and related national and regional
child-protection legislation and policies. We strongly urge all parties to cease their
occupation of educational institutions for military purposes and to adhere to the call
to ensure that schools remain zones of peace and places where intellectual curiosity
and an appreciation for social justice are cultivated.
Access to meaningful education, health care and key socioeconomic
protections remain seriously compromised for children and their families affected
by protracted conflict. In addition to direct violence, the devastating effects of
preventable illnesses associated with malnutrition and poor sanitation in conflictaffected countries continue to ravage communities, acutely affecting children.
Children are also the most affected by the security crisis in the Sahel, the Lake Chad
basin and other regions affected by the triple threat of conflict, the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) and climate change, with adolescent girls in particular suffering
the egregious consequences of conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence.
We encourage Governments in armed-conflict situations to do all they can to
institute a culture of respect for women and children among their armed forces. We
also call for improved age- and gender-responsive actions to prevent abuses, provide
reparation and psychosocial support to victims and survivors, and promote positive
shifts in consciousness regarding childhood and gender. Further, we encourage our
friends and partners in the international community to renew efforts to support
the socioeconomic development of those regions, in line with national needs and
priorities and in accordance with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
In closing, we wish to reiterate that long-term, strategic, child-centred and
focused interventions must be supported by immediate measures to address children,
rendered most vulnerable in conflict settings. With the numbers of displaced persons
on the rise globally, the majority of whom are women and children, parties to
conflict must comply with international humanitarian law and international refugee
law. As noted by the Secretary-General, the cross-border dynamics of conflict,
intercommunal violence and military processes associated with counter-terrorism
operations have all hindered access for child-protection actors. We urge parties to
ensure unimpeded access, in line with international law, for the delivery of critical
life-support supplies and access to health care by children and their families to save
lives and sustain child development.
We appeal to Members to strengthen their political commitment to the
children and armed conflict agenda and for organizations to remain committed
thereto, especially in the light of the further budgetary constraints occasioned by the
20/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. Children represent a significant proportion of
populations globally, a figure much higher in countries ravaged by armed conflict.
They are owed a more fruitful inheritance. Nothing short of global, national, local
and individual transformation will deliver the change they deserve.

20-0890621/137

S/2020/594

Annex 10
Statement by the Acting Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, James Roscoe
I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for hosting this year’s annual debate. Our
thanks go also to Special Representative Gamba de Potgieter and Executive Director
Fore. We also thank in particular Mariam for her very powerful briefing.
The United Kingdom is committed to protecting children in conflict. We
remain one of the largest donors to the Office of the Special Representative and
support its efforts to carry out its mandate. As an active member of the Security
Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, we work to ensure that
the Council provides pragmatic recommendations to parties to conflict, to address
child-rights concerns and encourage systematic follow-up to its conclusions. We call
on parties to conflict to adopt and implement action plans to end and prevent grave
violations against children and urge Governments to hold perpetrators to account.
Since their establishment 15 years ago, the Working Group and the United
Nations monitoring and reporting mechanism have achieved great successes,
including by contributing to the release of more than 155,000 children associated
with parties to conflict. However, 15 years later, it is clear that more work is needed
to ensure that those mechanisms remain transparent and credible vehicles for
accountability. The Secretary-General’s 2020 annual report on children and armed
conflict (S/2020/525) makes for sombre reading. The vast numbers of violations
committed against children is abhorrent and must serve as a rallying call to the
international community. We must do more.
The parameters for this year’s report mean that the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) is not covered. But, as we heard from Ms. Fore, its impacts will have
a devastating effect on children in conflict. Ensuring that child-protection actors
are able to continue to monitor, report and respond to grave violations during this
pandemic is paramount. The United Kingdom reiterates its strong support for
the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire and urges Member States to
collectively enable humanitarian access. The Secretary-General’s annual report and
its annexes provide a valuable tool for strengthening compliance with international
law, promoting accountability and influencing improvements in the behaviour of
parties to conflict.
The strength of this tool, however, depends on a standardized approach
to listing and delisting based on data collected by the monitoring and reporting
mechanism and consistent application of the criteria set out in the Secretary-General’s
2010 annual report (S/2010/181). The United Kingdom calls on the United Nations to
review its approach and work with Security Council members to reinforce our global
commitment to supporting children in armed conflict. We will call on Council
colleagues to make greater use of the Working Group’s tools and mechanisms to
promote the protection of children and ensure that there is sufficient child-protection
capacity in United Nations peace operations and political missions.
The United Kingdom supports the emphasis on education at this open debate.
Access to safe, quality education for children affected by armed conflict has an
important role in reintegration as well as in providing a route to a better future.
Schools can often protect such highly vulnerable children. Education also contributes
to a safer and more prosperous world, reduces conflict and increases stability.
We are therefore concerned by the annual report’s findings that in 2019 State
actors were responsible for more than half of all attacks on schools. In 2018, the
22/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

United Kingdom endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration, committing to reduce
the impact of conflict on education. We strongly support the Secretary-General’s
call for other States to sign on to the Declaration to strengthen the protection of
education from attack because, as Mariam reminded us, children have a right to their
childhoods and to an education free from conflict.
Mass school closures across the world as a result of COVID-19 have had the
biggest impact on girls’ lives. Globally, girls were already more likely than boys
never to receive any type of education, and their access is even lower in times of
crisis and emergency. They are least likely to return to school following a crisis,
facing increased risks of child marriage, teen-age pregnancy, gender-based violence,
sexual exploitation and the loss of vital sexual and reproductive health services. In
that regard, we would like to conclude with a call on the United Nations to continue
to improve the collection of gender-disaggregated data on grave violations in order
to strengthen its gender-sensitive response to child protection.
We need to do better because, as Ms. Fore says, when we fail children, we fail
the future. And so we owe it to Mariam, the children of Mali and children across the
world to redouble our efforts.

20-0890623/137

S/2020/594

Annex 11
Statement by the Acting Deputy Permanent Representative of
the United States of America to the United Nations, Cherith
Norman-Chalet
As I begin my remarks today, I should like to offer my thanks to Special
Representative Gamba de Potgieter and UNICEF Director Fore for their efforts to
spotlight and address child protection around the world. Those efforts are noble
and consequential. One of the most powerful lines that Ms. Fore spoke during her
opening statement just now is that children are not pawns, and it must stop. We fully
agree, and it is so true.
Fifteen years after the Council established its Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict and the United Nations-led monitoring and reporting mechanism,
the United States remains fully committed to supporting this critical work because
the impact of conflict on children remains all too real around the world. Far too
often, and sadly, we still see the six grave children and armed conflict violations
being committed globally. This tragic fact is starkly illustrated, on a scale that is
really hard to imagine, in this year’s report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/525).
Such violations include the continued killing and maiming of children, the
recruitment and use of child soldiers, sexual violence and abduction, attacks against
schools and hospitals, and denial of humanitarian access. Such acts must end, and
perpetrators must be held to account.
Even though many of us have taken steps to both help reduce the impact of
armed conflict on children and support reintegration efforts around the world, our
collective efforts and work on this issue are far from over, as so many have said
already. Children continue to suffer in numerous places, including in Burma, Mali,
Syria and Somalia. An added challenge, as others have highlighted, is the onset of
the coronavirus disease, including in countries where violations and abuses against
children continue to take place with impunity.
I want to thank Mariam for her bravery in speaking with us today. Her testimony
inspires us to work towards further support for reintegration and education, as
Ms. Fore so passionately pleaded for, for children who have had similar experiences.
The United States is horrified by reports of terrorists forcibly closing schools and
killing teachers in Mali, depriving children and exposing them to trauma in truly
awful ways. An entire generation of Malian children are impacted by these heinous
tactics; the psychosocial effects alone will last for years.
For our part, the United States has launched the Sahel Diplomatic Engagement
Framework to focus on State legitimacy. As part of the Girls Leadership and
Empowerment Through Education programme in Mali, the United States has
contributed $23 million to address gender disparities and help gravely impacted
women and girls in Mali. The provision of basic services such as schooling is
essential for stabilizing not only Mali, but the entire Sahel region.
Effective recovery from conflict also requires ensuring that the children
impacted by conflict have the tools they need to succeed later on in the workforce. That
includes accounting for their emotional and physical well-being while also providing
access to education, age-appropriate vocational training and job opportunities.
Those opportunities are the same ones desired by children who spoke to
Ambassador Craft and so many of us on trips — but especially on Ambassador Craft’s
visit to South Sudan, where they told us they wished for all of this in their own lives.
I hope the Council sees that investing in young people is a primary, cost-effective
24/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

means of achieving sustainable human, social and economic development. In the
long run, investing in the future of young people is vital to ensuring international
peace and security.
Additionally, in the wake of conflict, many children continue to experience
trauma, rejection and social isolation from their communities. They require
support for their long-term health and well-being, as well as to promote their future
contribution to peaceful societies. The United States is committed to ensuring that
children affected by conflict have the opportunity to thrive. We place a priority
on life-saving child-protection programming, as well as support for longer-term
recovery, resilience and healing. As a notable example, the United States has
contributed $30 million to the Education Cannot Wait global fund, and we call on
other international partners to do their part.
The United States will continue to invest in preventive and responsive
programming to protect children from violence. That will help empower children
by creating the safe and protective environments they need and deserve, facilitating
their access to essential social services, working with their families and other
caregivers and ensuring their participation in peace processes that will positively
shape their future for generations to come.

20-0890625/137

S/2020/594

Annex 12
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
We express our appreciation for the three briefers today and thank the French
presidency for organizing the open debate on children and armed conflict, a topic
that is always touching and heart-wrenching at the same time.
Fifteen years after resolution 1612 (2005) and 20 years after the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict, today’s meeting provides a meaningful opportunity to reflect
on our efforts and progress, and serves as a reminder that much more needs to be
done to fulfil our commitments to children. With the creation of the monitoring
and reporting mechanism and the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
resolution 1612 (2005) is critical to the child protection agenda.
The monitoring and reporting mechanism has proved to be a valuable tool
for collecting and verifying information on grave violations against children in
armed conflict. Behind each statistic are patterns and trends depicting the scale and
severity of violations. Behind each statistic are untold stories of children suffering
from violations. And behind each statistic is a growing urgency to prevent and stop
all these horrifying practices.
We are deeply grateful to all colleagues who, despite dangerous situations,
work wholeheartedly to bring objective and reliable information to our attention.
Furthermore, we fully share the sentiments of Mr. Olara Otunnu, former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, when he
said that “[a] monitoring and reporting mechanism is of limited value unless it leads
to action” (S/PV.5129, p. 5). In that connection, the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict has been working diligently to review reports and make practical
recommendations for various situations in specific countries. With the release of
more than 155,000 children and over 60 country-specific recommendations, we have
good reason to be encouraged by the continued impact and contributions of those
two mechanisms with regard to the situation of children in armed conflict.
We believe that the crucial factor to the success of the Working Group is
sincere dialogue and the spirit of unanimity among all 15 members for the common
goal of child protection. In furtherance of its entrusted mandate, the Working Group
needs to continue upholding the long-standing tradition of consensus since it is the
only way to fulfil its demanding tasks and, above all, to safeguard the best interests
of the child, to which we are all dedicated. We take this opportunity to pay tribute
to UNICEF, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and her Office, and
United Nations peacekeeping and political missions for their work in advancing the
children and armed conflict agenda.
Though much has been achieved on this agenda, the situation of children in
armed conflict remains painful. As shown in the Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2020/525), in 2019, 25,000 grave violations against children were verified, or
80 violations committed every day. We are deeply concerned about the continued
high level of violations.
While a long-term solution to the problem of children in armed conflict lies
in conflict prevention, it is imperative to work out concrete measures and immediate
actions to save thousands of children from the devastating effects of armed conflict.
We welcome the focus of today’s discussion on the importance of education and
vocational training. That is particularly true to ensure the successful rehabilitation
and reintegration of children released from armed forces and armed groups.
26/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Witnessing and committing violence greatly affects their emotions and behavioural
skills. For those children, education and vocational training will be the ticket to their
lost childhood and a better future.
Pursuing education is never easy during armed conflict. The international
community needs to strongly condemn attacks on schools and their personnel. We
call on all parties to armed conflict to immediately prevent and end such abhorrent
attacks. With the arrival of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), access to education
is now even more challenging. In that regard, we encourage the sharing of good
practices and innovative ways to ensure the continuity of education. While online
classes mostly work for children in urban areas, radio has been brought into use
for children in poor and rural areas. In our country, we encourage the voluntary
participation of young people to assist in the distribution of lessons to children in
remote and mountainous areas.
In a broader sense, we share the concerns about the impact of COVID-19 on the
implementation of national, regional and United Nations child-protection agendas.
Children in armed conflicts and other fragile situations will be affected primarily
by its secondary socioeconomic consequences. We therefore call for greater efforts
and the cooperation of all Member States and the United Nations system as a whole
to closely monitor the impact and to take timely action together in the fight against
the pandemic.
In conclusion, past progress shows that with political determination and
through concerted action, our commitments can be translated into tangible results
for the sake of our children. We must step up our efforts and build on our progress in
order to bring children hope and enact positive changes that they need and deserve.

20-0890627/137

S/2020/594

Annex 13
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the
United Nations, Adela Raz
At the outset, allow me to thank France for hosting this important meeting.
I also thank Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, and Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director of
UNICEF for their very thorough briefings. The adoption of resolution 1612 (2005)
on children and armed conflict constitutes a landmark moment in the Security
Council’s history. Today, 15 years after the establishment of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism and the Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, we can say that the United Nations has played a pivotal role in
advocating for children and working towards a world in which our children can live
and grow away from conflict, suffering and despair.
Afghanistan shares the concerns reflected in the Secretary-General’s most
recent report (S/2020/525) about the high number of cases of child casualties reported
over the past year. Afghan children casualties continue, primarily as a result of
despicable attacks carried out by the Taliban, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and other terrorist groups through roadside improvised explosive devices,
suicide attacks, ground engagements and the use of civilian locations and human
shields. One example of these barbaric terrorist attacks took place at a Médecins
Sans Frontières maternity ward in Kabul on 12 May, where terrorists mercilessly
shot and killed expectant mothers and newborns. Instead of being able to attend
school, children continue to be the victims of the decades-long ongoing conflict in
Afghanistan. Such acts are unacceptable and must be stopped.
The Afghan Government is fully committed to the protection of children in
conflict and strongly condemns and opposes all forms of violations against children,
including recruitment, killing and maiming, rape and other kinds of sexual violence,
abductions, attacks against schools or hospitals and denial of access to humanitarian
assistance. As a ratifying country of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, as well as other
conventions and obligations on the matter, Afghanistan has been actively engaged
in reforming its institutions through the adoption of policies and laws, including
the law on juvenile delinquency and the signing of the joint action plan in 2011
and the subsequent road map towards compliance, in 2014, to ensure that children
are protected and not engaged in conflict. That includes zero-tolerance measures
on the prohibition of the recruitment of children in all sections of the Afghanistan
National Defence and Security Forces and throughout relevant ministries working
to protect our children from the threats of the Taliban, ISIL and their affiliates. We
have also adopted a national policy for civilian casualty prevention and mitigation in
order to avoid civilian casualties during military operations, and passed a new penal
code in 2017 that sets punishments for those perpetrating sexual violence against
children and a child protection law endorsed by a decree signed by President Ghani
in March 2019.
Despite Government efforts, the Taliban, ISIL and other terrorist groups
continue to violate the rights of children, using them as human shields and enlisting
them as child soldiers to carry out many of their heinous attacks. Their crimes and
their blatant disregard for the lives of children, as indicated by the six grave violations
assessed by the United Nations, is a contravention of human rights and international
humanitarian law. We strongly reiterate our insistent call to halt those actions and
further stress that guaranteeing the rights of children, particularly girls, remains a
strong imperative of the Government of Afghanistan in their peace talks with the
Taliban. The Government continues its committed efforts for a prompt start of direct
28/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

talks with the Taliban and supports the Secretary-General’s call for a humanitarian
ceasefire that can stop the bloodshed, particularly as we also deal with the threat of
the coronavirus disease pandemic.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate Afghanistan’s strong position as a
committed partner for the protection of children in armed conflict. We will continue
our firm work and commitment to creating a new Afghanistan of opportunities for
children to grow and flourish into the leaders of tomorrow.

20-0890629/137

S/2020/594

Annex 14
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Andorra to the
United Nations, Elisenda Vives Balmaña
[Original: French]
At the outset, Andorra thanks France for organizing this open debate of
the Security Council on children and armed conflict, as well as the speakers for
their input on the importance of preserving and promoting the right to education in
armed conflict.
Andorra associates itself with the statement made by the representative of
Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
Andorra notes with concern the increase in violence against children reflected
in the Secretary-General’s most recent report (S/2020/525). Also worrying is the
growing number of children displaced by armed conflict who are now unable to
attend school. Similarly, the devastating effects of the coronavirus disease in recent
times have deepened inequalities by disrupting children’s right to education in
conflict zones.
This year we are celebrating the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1612 (2005), which established the monitoring and reporting mechanism,
which has made it possible to significantly deter children’s rights violations during
armed conflict. This year also marks the twentieth anniversary of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict, to which Andorra is party.
It is clear that the work accomplished in recent years through those
instruments reflects the commitment of the international community to protecting
children. However, we must remain aware of the emerging challenges. The increase
in attacks on schools and in the denial of access to humanitarian aid is alarming. We
must step up our efforts to ensure that children receive the assistance and support
necessary to secure their future. To that end, we acknowledge the role of the agencies
on the ground, whose work and coordination are essential to ensuring the peaceful
resolution of conflicts.
Andorra also commends the essential work of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict to prevent
violations of children’s rights and to promote their reintegration. This year, the Office
of the Special Representative has concluded 29 agreements with parties to conflicts.
Andorra has strongly supported the work of the Special Representative in
recent years through voluntary contributions. We are aware of her team’s particular
needs and the difficult conditions in which it must operate. For that, I thank her for
her invaluable work and reiterate Andorra’s commitment to her task.
Andorra remains committed and will continue to work with the international
community to ensure a protective environment and hope for the future for all children.

30/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 15
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Angola to the
United Nations, Maria de Jesus dos Reis Ferreira
First and foremost, I would like to thank France for inviting us to participate
in today’s supremely important debate on children and armed conflict. In the same
vein, we commend Belgium for its dedication and a job well done as the Chair of the
Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict at this challenging moment, which is
strongly marked by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
We welcome the briefing on the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/525)
by the Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba
de Potgieter, as well as the briefing by UNICEF Executive Director Henrietta Fore.
We believe that today’s open debate is a great opportunity for States Members
of the United Nations to reflect on the challenges faced since the adoption of
resolution 1612 (2005) and look for new ways to promote compliance with the
children and armed conflict agenda. Some 15 years after the adoption of resolution
1612 (2005), which strengthened the monitoring and reporting mechanism that set
up a functional and structured system for verifying and reporting on the six types
of violations committed against children around the world and which established
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, armed conflicts currently
continue to negatively affect children.
In this regard, we note with deep concern that, according to the SecretaryGeneral’s report, the United Nations has verified more than 25,000 serious violations
against children in 19 situations, more than half of which were committed by non-State
actors and a third of which were committed by Government and international forces.
Some 7,747 children were verified as recruited and used. Among these, 90 per cent
were used by non-State actors. Likewise, in 2019, a total of 13,200 children worldwide
were separated from non-State actors and armed forces. Fundamental challenges
hindered the successful and sustainable reintegration of these children, of children
at risk who were protected from recruitment through action plans or other measures,
and of children released from detention for actual or alleged association with armed
groups, including those designated as terrorist groups by the United Nations.
The situation of child soldiers should receive special attention from the
Security Council, as they are used in many cases directly or indirectly by armies,
armed opposition groups and rebels as well as by terrorist and extremist groups,
in breach of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. Sending
children to war is a violation of their most basic rights. First, in addition to putting
their lives at risk, they are deprived of contact with their families and communities
at a stage in their lives when such relationships are essential. Secondly, child
soldiers no longer dedicate themselves to their studies, which compromises their
personal and professional future. Moreover, the consequences can be drastic for their
psychological, mental and academic development, which will make it difficult for
them to readapt to society and sustain themselves in adult life.
We understand that the COVID-19 issue poses new challenges for children in
situations of armed conflict, which may lead to difficulties for the United Nations
system, including the Office of the Special Representative and peacekeeping missions,
to protect children, due to movement restrictions. In this regard, we would like to
stress the importance of the Secretary-General’s recommendation that the Security
Council ensure that child protection provisions are included in all relevant mandates
of United Nations operations, including peacekeeping and special political missions.

20-0890631/137

S/2020/594

We note with concern the growing trend of attacks against civilian personnel
and medical facilities. These criminal actions must end, and, in due time, the
perpetrators are to be held accountable.
We call on Member States and the international community to carry on with
everything in their power to help protect schools, students and teachers in situations
of armed conflict and ensure that schools remain safe places, with strict respect for
their civil character. Angola joined the Safe Schools Declaration, which was adopted
at the Oslo Conference in May 2015, and endorses the Guidelines for Protecting
Schools and Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict, a process
conducted by Member States, civil society and child-protection actors. It is also a
State party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
In conclusion, on a positive note, we would like to underline the progress
made by the “Act to protect children affected by conflict” campaign, national
political negotiations and peace processes. In some situations, conflict reduction
has been beneficial for the protection of children in armed conflicts. We advocate
the inclusion in peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes of specific commitments
related to child protection, including requirements for the rapid release of children
from armed forces and non-State armed groups, and their social reintegration.
Preventing the outbreak of conflict is still the best way to protect children.
The international community must continue to work towards adopting the most
appropriate tools for effective preventive action. Meanwhile, the protection of
children in armed conflict must remain at the heart of the international community’s
priorities and be addressed through a comprehensive strategy of active protection
and humanitarian response.

32/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 16
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Argentina to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Argentina thanks the Government of France for organizing today’s debate
on the essential topic of the comprehensive protection of children in the context of
conflict, on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict. It also thanks Special Representative Virginia Gamba de Potgieter
and UNICEF Executive Director Henrietta Fore for their briefings. We also express
our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his most recent report on children and
armed conflict (S/2020/525) and its annexes.
Argentina firmly supports the Organization’s work to prevent, avoid and stop
the six grave violations of children’s rights in the context of armed conflict. In that
regard, our country was one of the first States to ratify, in 2002, the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict and supported the adoption of resolutions 1261 (1999), 1612 (2005), 2143
(2014), 2225 (2015) and 2427 (2018). Argentina therefore stresses the relevance of
resolution 1612 (2005) and the creation of the monitoring and reporting mechanism
as a fundamental tool for the protection of children.
I would like to highlight the coordinated action of the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and the tasks carried out by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General with the collaboration of UNICEF
and other agencies of the United Nations system, which is reflected in the progress
made in the area of prevention and protection of the rights of children.
Accordingly, we appreciate the important work of the “Act to protect children
affected by conflict” campaign and the Global Coalition for Reintegration of Child
Soldiers initiative as key tools for strengthening collaboration between the United
Nations, civil society and the international community in support of actions designed
to end and prevent grave violations committed against children in armed conflict and
to achieve a comprehensive and sustainable reintegration that is oriented towards the
needs of children and takes a humanitarian, peace and development approach.
Argentina welcomes the rescue of a total of 13,200 children who were separated
from non-State actors and armed forces in 2019, the prevention of the recruitment
of children at risk and the release of children detained for being associated with or
suspected of belonging to armed groups, as mentioned by the Secretary-General in
his most recent report. However, despite the great work done and the progress made,
several challenges remain to be confronted.
Argentina shares the serious concern of the Secretary-General about the
alarming number of more than 25,000 grave violations against children verified
during 2019 and the great increase in the number of children affected by the denial of
humanitarian access as a result of violence against humanitarian workers, restrictions
on their movements and impediments to the performance of their work. Preserving
access to medical care and safeguarding health personnel and medical and surgical
supplies, in addition to allowing medical evacuations, is essential to safeguarding
children’s lives. We also express our concern and strongly condemn cases of killing,
maiming and sexual violence perpetrated against children. In this regard, it is
necessary to recognize the increased exposure of girls and boys to sexual violence in
conflict situations and to bear in mind that all responses to this scourge must focus
on the needs of survivors and ensure access to essential health services and to justice.
20-0890633/137

S/2020/594

Argentina expresses its concern over the increasing number of kidnappings
of children. Not only does kidnapping constitute a serious violation in itself, but it
also gives rise to other violations, such as forced labour, sexual slavery and military
recruitment. Kidnapping is also used as a means of punishing civilian populations.
Argentina condemns the attacks perpetrated against schools and hospitals,
whose number nearly doubled, according to the report. Education is critical to the
development and full enjoyment of human rights, and access to safe education
supports the protection of children from the dangers of armed conflict, helping them
to reach their potential and contributing to building more resilient and peaceful
communities. Argentina firmly believes that the scourge of attacks on schools in all
their manifestations can be confronted only through international cooperation, within
the framework of unrestricted respect for human rights, international humanitarian
law and international law.
In that regard, Argentina reiterates its firm support for the Safe Schools
Declaration, adopted in May 2015 and promoted by Argentina and Norway, which has
been endorsed by 104 States. The Declaration commits States to implementing the
Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use during Armed
Conflict, thereby ensuring the right to education and the protection of children and
young people in conflict situations. We recall that the Secretary-General has called
on all countries to endorse the Declaration and note that the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict has indicated that the
endorsement of the Declaration has contributed decisively to the adoption of concrete
measures to prevent attacks on education.
Argentina supports the Secretary-General’s 23 March global appeal for peace,
in which he stressed the urgent need to “put armed conflict on lockdown and focus
together on the true fight of our lives”. Peace is the best protection we can give to
our children.
We reiterate the urgent need to agree on and implement measures to
increase the international community’s pressure on State and non-State actors that
commit violations against children, in order to demobilize, separate, rehabilitate
and reintegrate children associated with such groups, in collaboration with their
respective communities, within the framework of absolute respect for international
humanitarian law, international human rights law and refugee law. In order to
ensure the full protection of children, a human rights-based approach to protection
is essential and should guide the mandates of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions, the peacebuilding actions of the Security Council, as well as
efforts aimed at combating terrorism and violent extremism. In this regard, it is
essential to develop, maintain and strengthen capacities in the field of peacekeeping
operations in the areas of prevention, protection, assistance, advice, documentation
and verification of violations of children’s rights. Likewise, it is of crucial importance
to strengthen the role of child protection advisers, who carry out a fundamental task
in the implementation of Security Council mandates on child protection.
In conclusion, we highlight and support the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and of the Global Coalition for Reintegration of Child
Soldiers in advancing this important initiative as it provides us with a renewed and
comprehensive understanding of reintegration. It is crucially important that we
adopt both a comprehensive approach to reintegration, understanding it not only
as immediate humanitarian assistance but also as a long-term commitment, and
gender-sensitive integration programmes that include mental health, psychosocial
support, education and access to justice as key aspects of sustainable reintegration.
In this regard, it is essential to meet the urgent need to come up with concrete
actions to comply with the cross-cutting principle of “leaving no one behind” set
34/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

forth in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We firmly believe that an
inclusive approach to society as a whole, focusing on the collective commitment and
coordinated efforts of all stakeholders, is a key factor in achieving the sustainable
reintegration of all children, on the basis of humanitarian assistance, development
and peace.

20-0890635/137

S/2020/594

Annex 17
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Armenia to the
United Nations, Mher Margaryan
I would like to thank the French presidency for convening today’s Security
Council open debate via video-teleconference on the theme of children and armed
conflict. We also thank the Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Virginia Gamba, and the Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Henrietta Fore, for
highlighting the challenges relating to the protection of children in armed conflict.
The fifteenth anniversary of the landmark resolution 1612 (2005) is an
opportunity to elaborate on the achievements and good practices adopted in the
implementation of the resolution and the ways forward towards making progress on
the international community’s efforts aimed at preventing violence against children
in conflict situations. The United Nations-led monitoring and reporting mechanisms
and the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict have been instrumental in
operationalizing the resolution’s provisions, and the success of their activities can be
measured in the thousands of children’s lives they have saved.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report on children and armed conflict
(S/2020/525) and for the recommendations contained therein. We are concerned about
the very high number of incidents of the killing and maiming of children, as well
as abductions, sexual violence, recruitment and use of children, which underscores
the imperative of scaling up the international response to violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
The crisis caused by the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic has heavily affected civilians, trapped in conflicts, including children.
We share the Secretary-General’s recommendation to all parties to conflicts to allow
safe, timely and unimpeded humanitarian access in order to provide assistance to
children. Attacks on and targeting of humanitarian workers are unacceptable and
should be clearly condemned. As stressed in the Secretary-General’s appeal for a
global ceasefire, the silencing of guns is crucial to help create corridors for lifesaving aid to the most vulnerable, including children.
Having unequivocally endorsed the Secretary-General’s appeal, Armenia
and Artsakh (Nagorno-Karabakh) continue to implement fully and in good faith the
trilateral ceasefire agreement of 1994 with Azerbaijan and the 1995 agreement on
consolidation of the ceasefire regime.
The continuous attacks on schools and their use for military purposes also
remain a source of serious concern. The fifth anniversary of the Safe School
Declaration creates momentum to step up the efforts of the international community
on protection of the right to education of children affected by conflicts on the
international agenda. I would like to underline the urgency of reaching out to children
residing in conflict areas to ensure their access to safe and quality education.
Armenia reiterates its support for the mandate of the Special Representative
in preventing grave violations, advancing the agenda of children and armed conflict
in activities of United Nations agencies, and promoting cooperation with regional
organizations, civil society and other stakeholders aimed at ensuring effective
protection on the ground.
Armenia prioritizes the protection of children and upholding their human
rights, as reflected in its national policies and programmes and frameworks of
international cooperation. We support the call of the Secretary-General to prioritize
education for all children and put an emphasis on the most vulnerable, including
children in conflict situations, as reflected in his message on the effect of the
36/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

COVID-19 pandemic on children․ We commend the efforts of UNICEF in alleviating
the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on children in Armenia, including projects
aimed at supporting the continuity of education through partnership with private
sector and civil society organizations.
The International Committee of the Red Cross is an important partner for
Armenia in promoting safe education in conflict-affected border regions, in line
with our international commitments, including the Safe School Declaration. We
also welcome the recently adopted General Assembly resolution 74/275, on the
International Day to Protect Education from Attack, which Armenia co-sponsored.
In our region, the aggression of Azerbaijan against the people of NagornoKarabakh has been accompanied by deliberate indiscriminate attacks on the
civilian population and civilian infrastructure, including schools and health-care
facilities, resulting in the killing and injuring of civilians, including children.
The suspension of activities of the conflict-related field operations due to the
pandemic increases humanitarian risks for the civilian population, including
children in Artsakh (Nagorno-Karabakh) and the border regions of Armenia. The
recent military provocation of Azerbaijan on the Armenian-Azerbaijani border
resulted in the wounding of a 14-year-old child. Armenia deplores, in strongest
terms, the provocations of Azerbaijan along the line of contact between Artsakh
and Azerbaijan and the Armenian-Azerbaijani border, in violation of its obligations
under international humanitarian law. Such appalling actions are in stark contrast
with the Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire and the relevant calls of
the co-chairs of the Minsk Group of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe.
We are equally alarmed at reports of children being involved in Statesponsored hate propaganda. Educational curricula in the kindergartens and schools
of Azerbaijan deliberately expose children to anti-Armenian propaganda, fuelling
ethnic hatred and inciting violence and intolerance. The report of the European
Commission against Racism and Intolerance in Azerbaijan, adopted in 2016,
highlights that
“political leaders, educational institutions and media have continued using
hate speech against Armenians... an entire generation of Azerbaijanis has now
grown up listening to this hateful rhetoric”.
Such policies and practices are incompatible with the norms and principles of
international human rights law and international humanitarian law and must be
identified and met with adequate responses by the international community.

20-0890637/137

S/2020/594

Annex 18
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Austria to the United Nations
Austria would like to thank France for convening this open debate. We
commend the work of Virginia Gamba, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, UNICEF, the Department of Peace
Operations and the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, as well as
the relevant civil society organizations. We also thank Mariam from Mali for her
participation and her calls for more action to protect children in armed conflict.
Austria fully aligns itself with the statements delivered on behalf of the
European Union and of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict and
shares the following points in its national capacity.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2020/525). Our support for
the Security Council’s children and armed conflict mandate is steadfast. We need
to rely on and preserve its integrity and impartiality to ensure the listing of all
perpetrators of grave violations against children, based on the objective findings
of the monitoring and report mechanism and on the criteria for listing and delisting
established in the Secretary-General’s report contained in document S/2010/181
of 2010.
The 25,000 grave violations against children documented in the report and
committed by all parties to conflict, both armed groups as well as Government
forces, include multiple denials of humanitarian access to provide assistance to
children are appalling. The reported increase in attacks against schools, hospitals
and protected personnel is also deeply concerning. These breaches of international
humanitarian law, international human rights law and refugee law need to be
investigated and condemned.
Austria is convinced that parties to conflict can prevent crimes against
children and protect children by abiding by their obligations under international law
as well as the comprehensive set of existing principles and commitments aimed at
protecting boys and girls affected by the scourge of war. We encourage all Member
States not yet having done so to adhere to the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, the
Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and
Use of Child Soldiers, the Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with
Armed Forces or Armed Groups, and the Safe Schools Declaration.
We welcome the adoption of several new actions plans by parties to conflict as
well as measures to enforce criminal justice to protect children in armed conflict. We
call for enhanced accountability, including by introducing laws to criminalize grave
violations against children. Austria would like to take this opportunity to reiterate its
full and unwavering support for the International Criminal Court and highlight its
importance for the rule of law, accountability and the fight against impunity for the
most serious crimes of concern to the international community as a whole.
We need to address the high number of children killed and maimed due to
the use of explosive weapons in populated areas. In October 2019, Austria therefore
organized an international conference to raise awareness of the humanitarian impact
of the use of the use of explosive weapons in populated areas, which started a process
of the elaboration of a political declaration on that subject. The participation of 133
States, international organizations and civil society organizations underscored the
importance attached to this matter. We are strongly supportive of the process and
hope for a strong political declaration.

38/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

We express our serious concern that children allegedly associated with nonState armed groups are too often perceived and treated as perpetrators rather than
victims of grave violations. States need to ensure alternatives to detention and
prosecution, whereas the impartial monitoring and reporting on the detention of
children needs to continue. In this regard, Austria welcomes the 2019 United Nations
Global Study on Children Deprived of Liberty.
The Austrian Development Cooperation supports projects seeking to reduce
the threat of violence against children. At present, the Austrian Development
Cooperation is carrying out a project in the Sudan, where parties to the Darfur
conflict receive training on the rights of the child. This project also supports the
Child Protection Unit of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur in facilitating dialogue between the conflict parties. It is estimated that 2.4
million children in Darfur will indirectly benefit from this project, which seeks to
contribute to the reduction of the six grave violations against children. For example,
in 2019, representatives from rebel groups from Darfur were invited to Austria in
order to provide them with a “safe space” for exchange and to foster dialogue, not
least about children’s rights. As a result, a joint declaration on explosive remnants
of war and the situation of internally displaced persons in Darfur/the Sudan
was signed.
Reintegration and education programmes are of paramount importance
in creating sustainable peace for every individual child and for the communities
affected by conflict. In this context, it is important to provide assistance and support
to children without parental care in armed conflict. Austria recalls, in this context,
the most recent General Assembly resolution on children without parental care,
resolution 74/133, and invites all Member States to follow up with its implementation.
Foster parent programmes can serve as a best practice to allow children to find a new
home and family. Austria particularly welcomes the engagement of the civil society
organizations, such as SOS Children’s Villages, in this field.
Finally, the monitoring and reporting mechanism has yielded important
results for the past 15 years in collecting evidence and information on the six grave
violations against children. We pay tribute to the members of the country task
forces of the monitoring and reporting mechanism, who collect this information,
often risking their lives. The data generated through the monitoring and reporting
mechanism has fostered accountability and helped the United Nations to engage
with parties to conflict in elaborating action plans. We need the monitoring and
reporting mechanism to remain the objective basis of information for the children
and armed conflict mandate of the United Nations. Austria will continue to advocate
in the General Assembly for a sufficient level of financing for United Nations child
protection advisors to support the monitoring and reporting mechanism and the
children and armed conflict mandate.

20-0890639/137

S/2020/594

Annex 19
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Azerbaijan to the
United Nations, Yashar Aliyev
At the outset, I would like to thank the delegation of France for convening this
open debate on children and armed conflict.
Despite some progress made in preventing and responding to grave violations
committed against children, serious challenges remain. Effective protection efforts
must be free of selectivity and must address all situations of armed conflict without
distinction, including those of a protracted nature. The wrongs of the recent past,
including attacks on schools and hospitals, the killing and maiming of children,
forced displacements and the abduction of children, must not be neglected.
During the continued aggression by Armenia against Azerbaijan, serious
violations of international humanitarian law have been committed. A scorched-earth
policy implemented by the Armenian side involved the ethnic cleansing of the seized
territories of all Azerbaijanis and the brutal killing or wounding of thousands of
civilians, including children. Over more than 30 years, Azerbaijan has hosted one
of the highest numbers of refugees and displaced persons in the world, many of
whom are children. To give a sense of the scale of the devastation caused by the
aggression, more than 900 settlements, 150,000 homes, 693 secondary schools and
855 pre-schools have been looted, plundered or destroyed in the occupied territories
of Azerbaijan.
Following the establishment of a formal ceasefire in 1994, the Armenian
armed forces have continued to target the densely populated areas in Azerbaijan
situated along or further behind the front line, causing casualties among civilians
and destroying civilian objects, including residences, schools and kindergartens.
Moreover, as of the beginning of 2020, 3,889 citizens of Azerbaijan were
registered as missing as a result of the conflict, including 719 civilians. Among
the civilians, 71 are children. It has been established that 871 of the 3,889 missing
persons were either taken as prisoners of war or hostages, including 267 civilians,
of whom 29 are children. Armenia is in breach of international law for refusing to
account for the missing persons within its control, as well as for refusing to conduct
a prompt and effective investigation into their fate.
The recently published comprehensive report on war crimes in the occupied
territories of Azerbaijan and Armenia’s responsibility (S/2020/90, annex) provides
convincing evidence as to the range, variety and consistency of Armenia’s
commission of multiple war crimes. Some of the offences examined in the report
amount to the crime of genocide, as ethnic Azerbaijanis have been targeted because
of their nationality and/or ethnicity, and the relevant intent has been to destroy the
group in part. The facts contained in the report necessitate prompt action by the
United Nations and the international community as a whole to ensure accountability,
in accordance with the international law of State responsibility and international
criminal law.
In order to break the cycles of violence and to aid prevention efforts, respect
for international humanitarian law is imperative, and impunity must end. Being an
inevitable consequence of the offences committed, accountability is an important
prerequisite on the path to peace and long-lasting reconciliation.

40/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 20
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bahrain to the
United Nations, Jamal Fares Alrowaiei
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, Sir, I should like to thank you for convening this important
meeting, coming in the midst of exceptional global circumstances resulting from
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which has brought about increased
threats to the security and safety of civilians in conflict situations.
I should also like to thank Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, and Ms. Henrietta Fore,
Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s Fund, for their valuable briefings.
This meeting is being convened on the fifth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1612 (2005), which strongly condemns the recruitment and use of child
soldiers by parties to armed conflict and requests the Secretary-General to establish
a monitoring and reporting mechanism on children and armed conflict. It also marks
the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, which
was ratified by the Kingdom of Bahrain in 2004, and stresses that States parties shall
take all feasible measures to ensure that members of their armed forces who have not
attained the age of 18 years do not take a direct part in hostilities.
These anniversaries have assumed added significance as the COVID-19
pandemic affects education and the movement of humanitarian supplies, posing a
grave danger to children in general and children in armed conflict in particular.
Bahrain therefore welcomes the call of the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire,
and supports the joint statement issued by a group of Member States, expressing
deep concern at the continuation of hostilities in various corners of the world,
particularly in the midst of the global health crisis, which is taking a severe toll on
the most vulnerable, especially women and children. Bahrain also underscores the
importance of diplomatic efforts to save lives and mitigate the social and economic
devastation. A ceasefire would allow humanitarian workers to reach the populations
most vulnerable to the spread of COVID-19.
In April, in response to the call of the Secretary-General, the coalition to
support legitimacy in Yemen announced a comprehensive ceasefire in Yemen to deal
with the consequences of the COVID-19 outbreak and stand by the brotherly Yemeni
people. That step was welcomed by the Secretary-General.
The decision of the Secretary-General to remove the coalition to support
legitimacy in Yemen from the list, annexed to his report on children and armed
conflict (S/2020/525), of parties that have not put in place adequate measures to
improve the protection of children during the reporting period clearly points to the
coalition’s unwavering commitment to protecting all civilians in armed conflict,
especially children, and the preventive and protective measures the coalition has
taken to promote the protection of children in Yemen.
The Kingdom of Bahrain affirms its commitment to working with the
international community to make progress on protecting children in conflict situations
and strengthening frameworks for the effective implementation of international
resolutions and international law through confidence-building measures and the
resumption of political negotiations for peace and stability in conflict zones so that
all children can enjoy their rights to life, health and education without fear of being
killed, recruited, abducted or subject to any other kind of violation. The Kingdom of
20-0890641/137

S/2020/594

Bahrain also stresses the importance of supporting and activating surveillance and
accountability tools against violators of children’s rights around the world in order
to uphold the principles of security and justice.

42/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 21
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the
United Nations, Rabab Fatima
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this virtual open debate. We
also thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Gamba, the
Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Fore, and the other briefers for sharing their
valuable insights.
We appreciate the efforts of the Council’s monitoring and reporting
mechanism on children and armed conflict and the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. The participation of children and dialogue with parties to
the conflict throughout the conflict cycle hold the key. Reintegration and curbing
recruitment can be sustainable only by building social acceptance and awareness in
the broader context of conflict prevention and development. The Security Council
should be able to utilize their political outreach vehicles, such as the Peacebuilding
Commission and special political missions, to create space for the monitoring and
reporting mechanism to better manoeuvre. United Nations system-wide efforts
need to be backed by adequate and sustained funding and break the silos across the
humanitarian-development-peace nexus. When schools are too dangerous to attend,
some innovative, alternative education arrangements, such as community-based
learning or virtual schooling, would be useful. This cannot be more relevant than
during this pandemic.
Our peacekeepers in the field are working hard to prevent the recruitment of
children by parties to conflicts and keeping schools safe from military use. As the
current President of the Executive Board of UNICEF, we are also working closely
with the UNICEF leadership, particularly Ms. Fore, to overcome key challenges
to protecting children in armed conflicts. We believe that UNICEF can further
leverage its comparative advantage of a widespread field presence and vast network
of partners.
We have taken note of the Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2020/525)
and its recommendations. The report highlights the grim realities about violations
of child rights and protection in many parts of the world. We would like to draw
the Council’s attention to the Myanmar situation, where “a threefold increase of
child casualties” due to intensified fighting in Myanmar’s Rakhine state is reported
(S/2020/525, para.7). Notably, 25 per cent of those casualties were caused by explosive
remnants of war, improvised explosive devices and anti-personnel mines. This only
signifies Myanmar’s blatant disregard for international humanitarian law and human
rights law.
We cannot agree more with the report’s inclusion of the Tatmadaw in the list
under section A of annex I. Out of the 1.1 million Rohingyas we are hosting, about 60
per cent are children, and each of them has a story to tell. There cannot be a stronger
proof of the Tatmadaw’s wrongdoing. However, we are dismayed and concerned
that the Tatmadaw has been delisted as an entity from the category of violation of
recruitment and use. In our view, it can at best be an illusion that the Tatmadaw’s
violations in that regard have subsided in Rakhine state. Recent reports point to the
contrary. It is imperative that the pressure be kept up on it. Delisting sends the wrong
message. We therefore urge that the Tatmadaw be relisted immediately. We must be
extremely careful that our actions are not used to hide or downplay the Tatmadaw’s
serious crimes or to exculpate it from the responsibility of justice and accountability
for the Rohingya children.
Meanwhile, along with our humanitarian partners, we have continued our
efforts to provide these Rohingya children the protection and assistance that they
20-0890643/137

S/2020/594

need, particularly during the coronavirus disease pandemic. We have partnered with
UNICEF to introduce the Myanmar curriculum for Rohingya children in the camps,
but more than anything else these children would like to realize their inalienable
right to return to their homes. We urge the Council to act decisively in that direction.
The international community must not fail them.

44/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 22
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Brazil to the United Nations
[Original: English and French]
I would first like to thank France for convening this meeting on such a
fundamental issue. I also thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2020/525).
This year marks the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1612
(2005), which established a robust framework to enhance child protection in armed
conflict. Brazil is proud to have supported the resolution as a member of the Council
in 2005. The monitoring and reporting mechanism thereby created constitutes one of
the pillars of the children and armed conflict agenda.
Brazil is fully committed to the advancement of this agenda. We ratified the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement
of children in armed conflict and endorsed both the Vancouver Principles Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child
Soldiers and the Paris Commitments. We have also supported initiatives on the
ground, such as the promotion of the practice of capoeira, an Afro-Brazilian martial
art, as a tool to reintegrate former child soldiers in Haiti and in eastern provinces of
the Democratic Republic of Congo.
During its most recent mandate as a member of the Council, Brazil supported
the adoption of resolution 1998 (2011) — another landmark instrument for the
children and armed conflict agenda — which focuses on attacks against hospitals
and schools. The protection of educational facilities is instrumental to providing a
sense of normality and stability to children. Education gives them hope for a brighter
future, thus alleviating the suffering caused by war.
In that spirit, Brazil endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration, which represents
an important political commitment to ensuring children’s education, even during
hostilities. Last February, Brazil also hosted, together with Poland and the United
States, a meeting of the Warsaw process working group on humanitarian issues and
refugees, which brought together delegations from all regions to discuss challenges
regarding child protection and education in the Middle East. The working group
made a relevant contribution to ongoing regional and national efforts, including
those coordinated with United Nations agencies and humanitarian organizations, to
protect children and youth in armed conflicts as well as to ensure access to quality
education during displacement.
Brazil welcomes the signing of new action plans and commitments by the
United Nations with listed parties to conflicts. The continued engagement with
Governments and non-State actors is a powerful tool to change behaviour and protect
children’s rights.
Despite progress in some areas, the reported 25,000 grave violations are
a matter of great concern, as they reveal a broader trend of blatant disrespect for
international law. Brazil reiterates its condemnation of the targeting and use of
children in armed conflict and underscores the responsibility of all parties to shield
them from the direct consequences of war, including by refraining from the use of
force, as required by the Charter of the United Nations.
Brazil shares the Secretary-General’s concern at the growing number of
children in detention for actual or suspected association with opposing parties
and concurs with the report’s assessment that children should be treated primarily
as victims.

20-0890645/137

S/2020/594

While both armed conflicts and domestic law enforcement are examined in
the annual report, they pose entirely different challenges and must be addressed
through different policies. Armed conflicts and other threats to international peace
and security are under the purview of the Council and follow specific rules, while
issues of internal law enforcement fall outside its mandate. One should not lose sight
of this distinction or of the appropriate forums in which to discuss each of them.
In conclusion, the international community can count on Brazil to advance the
children and armed conflict agenda in the Security Council and to promote peace,
which “remains the most powerful means to reduce violations against children”
(S/2020/525, para. 15).

46/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 23
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Canada to the United Nations
[Original: English and French]
We thank the Permanent Mission of France for convening today’s open
video-teleconference on children and armed conflict. Canada welcomes the focus
on resolution 1612 (2005) as we mark the fifteenth anniversary of this important
milestone for the children and armed conflict agenda.
The mechanisms established by resolution 1612 (2005), namely, the monitoring
and reporting mechanism and the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
are essential to our collective efforts to protect children and hold perpetrators of
grave violations to account.
Canada welcomes the efforts of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, particularly during this unprecedented period of social distancing. The
systematic implementation and follow-up of the Working Group’s conclusions are
essential. Canada will continue to forge links between the Working Group and the
Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict to support this.
Canada emphasizes its strong support for the impartiality and independence
of the monitoring and reporting mechanism on children and armed conflict and for
the need to apply clear, consistent and evidence-based criteria in the listing and
delisting of parties responsible for grave violations against children in the SecretaryGeneral’s annual reports on children and armed conflict. Anything less undermines
the effectiveness of these important tools and threatens the credibility of the children
and armed conflict mandate.
The Secretary-General’s annual report (S/2020/525) paints a grim picture
of the plight of children affected by conflict. Canada condemns the unacceptably
high number of grave violations committed against children during 2019. The report
presents what is a clear and alarming disregard for the life and safety of children in
too many armed conflicts.
This picture is all the more startling due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. COVID-19 and its related mitigation measures are exacerbating the risks
already facing children affected by armed conflict. Disruptions to education, lifesaving health care, humanitarian assistance and protection services will compound
these risks.
The significant progress made in recent decades to protect children and
promote their fundamental rights will be at risk unless there is a concerted effort to
place children at the centre of the COVID-19 pandemic response. Canada therefore
fully supports the Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire in the light of
the pandemic. Armed conflict must be put on lockdown to ensure that children are
protected and their humanitarian needs met. The Security Council must overcome
the deadlock and fully endorse this appeal.
At the same time, the Security Council, Member States, the United Nations and
regional organizations must prioritize the protection of children in armed conflict
and work together to prevent and end the six grave violations against children. A
major focus of Canada’s efforts is strengthening the child protection mandate in
United Nations peace operations. Canada is supporting the Department of Peace
Operations in standardizing and delivering training in English and French for
United Nations peacekeepers to ensure that they are better prepared and equipped
to protect children.

20-0890647/137

S/2020/594

Canada also supports UNICEF and the Roméo Dallaire Child Soldiers
Initiative to build African peacekeeping capacity for child protection, including
through improved training and policies with the African Union, the Democratic
Republic of Congo and Somalia.
The Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers, a set of 17 political commitments focused
on peacekeeping and the prevention of the recruitment and use of children by
armed forces and armed groups, also remain a priority for Canada. There are now
96 endorsements of the Vancouver Principles from all regions of the world. Canada
congratulates Morocco, Kuwait and Ecuador on their recent endorsement of the
Principles. Canada calls on all Member States to endorse the Principles without delay.
The work does not stop with endorsements. That is why Canada launched the
Implementation Guidance for the Vancouver Principles, which serves as a practical
resource for military, police and civilian organizations engaged in United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
Canada has been making progress at the national level. For example, the
Canadian Armed Forces have developed child-soldier content in predeployment
training and incorporated child-soldier scenarios into several major exercises, and
they provide courses on children affected by armed conflict in professional military
education programmes.
Canada will continue to work closely with its partners to implement the
Vancouver Principles and end the scourge of the recruitment and use of child
soldiers. This is also a testament to Canada’s commitment to the Optional Protocol
to the Convention of the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict, adopted 20 years ago.
Since 2006, Canada has been proud to chair the Group of Friends of Children
and Armed Conflict in New York, which has grown to 45 members from all regions.
Canada also proudly chairs or co-chairs a number of the local Groups of Friends of
Children and Armed Conflict that have been established, including in Colombia, the
Philippines, South Sudan and the Sudan.
In addition to their direct advocacy to prevent and end grave violations against
children, these local Groups of Friends can also be important platforms for country
task forces on the monitoring and reporting mechanism, as well as for the Security
Council Working Group in following up on its conclusions. Canada looks forward to
engaging with and through these local Groups of Friends to leverage our collective
commitment to preventing and ending grave violations against children wherever
they occur.

48/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 24
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Canada to the United Nations
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict
The Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict — an informal network
of 45 Member States representing the five regional groups of the United Nations —
expresses its serious concern over the multifaceted impacts of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic on children, especially those affected by armed conflict.
Mitigation measures to curtail the spread of the virus may also inadvertently
and negatively impact children. We strongly encourage the protection of children
in the response to the pandemic, including through the continuity of child-centred
services and rapid, safe and unimpeded humanitarian access to those in need,
including children in detention.
The Group of Friends reiterates our full support for the Secretary-General’s
appeal of 23 March for a global ceasefire and urges the Security Council to swiftly
endorse the appeal.
The Group of Friends is appalled by the scale and scope of the over 25,000
grave violations committed against children, as outlined in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2020/525). We are particularly alarmed by the increase in the verified
number of attacks against schools and hospitals, as well as the shocking increase
in verified incidents of denial of humanitarian access for children. We are further
alarmed by the persistence of recruitment and use of children as soldiers and of their
killing, maiming and abduction. Moreover, sexual violence, which disproportionately
impacts girls, continues to be vastly underreported overall.
We urge all parties to armed conflict to fully comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law and to put in place
concrete and effective protection measures for children in armed conflict. In that
regard, we welcome progress in the signing and implementation of action plans
by parties to conflict and the engagement of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the United Nations and other actors in the field. We encourage
full implementation of all action plans and commitments. Further, we reiterate that
the signing of an action plan should not form the basis for delisting in the SecretaryGeneral’s report.
The Group of Friends welcomes the release of over 13,200 children from armed
forces and armed groups in 2019 and the work of the United Nations Children’s
Fund, the Global Coalition for Reintegration of Child Soldiers and other actors in
promoting effective services for those children. We also welcome ongoing efforts
associated with the ACT to Protect campaign. In that connection, the Group of
Friends encourages all Member States to strengthen the protection of children in
armed conflict, including by acceding to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, particularly
as we mark its twentieth anniversary, and by considering endorsing and implementing
practical protection tools, notably the Safe Schools Declaration, the Principles and
Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, the Paris
Commitments to protect children from unlawful recruitment or use by armed forces
or armed groups and the Vancouver Principles.
This year marks the fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1612 (2005). The
United Nations-led monitoring and reporting mechanism and the Security Council’s
Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict continue to be essential tools for the
protection of children affected by armed conflict. The Group of Friends reiterates
the importance it attaches to the independence, impartiality and credibility of the
20-0890649/137

S/2020/594

monitoring and reporting mechanism. It is crucial that the mechanism continue to be
able to document grave violations against children impartially and objectively, based
on the facts on the ground.
We welcome the increased regularity of reporting by the Secretary-General
to the Working Group, as well as the associated conclusions reached by the Working
Group. We extend our thanks to Belgium in its capacity as Chair for ensuring that
the Working Group continues to deliver on its mandate. The Group of Friends
encourages the full implementation of Working Group conclusions, as well as
systematic follow-up in that regard. Furthermore, we emphasize the importance of
mainstreaming concerns facing children affected by armed conflict throughout the
work of the Council and encourage more regular briefings to the Council by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
The protection of children should be an important aspect of any comprehensive
strategy to resolve conflict and sustain peace. The Group of Friends welcomes the
practical guidance for mediators to protect children in situations of armed conflict.
We encourage the broadest possible dissemination of the guidance and its full use in
peace and mediation processes.
The Group of Friends also strongly supports the child protection mandate in
United Nations peace operations. We welcome the manual for child protection staff
in un peace operations in particular. The Security Council and Member States should
continue to support the implementation of child protection mandates in United Nations
peace operations, including through the deployment of child protection teams and
advisers. We call for the adequate resourcing of these capabilities, including in the
context of transition and downsizing. Consolidation efforts that would undermine
the ability of the United Nations to deliver on the child protection mandates should
be avoided.
Combating impunity and ensuring accountability, including through
international justice mechanisms, such as the International Criminal Court, are key
to preventing grave violations against children. We call for dedicated child rights
expertise within investigative and accountability mechanisms. True justice also
involves reparations and mental health and psychosocial support for survivors of
grave violations, whose trauma may endure for years.
The Group of Friends also welcomes the decision of the General Assembly to
establish 9 September as the International Day to Protect Education from Attack.
Finally, the Group of Friends recognizes the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to ensure the timely release of the annual
reports of the Secretary-General. We encourage the Secretary-General to ensure
that these reports are released to Member States earlier and in advance of scheduled
Security Council open debates.

50/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 25
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Chile to the United Nations
Chile extends its regards to the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière, and thanks France for putting the topic of utmost
importance — children and armed conflict — on the Security Council’s agenda.
More than a duty, it is a moral imperative to protect children, who, without
being given a choice, experience the wrenching and painful consequences of conflict
as part of their daily lives. The figures showing that reality are appalling. This year,
the United Nations verified more than 25,000 grave violations against children and
a total of 13,200 children were separated from non-State actors and armed forces
worldwide. We must not forget our commitment to the 7,000 children who were
abducted, recruited by force or in exchange for money, employed as combatants,
messengers or cooks or forced to provide sexual services when their place really
should be in school and with their families, like many children around the world.
Children also experience physical and psychological trauma that will scar
them for life. The secondary impacts of conflict put them in situations where they
might actually be left behind developmentally, physically and emotionally. The
current 400 per cent increase in denials of humanitarian access to children does
little to assist them. What is worse, the lack of protection, holistic resources for
survivors and accountability mechanisms disincentivizes survivors, their families
and witnesses from reporting violations. Meanwhile, restrictions put in place to
mitigate the spread of coronavirus disease threaten to hamper efforts to prevent,
monitor, report and respond to child rights violations.
Chile strongly believes that there is an urgent need to address immediate
threats while also incorporating preventive approaches in order to evaluate emerging
challenges and conceptualize long-term solutions. To that end, we highly value the
role of the monitoring and reporting mechanism, which allows a better understanding
of the situation on the ground as a basis to guide effective action towards protecting
children. Accordingly, we add our voice to those who call for the Secretary-General
to initiate a rigorous and transparent procedure to ensure that, going forward,
the annexes to the annual report accurately and consistently reflect the evidence
collected by the monitoring and reporting mechanism.
With regards to accountability, it is important to keep implementing the
legislative and institutional arrangements in order to comprehensively address
violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Naming perpetrators in the annex of the Secretary-General’s annual report is an
important step towards accountability for those who commit atrocities against
children. Therefore, to ensure maximum accountability, we encourage the conduct
of an independent, objective and transparent assessment of how the listing and
delisting criteria set out in document S/2010/181 have been implemented thus far.
But, most important, we owe it to these brave children to keep seeking
solutions. We must continue to keep strengthening an integrated response that
contributes to building resilient societies, supports children from the origins of a
conflict to the end of the cycle of violence and seeks full, systemic reintegration.
That needs to be done while consistently implementing the existing instruments that
facilitate the protection of children, such as the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, the
Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and
Use of Child Soldiers, the Safe Schools Declaration and the programmes for the
reintegration of child soldiers.
20-0890651/137

S/2020/594

Annex 26
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Colombia to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
I thank France for convening this open debate, as well as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and the
Director of the United Nations Children’s Fund for their presentations.
Colombia has experienced the phenomenon of forced recruitment by illegal
armed groups. However, the children concerned are identified and cared for by the
Colombian State as victims and, consequently, are not deprived of their liberty,
which is in line with the Special Representative’s recommendations and helps to
avoid further stigmatization.
Pursuant to resolution 1612 (2005), Colombia continues to make progress on
effective mechanisms to prevent recruitment, such as the Intersectoral Commission
for the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Children and Adolescents by Illegal
Organized Groups, which has helped to identify risk factors and coordinate State
action. In addition, in November 2019, the Government adopted a public policy on the
prevention of recruitment and use of children and adolescents and of sexual violence
against them by organized armed groups and organized criminal groups. The policy’s
main purposes are to create protective environments, progressively reduce all forms
of violence and exploitation, guarantee rights and establish mechanisms to facilitate
intersectoral coordination.
Colombia has made an unequivocal commitment to respect that population
group and has directed all the necessary efforts to prevent the recruitment, use
and utilization of children, and sexual violence against them, by armed groups and
organized crime. It is important to reiterate that law enforcement entities have been
respectful of children’s rights. They have complied strictly with the prohibition on
involving them in service activities, in accordance with the Code on Children and
Adolescents and the Intelligence and Counter-Intelligence Act.
In response to acts of sexual violence, the Government is developing a technical
assistance strategy to include the comprehensive care and prevention programme in
the development plans of the target territories. Colombia rejects and condemns the
use of schools and educational centres by organized armed groups to conduct their
criminal activities. Likewise, it reiterates its respect for the rules of international
humanitarian law.
My country encourages the Secretary-General to indicate in his annual reports
the sources of the recorded figures, in order to improve the data analysis process of
international organizations and States and to contribute to strengthening evaluation
mechanisms. The reports are a guide and a starting point in the formulation and
improvement of public policies.
Education and vocational training are the most effective means of creating
safe environments for comprehensive development and of preventing the six grave
violations committed in times of armed conflict. It is imperative that we continue
working towards the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, which
include, inter alia, rights to an adequate standard of living, food, equality, health,
education and personal integrity.
Today we reaffirm once again Colombia’s commitment to building an
increasingly prosperous and secure future for children and adolescents. They are the
future and the seed of peace in our country.
52/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 27
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Costa Rica to the
United Nations, Rodrigo A. Carazo
[Original: Spanish]
Costa Rica associates itself with the statement made by the representative of
Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict and takes
this opportunity to congratulate France on its presidency of the Security Council
for the month of June and to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s Fund, Henrietta Fore, for
their presentations.
In times like these, when a pandemic is sweeping the globe, we must protect
children who are caught up in armed conflict. Their health, safety, education and
future are doubly threatened by the violence of war and the impact of coronavirus
disease and the measures taken to contain it. That is yet another reason to silence
the weapons, and why the delegation of Costa Rica wishes to recall the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a global ceasefire. We also stress the importance of the members
of the Security Council supporting the call, which is so necessary to protect child
victims of hostilities.
Given the times, the fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1612 (2005) should
lead us to reflect more than ever on the importance of its mandates and their
implementation as mechanisms to protect children and guarantee their rights. In
2020 we also celebrate the fifteenth anniversary of General Assembly resolution
60/1, on the responsibility to protect, which reminds us that the duty of all States to
prevent atrocities and genocide includes protecting children. Resolution 1612 (2005)
achieved three main things.
The first is the establishment of the monitoring and reporting mechanism on
children and armed conflict, which is the best way to obtain timely, objective and
accurate information on the condition of children and to take the necessary action to
guarantee their rights.
The second is the adoption of action plans for the protection of children in
armed conflict. We take this opportunity to acknowledge the achievement of the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in signing 29 plans in
2019 and in supporting Governments in adopting relevant legislation.
The third is the establishment of the Security Council Working Group on
Children in Armed Conflict, which has the important responsibility of reviewing the
mechanism’s reports, taking effective action and determining progress made in the
situation of children and the implementation of action plans. In that connection, the
resolution underlined the role of listing and delisting, which should be done on the
basis of reports and objective criteria. We emphasize that there must be consistency
between the findings of reports and the lists.
I conclude by recalling the obligation of all States, even those without armed
conflict, to end impunity for abuses, crimes and atrocities committed against
children, as well as the important role played by institutions such as the International
Criminal Court in the fight against impunity.

20-0890653/137

S/2020/594

Annex 28
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ecuador to the
United Nations, Luis Gallegos Chiriboga
[Original: Spanish]
I wish to congratulate France and Germany on their presidencies of the
Security Council in June and July, respectively, and to thank you, Sir, for having
organized this debate on children and armed conflict. I would point out that all the
elements highlighted by Ecuador in the debate held on 27 May on the protection of
civilians (see S/2020/465), in particular as concerns the consequences of conflicts,
are even more applicable to boys and girls.
On that occasion, I expressed Ecuador’s interest in participating in the efforts
of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict to further promote the
efforts of the international community in terms of the protection of children. Today I
have the honour of aligning Ecuador, for the first time, with the statement delivered
on behalf of the Group of Friends, of which we have been a part since June.
On 21 March, Ecuador also formalized its adherence to the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of
Child Soldiers.
Although there have been important advances in the 75 years since the United
Nations was founded, the situation of children in armed conflict continues to reflect a
devastating reality, as described in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/525).
Ecuador is also deploying considerable efforts at the regional level to fight
the trafficking and recruitment of minors. However, this is a global challenge that
concerns the entire international community. It represents yet another reason to
increase, for example, the funds allocated to peacebuilding, not only for countries in
conflict but also for cross-border cooperation in affected areas, and to direct them
towards the protection of children.
We as an Organization must focus greater efforts on the care of children, which
has also deteriorated owing to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which
has exacerbated conditions in conflict zones. For that reason, Ecuador, together with
Malaysia, Bangladesh, Egypt, Slovenia, Japan, Jamaica, Oman, Senegal and Sweden,
initiated a statement of firm support for the Secretary-General’s call for a ceasefire
at the global level, which has received the support of more than 170 delegations.
It is vital that the Security Council adopt the draft resolution on COVID-19
(S/2020/607) and endorse the call for a ceasefire so that it can be implemented more
effectively. For that reason, I invite all Council members to do so in order to save
the lives and alleviate the suffering of the more than 420 million children living in
conflict zones.
I would be remiss if I were to conclude without once again stressing the
urgency of strengthening the Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, especially
in this context of increased pressure and challenges resulting from the pandemic.
Finally, the message conveyed by Mariam, from Mali, this afternoon in the
Security Council must not only be recorded in the record of speeches given during
this debate but must also be heard and truly heeded by the Security Council and the
United Nations in general. Mariam, 15 years old, is a contemporary of resolution
1612 (2005), whose fifteenth anniversary we are also commemorating. The best way
to do so is to ensure the effective promotion and protection of the rights of children

54/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

worldwide, with special attention paid to those who live in conflict zones and those
who, despite still being in zones of peace, are at risk of being kidnapped or recruited.

20-0890655/137

S/2020/594

Annex 29
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations
At the outset, we would like to thank France for having organized this
important debate on children and armed conflict. We would also extend our thanks to
the briefers for their interesting briefings delivered at the beginning of the meeting.
Egypt believes in the importance of raising awareness regarding human rights
issues and their linkage with the realization of peace and security, particularly as
concerns issues relating to the protection and promotion of the rights of the child.
Egypt strongly support all efforts to strengthen the protection of children
and to put an end to violations committed during conflict, especially crimes
committed by terrorist organizations. Armed conflicts deprive children of their right
to life, physical integrity and mental health, as well as their social, cultural and
educational rights.
The strong negative impacts of armed conflicts on children have been
aggravated by the impacts of the coronavirus disease pandemic. This requires
greater international cooperation and stronger measures to urgently respond to those
exacerbated impacts. In that regard, Egypt, at the highest level, has expressed to the
United Nations its willingness to cooperate to the utmost possible extent in order to
ensure the delivery of much-needed humanitarian assistance.
In 2002, Egypt ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict. The provisions of the
Protocol have been incorporated into our national legislation.
Furthermore, respect for international humanitarian law, including the
protection of children in armed conflict, is part of the curriculum provided by
the Egyptian Ministry of Defence to its personnel, especially for those personnel
participating in peacekeeping operations. The content of the curriculum is prepared
in collaboration with the International Committee of the Red Cross and the National
Council for Childhood and Motherhood with a view to ensuring the protection of the
rights of the child.
Egypt will continue its efforts nationally and internationally to ensure the
protection of the rights of the child, especially for those trapped in difficult situations.

56/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 30
Statement by the Permanent Mission of El Salvador to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
El Salvador thanks the presidency of France for having convened this open
debate, and the Secretary-General for presenting his latest report on children and
armed conflict (S/2020/525).
We commend the Council’s efforts to facilitate and encourage dialogue on the
protection of children and adolescents through various actions, consultations and
campaigns that have contributed to the inclusion of child protection in specific cases
involving peace negotiations.
El Salvador wishes to reiterate its deep commitment to the maintenance of
international peace and security in tackling the heartbreaking consequences of
armed conflict and working to alleviate the resulting widespread suffering of the
civilian population, particularly children, girls and adolescents in conflict areas.
El Salvador believes that full compliance with the Convention on the Rights
of the Child is a high priority in order for the best interests of the child to prevail,
regardless of the context.
We welcome the progress set out in the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on this issue. However, we express our deep concern at the continued
forced recruitment of minors, whose use in conflicts constitutes a serious violation
of their rights, resulting in separation from their families, sexual abuse, appalling
mutilation and, in the worst case, their tragic death. Such traumas deprive them of
their childhood and dignity and leave permanent scars on their adult lives.
At the same time, we deplore the significant increase in the number of attacks
on schools and hospitals, which is why we urge a greater commitment on the part of
the international community and condemn the use and recruitment of children and
adolescents in conflicts. We must continue working for the promotion, protection
and full and effective enjoyment of the rights of children and adolescents, while
giving priority to that goal in our work.
Because El Salvador is committed to those who suffered as children during the
internal armed conflict, it has progressed in terms of the creation of legislation and
institutions for the protection of children, having signed and ratified the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict.
El Salvador therefore recognizes that respect for, and the protection and
guarantee of, human rights are essential pillars of the establishment of genuine rule
of law. Consequently, it has made a resolute commitment to the issue of prevention
and to that of locating and identifying missing persons, especially boys and girls, as
well as support for the families of disappeared persons, the investigation of cases,
the punishment of those responsible and comprehensive reparations for victims and
their families.
El Salvador has recognized the right of families to know the whereabouts of
those girls and boys who disappeared during the armed conflict. For that reason,
in 2010 El Salvador created the National Commission for the Search for Girls and
Boys Disappeared during the Internal Armed Conflict, which conducts research and
locates, contacts and reunites disappeared children — who today are adults — with

20-0890657/137

S/2020/594

their biological families, as well as provides psychosocial support to families that are
victims of enforced disappearance.
In addition, October 2013 saw the creation of the Reparations Programme for
Victims of Severe Human Rights Violations That Occurred in the Context of the
Internal Armed Conflict, which includes the forced disappearance of persons. The
Board of Directors of the Registry of Victims of Serious Violations of Human Rights
That Occurred in the Context of the Internal Armed Conflict was also created.
Likewise, the country is promoting the creation of a State bank of genetic profiles in
order to locate missing children in the context of the internal armed conflict.
All of the aforementioned is in line with Salvadoran initiatives within the
United Nations such as the proclamation, through General Assembly resolution
65/196, of 24 March as the International Day for the Right to the Truth concerning
Gross Human Rights Violations and for the Dignity of Victims. El Salvador suffered
from the scourge of an armed conflict for more than 10 years, which left us with
countless lessons learned and allowed us to strengthen our regulatory framework,
with the primary goal of not repeating the mistakes of the past. For that reason, we
passed the Law for the Comprehensive Protection of Children and Adolescents, which
establishes a series of rights, guarantees and duties of children and adolescents that
is consistent with the international framework of human rights. That law establishes
that, in the event of disasters or in situations of armed conflict, the State must
provide all children with special protection based on their rights. It also provides
protection measures against sexual abuse and exploitation as well as other forms
of exploitation, including the forced or compulsory recruitment of children and
adolescents for use in conflict.
In addition to those measures, El Salvador joined the Safe to Learn initiative,
which is aimed at ending violence in and through schools so that children can be free
to learn, prosper and pursue their dreams. It has also signed on to the Safe Schools
Declaration and to the commitment to protect schools from attack in times of armed
conflict. Although there is no armed conflict of any kind in El Salvador, a decision
was made to establish safe places and implement inclusive designs that are resistant
to the threats to which educational centres may be exposed, in the process involving
educational communities and implementing monitoring projects, financing and
continuous supervision of the relevant facilities.
In addition, 2019 saw the implementation of the Education Violence Alert
System, which is aimed at preventing acts of violence that could affect the educational
community, including harassment, bullying, sexual abuse, threats and extortion,
both inside the schools and in their vicinity. The project is led by the Ministry of
Education and has a network of public and private educational centres throughout
the country.
The Ministry of Education works at the inter-institutional level in coordination
with the National Civil Police, and together they provide an efficient and effective
response to cases reported through the system. In addition, the set of alerts produced
through the Education Violence Alert System will generate information that will
serve as input for the design of public policies and the development of strategies and
plans to reduce violence in order to urgently prevent critical acts of violence affecting
educational communities, thereby strengthening the protection of schools and
providing adequate care in order to serve the people involved in the reported cases.
We take this opportunity to thank the agencies of the United Nations system
that have supported that initiative, as well as other friendly countries that have
offered their cooperation and support in its implementation.

58/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

In the framework of the General Assembly, El Salvador, as a State member
of the Latin America and Caribbean Group and in conjunction with the European
Union, submitted a draft resolution entitled “The rights of the child” (General
Assembly resolution 74/133), which, among other things, encourages all States to
strengthen efforts to protect children affected by armed conflict, including from the
recruitment or use by armed forces or armed groups and by supporting long-term
and sustainable reintegration and rehabilitation for these children.
Likewise, El Salvador co-sponsored resolution 74/275, entitled “International
Day to Protect Education from Attack”, which highlights the need to take measures
to achieve the full realization of the right to education for all children and, in
particular, to take all feasible measures to protect schools from attacks and to refrain
from actions that impede children’s access to education, and to facilitate access to
education in armed conflict.
In addition, El Salvador is a pioneer country in the Global Partnership
to End Violence against Children, which aims to make progress in the fight
to eradicate violence as well as in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
We are pleased to report that El Salvador, following up on the commitments
made and in the context of openness to special procedures, received, from 23 April
to 3 May 2019, the Special Rapporteur on the promotion of truth, justice, reparation
and guarantees of non-recurrence, Mr. Fabian Salvioli, in order to assess the progress
made in the implementation of transitional justice measures in order to address the
violations of human rights and international humanitarian law committed during the
armed conflict.
Among his preliminary findings, the Special Rapporteur acknowledged the
progress made since the signing of the Chapultepec Peace Accords in terms of
truth and guarantees of non-recurrence, as well a recent initiatives to search for
disappeared adults and children, the request for a public apology and the first steps
forward in the criminal investigation of the violations committed.
We would like to thank UNICEF for all its support at the national and
international levels in promoting better results in the protection of children in
various contexts, particularly its work in different regions for the protection of
children in conflict situations. We believe it is necessary to strengthen programmes
to reintegrate children who have been released and removed from military activity,
so they can be properly integrated into society through viable alternatives. In this
way, we will reduce the chances that they will again become vulnerable to abuse,
social stigmatization and recurrent recruitment.
We believe that it is best to apply preventive approaches that ensure that all
children and adolescents are protected and given the opportunity to grow up and
strengthen their abilities to build their life projects. To that end, in December 2017,
El Salvador joined the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of
the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers and considers them to be a comprehensive
set of measures to end the recruitment of child soldiers.
The Vancouver Principles, which are based on the existing framework for the
protection of children and the promotion of their rights, constitute an innovative
measure to encourage the reporting of all types of abuses and grave violations against
children and adolescents in armed conflict. It is important to apply such measures in
areas where peacekeeping operations are carried out, taking into account the impact
that conflicts can cause on children and how vulnerable to failure the objectives of
the United Nations would be if we did not take measures to prevent the violation of
children’s rights. We call on the international community to consider joining this
20-0890659/137

S/2020/594

initiative and thereby strengthen the protection of children and the promotion of
their rights.
The outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has caused an
unprecedented set of challenges for all Governments and other key actors in achieving
the goals on the children and armed conflict agenda. In the Secretary-General’s most
recent report, we can see how progress has been constrained by the outbreak of the
virus. The social, economic and political consequences of the pandemic are expected
to grow, including consequences to peace, international security and the protection
of human rights and international humanitarian law.
El Salvador wishes to emphasize the importance of multilateralism and the
collective support that each country and international organization, civil society, the
private sector and other relevant actors, each working in its own area of specialization,
can provide to minimize the negative consequences, as we face the effects of the
outbreak of COVID-19. We must maintain a spirit of solidarity as we work together
to support efforts aimed at protecting children and adolescents, without reversing
course on the important achievements we have made.
The time has come to take immediate action to respond to the effects of
COVID-19. This response must address the immediate effects of the pandemic,
bearing in mind that incitement to hatred, inequality and restrictions on access
to health care, among other restrictions that undermine human rights and limit
progress in the area of peace and security, have also been exacerbated in the effort
to contain the impact of the pandemic. In these difficult circumstances, we call
on all countries to continue to the best of their abilities to support efforts aimed at
continuing life-saving work. We commend the work of the specialized agencies of
the United Nations system, in particular for ensuring equal humanitarian access for
all, without discrimination.
We would urge all parties to conflicts to respect international law, primarily
human rights law and international humanitarian law, and to continue to take measures
to end violations of the rights of children and adolescents in armed conflicts, and to
take preventive, protective and rehabilitative action, as required, on a case-by-case
basis. For our part, while El Salvador has made significant achievements in terms
of children’s rights in various contexts, we will continue to seek solutions to the
challenges before us — solutions that not only respond to the mandate to adapt our
national legislation to the principles and precepts of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, but also involve concrete steps forward in the transformation of our society
in favour of a paradigm of comprehensive protection for children and adolescents.
Finally, El Salvador remains convinced that the protection of all children and
adolescents in armed conflict must be an important aspect of any strategy for conflict
resolution and of any peacebuilding process. Addressing armed conflicts from a
comprehensive perspective is the key to ensuring the maintenance and sustainability
of peace in different regions of the world.

60/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 31
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ethiopia to the
United Nations, Taye Atske-Selassie Amde
I would first like to thank the President of the Security Council and France
for convening today’s open debate. I also wish to thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, Ms. Henrietta Fore and all the
briefers for their informative presentations.
Over the past 15 years, since the adoption of the landmark Security Council
resolution 1612 (2005) on children and armed conflict, significant progress has been
made in ending and preventing violations against children in conflict situations
around the world. The monitoring and reporting on children and armed conflict by the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution
1612 (2005) and the signing of 32 action plans and other types of engagement with
parties to conflict have played a critical role in further strengthening the protection
of children affected by conflicts.
Despite these efforts, however, grave violations of international humanitarian
law committed against children in armed conflict persist. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2020/525) documents over 10,000 verified child casualties. It
is totally unacceptable that children are still being subjected to gruesome killing and
maiming, denial of humanitarian access, rape and other forms of sexual violence,
and coercive recruitment and use.
We are also seriously concerned that the abuse of refugee and migrant children,
including through trafficking, torture, sexual violence and ill-treatment in detention,
remains unresolved. As one of the largest refugee-hosting countries, Ethiopia firmly
believes in the need to treat refugees with special care, bearing in mind their basic
needs in terms of access to shelter, food, clean water, health care and education, as
well as the provision of official documentation.
We are committed to the continuous provision not only of international
protection, but also education and health services, to refugee children, including
unaccompanied minors who are forcibly displaced as a result of armed conflict.
This is why Ethiopia last year adopted one of the most progressive refugee policies
in Africa. We believe much more needs to be done to find durable solutions to the
general living conditions and status of children affected by conflict and forced
displacement. In this regard, strengthened support from development actors to
countries emerging from conflict and to refugee-hosting countries remains vital.
We believe the signing of action plans by parties to armed conflict is a step in
the right direction. However, enhanced cooperation between the Council and regional
and subregional organizations is critical to ensuring concrete implementation. In
this regard, we would like to encourage the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to explore mechanisms for further strengthening the cooperation between
the Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council.
Ethiopia acknowledges the role of the monitoring and reporting mechanism
in tracking violations against children in armed conflict, including in the context
of peace operations. We believe that any alleged grave violation of international
humanitarian law and human rights law should be properly investigated. In line
with the provisions of resolution 1612 (2005), close coordination with national
Governments, troop-contributing countries and relevant United Nations and civil
society actors will enable the mechanism to properly verify the objectivity, accuracy
and reliability of any information.

20-0890661/137

S/2020/594

In that regard, we have noted the references in the report of the SecretaryGeneral to the African Union Mission in Somalia and regional forces operating in
Somalia, including the Ethiopian National Defence Forces, in relation to two alleged
cases of violations. We reaffirm the need for a coordinated investigation with the
troop-contributing countries and international forces concerned as well as relevant
international and regional organizations.
As a major troop-contributing country, Ethiopia has taken various measures
to ensure the protection of civilians, including children, in areas where our troops
are deployed. Our troops are guided by elaborate rules of engagement within the
framework of our obligations under international humanitarian law. Our troops are
given intensive predeployment training on the protection of civilians, with special
attention on protecting the most vulnerable groups — particularly women and
children. We have also put in place mechanisms for predeployment orientation and
after-duty evaluation in order to ensure accountability for any violations committed
by our troops deployed in a mission.
Ethiopia has ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child, its amendment
and two Optional Protocols. Undoubtedly, international commitments are vital to
further strengthening the Convention and bringing about the necessary changes in
attitudes to create conditions for the protection of children in armed conflict. In
this regard, my country will work towards the full adoption of the Paris Principles
and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, the
Safe Schools Declaration and the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the
Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers.
Finally, I would like to conclude by reiterating Ethiopia’s firm and continued
commitment as a troop-contributing country to ensuring the protection of children
in armed conflict. We will continue to work with all the relevant actors to that end.

62/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 32
Statement by the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations
I am pleased to submit this statement on behalf of the European Union (EU)
and its member States. I extend our congratulations to the briefers, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children in Armed Conflict, the
Executive Director of UNICEF and Mariam from civil society. I thank the French
presidency of the Security Council for organizing today’s debate.
This year we mark the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1612
(2005), which established the United Nations monitoring and reporting mechanism
and the Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
Since then, we have seen some significant progress: countries have criminalized
recruitment, adopted protocols for the handover of children and implemented
measures to protect schools and hospitals. The resolution is an important milestone,
and, on this occasion, we commend Belgium for chairing the Working Group.
Despite the progress made in some areas, the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2020/525) shows that there are still significant gaps and concerns to be addressed.
We expect members of the Security Council to deal with them as a matter of priority
and with complete dedication. This means ensuring the mainstreaming of the
agenda across the work of the Council, inviting the Special Representative to brief
on country situations, raising issues from the children and armed conflict agenda,
including those related to child protection, during Security Council visits, providing
ample resources for child protection and making sure that these issues are addressed
in relevant mandate discussions for all United Nations missions and with all Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General who appear before the Security Council.
It is shocking that, in 2019, over 25,000 grave violations were committed
against children in the 19 situations assessed by the monitoring and reporting
mechanism, with continuing sexual and gender-based violence, which remains
vastly underreported, and a worrisome trend of a 400 per cent increase in denial
of humanitarian access, with 4,400 verified incidents this year, and attacks against
schools and hospitals. The EU urges parties to armed conflicts, State and non-State
alike, to ensure universal respect for international humanitarian law, implement
human rights law and refugee law and allow for concrete and effective protection,
which is all the more important against the backdrop of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. The EU also calls upon States Members of the United
Nations and non-State actors to improve access to safe and quality education, in line
with the recently adopted General Assembly resolution 74/275.
This year, as we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the
Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict, we call on its
universal ratification. We also welcome other initiatives that build on the existing
framework in a complementary manner, such as the Paris Principles and Guidelines
on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups and the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child
Soldiers. The Safe Schools Declaration is also a valuable tool to this end.
The EU remains a staunch supporter of the United Nations children and armed
conflict mandate, which is equipped with essential tools that have a real impact:
the Security Council Working Group, the monitoring and reporting mechanism, the
action plans and the annual report, with its annex listing parties to conflicts that
have committed grave violations. Considering the indispensability of these tools, it
is of the utmost importance to protect the agenda’s integrity and impartiality.
20-0890663/137

S/2020/594

The EU places a high value on accountability, including through the
International Criminal Court. Every year, EU member States review the EU list of
priority countries on children and armed conflict, based on the description of the
country situations in the annual report. We encourage the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to continue to secure agreements on new action plans and
support the implementation and monitoring of existing ones. In parallel, we value
the Manual for Child Protection Staff in United Nations Peace Operations, and we
actively support the practical guidance for mediators to protect children in situations
of armed conflict, launched in 2020.
The protection and promotion of the rights of the child is central to the EU’s
human rights policy. The draft EU action plan on human rights and democracy
2020-2024 supports the demobilization, long-term rehabilitation and reintegration
of children formerly associated with armed forces and groups. The children and
armed conflict agenda is mainstreamed in EU common security and defence policy
missions, and child protection aspects are taken into account in the planning of
operations, trainings, early warning and peace negotiation, in close cooperation with
the United Nations peacekeeping operations, agencies and funds as well as other
actors, such as civil society. The EU continues to support projects in Bangladesh,
Colombia, the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Nigeria
and the Sudan — providing tailor-made assistance for the release and reintegration
of children associated with armed forces and groups, including access to education,
psychosocial support and improved livelihood opportunities.
Our strong engagement to the conflict-prevention agenda and dedication
towards moving the children and armed conflict agenda forward in times of crisis,
such as the one engendered by COVID-19, is key to ensuring that the rights of the
child are taken into account in all our efforts aimed at building back better.

64/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 33
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Fiji to the United Nations
Fiji congratulates France on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of June. I thank France for inviting Member States to participate in
the Security Council’s debate on this important topic of children and armed conflict.
Forty years have passed since the adoption of the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, which placed the crucial obligation on States to protect children in
conflict. The Convention has been further reinforced by over 20 Security Council
resolutions since 1999 relating to the protection of children in armed conflict.
Despite these, the Secretary-General reports today that the United Nations has
documented over 25,000 grave violations against children in 19 situations around
the world. Secretary-General Guterres’s report to the Security Council (S/2020/525)
further states that half of these grave violations were committed by non-State actors
and a third by Governments and international forces. The Secretary-General’s other
recent reports on the protection of civilians (S/2020/366) and conflict-related sexual
violence (S/2020/487) highlight an alarming trend overall. They build a picture of
increasing violations and deaths in conflict. These reports combined called for the
Security Council to seriously step up.
Protecting children in armed conflict is a legal obligation first, and a moral
obligation second. Fiji welcomes and fully supports the continuous efforts by the
United Nations to protect and assist children in armed conflict. The SecretaryGeneral’s report on children and armed conflict reflects the effort taken by all
agencies to investigate and document grave violations against children in armed
conflicts. The annual reports continue to highlight the same challenges over and
over. Children need to be protected, perpetrators need to be held accountable and
impunity needs to end.
The Security Council has an important role to play in preventing conflicts
through early intervention. It has the powers to ensure accountability and to end
impunity. It has been 15 years since the establishment of its Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. The Working Group’s recommendations should
continue to be the Council’s main guidance for matters related to children in
armed conflict.
The country task force on monitoring and reporting still faces the challenge
of access in order to investigate violations. Member States should continue to
allow access to the task force and work together with it towards fulfilling their
international obligations.
As the report highlights, non-State actors are a growing challenge to the
protection of children in armed conflicts. All stakeholders should continue to engage
with non-State actors to build awareness of their responsibilities in protecting children.
Fiji respects its international obligations with regard to the protection of
children in armed conflicts. Fiji is a party to the Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, the Safe Schools Declaration and
the Vancouver Principles. Fiji believes that schools and other educational facilities
must be designated prohibited areas for all parties involved in armed conflicts.
Keeping armed parties away from schools is a step in achieving a secure learning
environment for children and in protecting children from activities that can be a
danger to them. But trying to do all that when local communities have suffered and
are dispersed and when State institutions have been weakened or destroyed can be a
huge challenge for States.

20-0890665/137

S/2020/594

Children are always the most vulnerable and will continue to be the first
victims of armed conflicts. The most effective way to protect children in armed
conflicts is preventive intervention and, when conflicts do break out, then protection
requires the strongest possible oversight, reporting and investigation. In all those
areas, the Security Council needs to do a lot more. It needs to step up monitoring:
oversight is pressing as conflicts are becoming even more complicated. Furthermore,
new technologies make it easier to spread hate speech easier and for non-State
actors to influence and radicalize young people. Similarly, climate change in many
conflict zones is destroying livelihoods and making children more vulnerable to
manipulation by armed groups.
Fiji supports the recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
report and requests the Security Council to give this challenge urgent and most
serious attention in its deliberations.

66/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 34
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Georgia to the
United Nations, Kaha Imnadze
At the outset, I wish to extend my sincere gratitude to the French presidency
for convening today’s important open debate. We would also like to thank the
distinguished briefers for their comprehensive overview.
While the findings of the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/525)
on children and armed conflict contain some encouraging elements, the rest of the
account remains a cause for alarm. Particularly deplorable is the continuing practice
of grave violations, including sexual violence against children, attacks against schools
or hospitals and denial of humanitarian access to children. We have to move towards
the implementation of the legal corpus that, throughout the past decades, has been
neatly crafted by the international community, including in the Security Council.
That is especially relevant against the backdrop of the fifteenth anniversaries of
milestone resolution 1612 (2005) and the landmark principle of the responsibility to
protect (General Assembly resolution 60/1), which we mark this year.
Georgia, as a party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its
Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict, is committed to
upholding the norms for the prohibition of the recruitment and use of child soldiers.
We have endorsed vital documents in recent years, including the Safe Schools
Declaration and the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers.
Yet, notwithstanding our efforts, the fundamental rights of the conflict-affected
children in Russia-occupied regions of Georgia — Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South
Ossetia — continue to be violated by the occupying power, which exercises effective
control on the ground. The major concerns include, inter alia, the restrictions on
freedom of movement, access to health care and the prohibition of education in the
native language, as well as the various other forms of discrimination that children
regularly face and that each year deprive up to 5,000 of them of the right to an
education in their mother tongue and other basic rights.
That dire humanitarian and human rights situation on the ground has been
aggravated by the coronavirus disease pandemic. In these difficult times, when it
is critically important to support the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire
and show care for conflict-affected children, Russia continuous the illegal process of
erecting the so-called border signs and other artificial barriers along the occupation
line. To make matters worse, due to the irresponsible and inhuman approach of
closing the so-called crossing points along the Russian occupation line, the population
residing in the occupied regions, including children, remain stripped of access to
urgent care and medical evacuation. Thus, owing to the Russian occupation regime’s
denial of medical evacuation to those in need, the death toll of ethnic Georgians has
risen to 14 since the closure of the occupation line in the Tskhinvali/South Ossetia
in September 2019.
Against that background, while we reiterate our commitment to the protection
of children’s rights, we call on the international community to urge Russia to cease
its provocative and destructive actions in the occupied regions of Georgia and start
fulfilling its international obligations, first and foremost the European Unionmediated ceasefire agreement of 12 August 2008.

20-0890667/137

S/2020/594

Annex 35
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Greece to the United Nations
Greece would like to congratulate the French presidency of the Security Council
for organizing today’s open debate on children and armed conflict. Greece would
also like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, the Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s Fund
and Mariam from civil society for their comprehensive briefings.
While aligning itself with the statement submitted by the European Union,
Greece would like to highlight the alarming number of verified grave violations
against children in armed conflict in 2019 — 25,000 according to the latest annual
report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/525). Around the world, children remain
the largely invisible victims of human rights violations and abuses, for instance be
killed or maimed, recruited or used as soldiers, detained for their actual or alleged
association with parties to conflict or terrorist groups, sexually abused or raped,
abducted, deprived of education and health services due to military attacks against
schools or hospitals, as well as denied humanitarian access.
In addition to that, the current global health crisis due to the coronavirus
disease pandemic, which is exacerbating existing vulnerabilities, has a cumulative
negative impact on other dimensions of human security, namely, personal, food,
economic or community security, especially for children, and impedes the equal
enjoyment of their human rights.
This cruel and devastating reality illustrates the urgent need to accelerate
coordinated international action in order to achieve peace and sustainable human
development for all, especially children since they are key actors in building
peaceful, inclusive and resilient societies founded on the rule of law, justice and
strong institutions, (Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 16). Therefore, the focus
of the international community should be directed towards ensuring accountability
for violations against children through child- and gender-sensitive criminal justice
mechanisms, as those are considered the best way of preventing the recurrence of
violations and contributing to sustainable peace. Moreover, precise legislation and
guidelines for the armed forces enhance the protection of civilians, especially children.
In addition, sustainable human development presupposes good quality
education and lifelong learning opportunities for all, especially children (SDG
4). In fact, education and vocational opportunities facilitate the rehabilitation and
smooth reintegration in society of children recruited and used as child soldiers. In
this respect, as armed conflicts place the education of entire generations at risk by
destroying or damaging educational facilities, priority should be given to providing
education during emergencies, as well as to rebuilding schools once peace has
been achieved.
Effective coordinated international action to address the specific needs of
conflict-affected children requires enhancing system-wide policy coherence by
mainstreaming the children and armed conflict agenda together with a gender
perspective throughout the whole range of United Nations policies so as to leave not
even one boy or girl behind.
Greece, as a dedicated supporter of the United Nations children and armed
conflict agenda, places particular emphasis on the protection of children’s rights,
especially in times of armed conflict. Having ratified the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict and endorsed the Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with
Armed Forces or Armed Groups, the Safe Schools Declaration and the Vancouver
68/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Principles, Greece is in the process of developing a national action plan on the
rights of the child and another on women, peace and security, which prioritizes the
protection of girls from conflict-related violations and abuses.
In that light, Greece remains committed to joining forces with all international
stakeholders in a common effort to adequately promote and protect the rights and
welfare of conflict-affected children and, thus, to contribute to building a future
peaceful, inclusive, resilient and gender-equal world.

20-0890669/137

S/2020/594

Annex 36
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Guatemala to the
United Nations
Allow me to congratulate France on having organized this open debate marking
the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005). We appreciate
the concept note, which provides guidance, as well as the valuable briefings by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Virginia Gamba, and the executive Director of the United Nations Children’s Fund,
Henrietta Fore.
The Security Council has been adopting resolutions regarding the protection
of children affected by armed conflict since 1999. Each of the resolutions contains
increasingly stringent provisions on the protection of children. Adequate and timely
financial support remains necessary to ensure that the monitoring and reporting
mechanism, as well as the child protection advisers within peacekeeping operations,
fulfil their role under this mandate.
It is clear that development and peaceful and inclusive societies cannot be
achieved without the comprehensive protection of children. However, despite the
efforts of the international community, we continue to see serious abuses committed
against children by armed groups, which not only constitute a serious violation of
their human rights but are also a clear demonstration of contempt for human life.
Civilian casualties in armed conflicts are on the rise, with children being
the victims of atrocious and vicious violence that hampers their development and
education. Of extreme concern are the indiscriminate attacks on hospitals and
schools, direct attacks on civilians with explosive weapons, air strikes and the use
of chemical weapons, which cause high rates of injury among civilians, including
thousands of children, who, in addition to the deprivation of their basic rights, may
suffer or die. The perpetrators of such acts should be subject to strict sanctions by
the Council.
Armed conflicts have devastating consequences for the social structure of a
country. Guatemala considers that the preventive approach (sustaining peace) must
be accompanied by actions to promote a culture of peace, respect and tolerance as part
of the efforts to reintegrate children into their families and communities. Guatemala
stresses its commitment to protecting the rights of every child. An example of that
commitment is our endorsement of the Safe Schools Declaration, which calls for
strong political support for the comprehensive protection of every child.
This occasion is also important to highlight the global suffering caused by
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which is a common enemy and
does not discriminate on the basis of nationality, sex, religion, ethnicity or age.
Despite this emergency, armed conflicts continue around the world. For that reason,
we applaud the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire. It is time to put an
end to armed conflict and, today more than ever, to focus collectively on the fight
against COVID-19.
I conclude by emphasizing that defending children is a moral and political
imperative. If we continue to act jointly, we will be sending a message of hope and
be able to fully carry out our responsibility to protect our societies’ most precious
asset — children.

70/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 37
Statement by the Permanent Mission of India to the United Nations
We congratulate France on their successful presidency of the Security Council
this month and convey our appreciation for convening this open video teleconference.
We also thank the briefers for sharing their perspectives.
The Security Council’s children and armed conflict agenda has evolved
considerably over the last two decades. This year also marks the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict. While a sound normative
framework is already in place, the protection of children in armed conflicts continues
to present a wide array of operational challenges. A lot more remains to be done in
keeping with the changing nature of armed conflicts and the varied nature of the
vulnerabilities that children face in such situations. We wish to highlight following
points in that regard.
First, cherry-picking situations beyond the mandate of the Council for
inclusion in the Secretary-General’s annual reports on children and armed conflict
politicizes and instrumentalizes the child protection agenda. It also diverts attention
from situations that pose a threat to international peace and security.
There is also a need for greater transparency and honest engagement between
the Member States and United Nations mandate holders in order to provide accurate,
objective and reliable information to the Security Council on the grave violations
committed against children in situations of armed conflict. The relevant Security
Council resolutions require, in no ambiguous terms, that such monitoring and
reporting activities be undertaken in cooperation with, and with the participation
of, the host Government. That requirement has to be followed in letter and in spirit.
Unfortunately, in the case of the paragraphs of the Secretary-General’s latest
annual report (S/2020/525) pertaining to India, none of the above was adhered to,
thereby contravening the mandate given to the Secretary-General with regard to
preparing the report. The information claimed to have been verified by the United
Nations cannot be based on hearsay, and due diligence must be done in a transparent
manner. Any derogation from that only undermines the credibility of the report.
Secondly, abuse, exploitation, sexual violence and other grave violations
against children by terrorists need greater focus and understanding. Terrorist
networks are increasingly interlinked with other non-State actors, such as organized
crime syndicates, spreading their tentacles across borders. In some situations, the
unholy nexus between State machineries and non-State actors further adds to the
complexities that lead to widespread violence and deprivation, which afflict children
in multiple ways.
Thirdly, children remain particularly vulnerable to indoctrination through
violent extremist ideologies designed to foment terrorism. Their social, emotional and
cognitive developments are often interrupted by radicalization and the experience of
violence in armed conflicts, impacting them for life.
Nowhere is that truer than in our region. Terror emanating from Pakistan
has jeopardized the future of millions of children in its neighbouring countries and
beyond. Pakistan has the dubious distinction of running a system of “schooling”
young children in violent extremist ideologies and recruiting them for terrorist
activities. A thriving transnational narco-terror network run by Pakistan threatens
the future of millions of children across regions. Educational institutions for girls
continue to be targeted, and children belonging to religious and ethnic minorities in
Pakistan remain particularly vulnerable to egregious violations and deprivation of
20-0890671/137

S/2020/594

rights. Yet the delegation of Pakistan relentlessly pursues an agenda of peddling fake
narratives about India at every United Nations forum, turning a blind eye to its own
follies. These are smoke screens for its design of perpetuating terror in the region.
We call for an end to impunity for all actors inciting and perpetrating grave
violations against children at home and abroad. There must be greater accountability
and sincere efforts to bring the perpetrators to justice by the Governments from
whose territory such entities operate. The United Nations must also reckon with the
full complexity of such situations in order to better situate the child protection issues
in context.
Fourthly, we need a more inclusive approach to providing protection to child
victims of armed conflict. The children who face relocation and reintegration require
special attention. Children who grow up in conflict and post-conflict situations often
need a fresh start. Engagement with Governments to strengthen legal and operational
tools for child protection is important. The tools have to be complemented by
community awareness and family resilience, so that parents cannot be coerced into
sacrificing their children or their children’s future.
From our experience of United Nations peacekeeping over the past six decades,
we also recognize the importance of having sufficient resources and the requisite
number of child protection advisers in the field to make a difference.
The importance of good quality education and skill development to mitigate
those negative consequences cannot be overemphasized. The use of digital tools
to provide education, vocational training and psychosocial support opens up new
opportunities for children in fragile situations. Protecting schools, especially girls’
schools, and health-care facilities and personnel must be accorded priority in order
to give all children the opportunities they deserve.
Fifthly, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has deepened the
vulnerability of children in armed conflicts by increasing their risk of exposure to
violence and exploitation. United Nations agencies, peacekeeping missions and other
partners have made commendable efforts in mitigating the impacts of COVID-19
and in facilitating humanitarian assistance. The rights and needs of children must
continue to receive priority when responding to the pandemic in armed conflicts.
In conclusion, we reiterate India’s support to United Nations endeavours to
protect children in armed conflicts.

72/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 38
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Iraq to the United Nations
At the outset, my country would like to thank the Permanent Representative
of France to the United Nations, President of the Security Council this month,
for holding this constructive dialogue. We are confident in his wisdom and able
leadership. We also thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, and the Executive Director of the United Nations
Children’s Fund, Henrietta Fore, for their tireless efforts in assisting and supporting
children all over the world.
Iraq, like many countries around the world, has been affected by the
coronavirus disease pandemic and has made it clear to the Office of the Special
Representative, during the preparation of this report (S/2020/525), that it was not
able to clarify any alleged information mentioned in the draft version of the report,
since Baghdad was under curfew and remains under partial curfew now. However,
we call upon the Office not to further burden Iraq at a time when — not to mention
the impact of the global pandemic — we continue to witness recurring terrorist
attacks that claim the lives of innocent Iraqi citizens, including children.
Iraq would like to thank Special Representative Gamba de Potgieter for calling
upon the countries concerned to facilitate the repatriation of foreign children to their
countries of origin, in line with the principles of international law and with respect
for the best interests of the child.
With reference to paragraph 77 of the report, Iraq would like to remind the
Office of the Special Representative of its note verbal of 12 March 2020 (CMT
3/2/102), which clearly states that the authority concerned is working on a draft bill
on the rights of the child that includes articles providing for the criminalization of
the recruitment and use of children. The Iraqi Government works closely with the
international organizations providing humanitarian assistance to Iraqis in camps for
internally displaced persons. However, as with any other sovereign country, it has
security measures that need to be respected. There are no so-called bureaucratic
impediments, only security measures that guarantee the safety and security of our
people, as well as humanitarian personnel.
While we commend the commitment of the United Nations to assisting
Iraq in reintegrating affected children, Iraq wishes to highlight the elements of
rehabilitation and reintegration, which it considers to be complementary and must
be brought together when dealing with children who were exposed to severe terrorist
propaganda and a long brainwashing process by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL).
Iraq does not consider innocent children as criminals, on the contrary.
Iraqi laws on juveniles are in line with relevant international standards, bearing
in mind that there are children who were associated with ISIL and were, as we
mentioned, brainwashed, some of whom have committed crimes and are dangerous
to themselves and to all Iraqis. Those children are being dealt with by the competent
Iraqi authorities in a way that ensures the public’s safety as well as theirs. There are
steps and measures in place to rehabilitate them so that one day they may be ready to
rejoin society as normal, productive and responsible individuals. However, it would
be a threat to public safety if they were set free prior to rehabilitation.
Despite our repeated calls on the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, inaccurate and incomplete alleged information is still
being incorporated into the reports. In this year’s report again, only the number of
violations were included, with neither date nor place, which makes them impossible
20-0890673/137

S/2020/594

to verify and complicates the situation from our side in terms of addressing any
alleged violations. Therefore, we call on the Office of the Special Representative to
be reasonable in its approach while pursuing the best interests of children.
Last but not least, Iraq works closely with the United Nations Mine Action
Service (UNMAS) as part of the efforts to clear the land previously occupied by
ISIL. The quantity of landmines and explosive remnants of war is unprecedented.
Iraq, with the cooperation of UNMAS, is raising awareness and educating the people
living in those areas about the threats posed by mines. We call upon United Nations
agencies and offices working in Iraq to better coordinate among themselves, while
avoiding overlap or duplication of their functions.
Iraq reiterates its statement issued on 8 January 2020 in response to the third
report on children and armed conflict in Iraq (S/2019/984).

74/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 39
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Ireland

to

the

We thank the French presidency for giving Member States an opportunity to
present statements for this important debate on children and armed conflict. We also
thank Belgium for its invaluable leadership of the Working Group on Children in
Armed Conflict.
Ireland aligns itself with the statement submitted by the observer of the
European Union.
In what is already a year of important anniversaries for the United Nations,
2020 also marks 15 years since the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), which led
to the creation of the United Nations monitoring and reporting mechanism and the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. We thank the briefers — the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Virginia
Gamba de Potgieter; the Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s Fund,
Henrietta Fore; and Mariam, representative of the National Children’s Parliament of
Mali — for their key insights and for shedding light on the current situation.
Too often, debates at the Security Council can feel detached from their impact
on the ground, but the children and armed conflict agenda has catalysed enormous
change in the lives of some of the world’s most vulnerable. Since the introduction of
the monitoring and reporting mechanism, over 155,000 children have been released
by parties to conflict. The Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention
of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers, supported by Ireland, have made an
important contribution to that progress. For our part, we will continue to advance
our efforts to protect the most vulnerable, which include the initiative we are leading
on strengthening the protection of civilians from humanitarian harm arising from
the use of explosive weapons in populated areas.
However, much remains to be done. The recent Secretary General’s report
on children and armed conflict (S/2020/525) underscores just how prevalent grave
violations against children remain, having verified over 25,000 cases in the past
year. That is unacceptable, as are the 4,400 instances of humanitarian access to
children being denied. More must be done to strengthen the monitoring and reporting
mechanism, which could benefit from further transparency and robust evidencecollection systems. Accountability is essential to our efforts to foster compliance
with international law. We must also guarantee child protection in humanitarian and
conflict situations, ensure reintegration and uphold commitments to the children and
armed conflict agenda.
Addressing the needs of children affected by armed conflict requires a
holistic approach, combining the three pillars of the United Nations — human rights,
peace and security, and development — to ensure support throughout childhood
and adolescence. For that reason, we welcome the French presidency’s focus on
the empowerment of children through access to education, skills and livelihood
opportunities. That is a priority for Ireland, as reflected in our development policy,
A Better World.
A lack of access to education in armed conflict situations not only violates the
rights of children but also limits their future opportunities. In conflict situations,
education is often cast aside or, worse, is a target for warring parties. That furthers
the cycle of poverty and vulnerability. We call on Member States to take concrete
measures to deter the military use of schools by armed forces and groups, in line
with the Safe Schools Declaration, which Ireland supports.
20-0890675/137

S/2020/594

We must acknowledge that girls are at a particular disadvantage in such
situations, as they are 2.5 times more likely to be out of school than boys in countries
affected by conflict, making them increasingly vulnerable to exploitation and abuse.
Those risks are being compounded by the coronavirus disease pandemic, with
school-attending children, particularly girls, at an even greater risk of dropping out
of school permanently.
Earlier this year, Ireland hosted two events on our Drive for Five initiative:
a global call to action to ensure adolescent girls have access to safe, good quality
education. We heard from numerous brave young voices who had escaped conflict
situations to fulfil their educational aspirations. Similarly, we were especially
pleased to listen and learn from the powerful words of our briefer Mariam. Young
people deserve to be heard and engaged in peace and security. We know that, for
children to flourish and to become the leaders and peacebuilders of tomorrow, an
education is essential.
On 17 June, Ireland was elected as a member of the Security Council for the
term 2021-2022. When we assume our seat on the Council next year, we will work
to advance the children and armed conflict agenda, the achievement of peace and
security, and the values of multilateralism.

76/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 40
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Italy to the United Nations
Italy aligns itself with the statement by the Delegation of the European Union,
as well as with the statement by the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict and would like to add the following
remarks in its national capacity.
We thank the presidency of the Security Council for organizing this debate at
a challenging time for the protection of civilians in times of war, which exposes the
most vulnerable in particular. Children continue to be disproportionately affected by
gross violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law, as the latest
Secretary-General’s report on children and armed conflict shows (S/2020/525).
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has further exacerbated the
need to protect children living in emergency situations by strengthening international
cooperation. Italy supports key global actors, such as the United Nations Children’s
Fund, the United Nations Population Fund, the World Health Organization, the Global
Partnership for Education and the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization,
whose action is crucial to ensure that no child is left behind. The Italian Development
Cooperation Agency is consistently working in numerous countries around the
globe to serve children’s needs and provide them with comprehensive, good-quality
services. In order to achieve long-lasting results for the protection of the rights of
children, both during and after conflict, Italy made an open pledge on the occasion
of the thirty-third International Conference of the Red Cross and the Red Crescent,
held in Geneva from 9 to 12 December 2019.
We are willing to further intensify our efforts, in particular by fostering
children’s access to education and health services and facilities and by guaranteeing
that those facilities are protected and respected in accordance with international
humanitarian law. Italy actively promotes references to this key issue in all relevant
international documents and contributes to the global response through multilateral
programmes and initiatives.
This year we celebrate the fifteenth anniversary of the establishment of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism through landmark resolution 1612 (2005). The
mechanism and its related advocacy efforts have contributed to the release of more
than 155,000 children from parties to conflict and to the signing of 32 action plans.
As child protection advisers within peacekeeping missions play a key role in the
framework of the monitoring and reporting mechanism, the relevant posts need to be
duly staffed and budgeted.
Child protection is currently one of the main priorities of the United Nations
peacekeeping architecture, and Italy strongly promotes its mainstreaming into the
mandates of all United Nations peace operations. We welcome the practical guidance
for mediators to protect children in situations of armed conflict and the manual
for child protection staff in United Nations peace operations. We encourage their
broadest possible dissemination and full use in peace and mediation processes.
This year also marks the twentieth anniversary of the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict. We encourage all Member States to sign and ratify the Optional Protocol
with a view to achieving its universality.
Due to COVID-19, schools are being left empty or abandoned, which poses an
increased risk of their becoming military targets or premises, as well as a major risk
of exposing girls to violence, abuse and recruitment. In accordance with international
humanitarian law, Italy considers it fundamental to protect and respect educational
20-0890677/137

S/2020/594

facilities and personnel and condemns all armed attacks against them. We welcome
the General Assembly’s decision to establish 9 September as the International Day
to Protect Education from Attack. We are working with determination to achieve the
universal endorsement of the Safe Schools Declaration, with a particular focus on
gender-based implementation of the Declaration. Italy has endorsed the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child
Soldiers and is strongly convinced that children formerly recruited by armed groups
should be treated primarily as victims, as stated in resolution 2427 (2015), which
Italy co-sponsored.
Italy supports the mandate of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and strongly appreciates her campaign “Act to protect children affected by
armed conflict”, aimed at widening the reach of the previous “Children not Soldiers”
campaign. We will continue to engage and advocate for the respect, protection and
promotion of the rights of children, as they represent the backbone of our present
and future societies.

78/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 41
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations, Ishikane Kimihiro
I would like to begin by thanking France for convening this important meeting.
I also thank the Secretary-General and his Special Representative for the report on
children and armed conflict (S/2020/525).
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict and the fifteenth anniversary of landmark resolution 1612 (2005),
which instituted the monitoring and reporting mechanism on children and armed
conflict. Despite the Council’s continued resolve, it is regrettable that children
affected by armed conflict continue to experience grave violations and abuses.
Japan urges all parties to armed conflict to fully comply with the obligations under
international human rights law, international humanitarian law and relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is currently causing a serious human
security crisis, spreading across borders and striking the most vulnerable segments
of society, in particular children in armed conflict. Japan is alarmed at the lost
opportunity for their education, the increased risk of their recruitment and use, and
the further delay in their release. Japan strongly urges all parties to armed conflict
to immediately respond to the Secretary-General’s call for a ceasefire and ensure
safe, timely and unimpeded humanitarian access to children affected by conflict.
In March, Japan provided $28.8 million in emergency assistance through the
United Nations Children’s Fund to assist developing countries prone to the impact
of COVID-19, including those affected by conflict, to improve children’s access to
quality health services. In April, Japan decided on an additional contribution of over
$68.1 million for UNICEF.
Human security implies that all individuals, in particular vulnerable people,
including children, are entitled to freedom from fear and freedom from want, with
an equal opportunity to enjoy all their rights and fully develop their potential. Under
prolonged crisis caused by armed conflict, children are deprived of all that.
As one of the largest contributing countries, Japan is cooperating with UNICEF
to protect children who fled their homes in Syria and Myanmar. It is also working to
enhance a child-friendly justice system and a gender-sensitive social welfare system
in Yemen. Furthermore, as the largest donor to the humanitarian window of the
Fund to End Violence against Children, Japan has provided substantial assistance
for children affected by armed conflict in African counties. Over 1,900 children
have been released from Boko Haram and military detention facilities, over 70,000
children and caregivers have received psychosocial support and over 42,600 have
been given mine risk education. Japan calls upon other Member States to join in
that endeavour.
Japan is determined to make every effort to achieve target 16.2 under the
Sustainable Development Goals, namely, to end abuse, exploitation, trafficking
and all forms of violence against and torture of children and to realize human
security for all children. Japan renews its unwavering commitment to the protection
and promotion of children’s rights and looks forward to working closely with the
United Nations.

20-0890679/137

S/2020/594

Annex 42
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kyrgyzstan,
Mirgul Moldoisaeva
First of all, let me express my gratitude to France for the invitation to today’s
open debate of the Security Council and to commend it for the placing this very
timely and critical issue on the agenda during its presidency this month. I would
also like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, and the Executive Director of the
United Nations Children’s Fund, Henrietta Fore, for their very informative addresses.
Let me thank the organizers of today’s open debate for the opportunity to speak on
the important topic of children and armed conflict.
Fifteen years ago, the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution
1612 (2005), which established the United Nations-led monitoring and reporting
mechanism to provide timely and reliable information on the recruitment and use
of child soldiers in violation of applicable international law and on other violations
and abuses committed against children affected by armed conflict. By adopting
that important resolution, the Security Council made important progress towards
ensuring that children caught in armed conflict are protected from violence and
related threats to their security and well-being.
Today the monitoring and reporting mechanism and the Working Group on
Children in Armed Conflict play a vital and positive role in ending and preventing
violations against children in situations of armed conflict. We strongly believe that
the Security Council should continue to be actively engaged on issues related to
children and armed conflict and to promote all possible measures fostering the
protection of children affected by armed conflict.
The armed conflicts in different regions today increasingly cause pain and
concern among the international community. In the unstable situations in Syria,
Yemen, Iraq, Libya, Gaza, Africa and Afghanistan, armed conflicts and terrorist
attacks claim the lives of children every day. The advent and rapid spread of
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on a global scale has had a severe impact on the
protection of children in conflict-affected States. We note with deep concern the
continued spread of the coronavirus pandemic in all regions of the world, which
poses a great threat to children’s health and safety. It is obvious that children in
conflict-affected States pay the highest price in the fight against the COVID-19
pandemic. Continuing armed conflicts and the COVID-19 pandemic around the
world highlight the need for timely and effective measures to protect children.
Unfortunately, according to the Secretary-General’s annual report on children
and armed conflict (S/2020/525), education continues to be under attack in conflict
situations. Millions of children in armed conflict lack access to education owing
to attacks on schools. Education, as one of the critical needs of children affected
by armed conflict and a vital element of reintegration programming for children
formerly associated with armed forces or groups and their communities, must be
prioritized by all United Nations Member States. It is obvious that all States need to
take steps to achieve the full realization of the right to education for all children and
to take all feasible measures to protect schools from attack. In that regard, we fully
supported and became a co-sponsor of General Assembly resolution 74/275, on the
International Day to Protect Education from Attack.
We strongly condemn all acts of violence against children. In that regard,
Kyrgyzstan fully supports all initiatives of the international community to resolve
conflicts and protect children. We ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict in 2003
80/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

and are considering adhering to other international documents highlighting the
importance of child protection.
Kyrgyzstan strongly supports the efforts of all Member States, United Nations
entities and other donors to support national institutions, United Nations agencies
and civil society organizations working to implement the monitoring and reporting
mechanism and other related child-protection activities. In that context, Kyrgyzstan
is interested in active cooperation with the United Nations and all international
partners in order to fulfil the requirements of all Security Council resolutions related
to children and armed conflict.

20-0890681/137

S/2020/594

Annex 43
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the
United Nations, Amal Mudallali
Allow me at the outset to congratulate France on assuming the presidency of
the Council for this month and to thank it for organizing this important and timely
debate, at a time when the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic continues
to sweeping across the globe, severely impacting people, including children. I also
would like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, and the Executive Director of the
United Nations Children’s Fund, Henrietta Fore, for their comprehensive briefings,
as well as for their leadership in their respective fields.
Lebanon is proud to have joined the statement supporting the SecretaryGeneral’s appeal for a global ceasefire amid the COVID-19 pandemic. Lebanon,
alongside 168 countries, signed the joint statement “Protect our Children” in response
to the Secretary-General’s call on countries to prioritize children’s education, food,
health and safety amid the pandemic. In the statement, we reiterated our firm
commitment to leave no one behind and no child behind.
Lebanon believes that children should be allowed to be children and should
never be recruited in conflicts or used as soldiers, because they are not soldiers
and should never be exploited as such. Accordingly, Lebanon has been working
on concrete steps to build a better, safer and more secure future for children. In
this respect, let me underline that the Higher Council for Children, a governmental
institution under the Ministry of Social Affairs of Lebanon, is currently working on
updating and streamlining the national action plan to prevent and protect children
associated with armed violence in Lebanon. The action plan was adopted in 2014
in the light of the Secretary-General’s latest annual report on children and armed
conflict (S/2014/339). Since the solution to that problem should be comprehensive in
its approach, the Ministry of Social Affairs and the Higher Council for Children have
been cooperating with international partners, including UNICEF, and the relevant
ministries and institutions — the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Education, the
Lebanese Armed Forces, the internal security forces and the General Directorate
of General Security. The plan aims at providing a legal review that will lead to the
ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on
the involvement of children in armed conflict, which Lebanon signed in 2002. It will
also establish coordination, awareness-raising and capacity-building mechanisms
and will propose rehabilitation and reintegration programmes.
In parallel, the Higher Council for Children, in partnership with various
stakeholders and civil society organizations, is carrying out a number of activities
with the aim of raising awareness and disseminating information about the
involvement of children in armed conflict.
Furthermore, Lebanon is working towards the adoption of national strategies on
counter-terrorism and cybersecurity, which will encompass online recruitment. The
General Directorate of General Security has launched several awareness campaigns
to educate people, and children in particular, on how to protect themselves against
online recruitment attempts by terrorist groups.
With regard to the situation of militants inside Palestinian camps in general
and children in particular, the Lebanese army prioritizes the humanitarian situation,
as well as the interests of civilians and children, and focuses on spreading awareness
and providing facilities to governmental and non-governmental humanitarian
organizations working in the camps and in the field.
82/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

I thank the President again for organizing this important debate and assure him
of Lebanon’s firm commitment to do more and to work with our partners, especially
the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict, to further advance the children and armed conflict agenda.

20-0890683/137

S/2020/594

Annex 44
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Liechtenstein to the
United Nations, Christian Wenaweser
Only a few weeks ago, we celebrated the fifth anniversary of the Safe Schools
Declaration — a political commitment to protect students, teachers and educational
facilities from the worst effects of armed conflict. The current global situation
illustrates that the Declaration is as relevant today as it was five years ago. The
United Nations verified almost 500 attacks on schools in 2019, many of which were
unprovoked. Schools continue to be used for military purposes, thus eroding their
sanctity as safe spaces and exposing schools, teachers and students to attack. Such
attacks violate the right to education and often constitute war crimes or crimes
against humanity.
Depriving children of access to education also has a devastating impact on
sustainable development, in particular Sustainable Development Goal 4, and inflicts
irreparable long-term damage on children, families, communities and societies. It
is therefore vital to ensure inclusive, equitable and good quality education for girls
and boys at all times. It is also important to put children’s voices first, to listen to
them as advocates and agents of change and to empower them when they experience
violations of their rights.
The Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a
communications procedure gives children that voice. It is a reflection of the true
spirit of the Convention and is in the best interests of the child. Liechtenstein has
been among the few States to ratify the Optional Protocol, and we hope that many
others will join us.
For many children in situations of armed conflict, the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic has further deteriorated their already challenging and
devastating reality. It has exacerbated the risk of exploitation and violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law, including human trafficking
and modern slavery. Quarantine, curfews and other restrictions on movement are
weakening protection mechanisms and heightening risks of domestic and sexual
violence for women and girls, as well as men and boys, in crisis-affected communities.
Its socioeconomic effects increase the vulnerability of children to recruitment and
use by armed forces or armed groups, child labour and sexual exploitation and abuse.
The Secretary-General’s call for an immediate global ceasefire is an opportune
moment to put armed conflict on lockdown and to focus together on the fight against
COVID-19 and on protecting the most vulnerable.
Liechtenstein remains deeply concerned at the high occurrence of rape and
other forms of sexual violence against children. Such violence is often underreported
owing to the fear of stigmatization and cultural taboos, in particular when perpetrated
against boys, as also documented by the All Survivors Project. A culture of silence
continues to impede accountability and justice and contributes to further cycles of
violence and persistent harmful gender stereotypes.
We reiterate our strong support for the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict to shed more light on
marginalized victims and survivors of conflict-related sexual violence, in line
with resolution 2467 (2019). Upholding the security, privacy and confidentiality
of survivors and witnesses is key, as are ethical considerations in documenting
and verifying information of child survivors of sexual violence. In the light of the
pandemic, it is all the more important to prioritize the development and remote rollout of gender-specific training tools to conduct the safe and ethical documentation
of cases of conflict-related sexual violence against girls and boys. With global
84/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

guidelines for reporting to the monitoring and reporting mechanism unaltered,
it is vital that monitoring staff be urgently trained to explore options for remote
verification of incidents of violence.
While we acknowledge the challenges the Special Representative’s mandate
is currently facing, we reiterate that the protection of the Office’s independence
and integrity is crucial to its effectiveness and credibility, which also includes the
objective, consistent and transparent practice of listing parties that have committed
grave violations against children, as well as those that have or have not put in place
measures during the reporting period to improve the protection of children.

20-0890685/137

S/2020/594

Annex 45
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Luxembourg to the
United Nations
[Original: French]
Luxembourg aligns itself with the statements submitted by the Delegation
of the European Union and on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and
Armed Conflict.
We thank France for organizing today’s open debate, and the briefers for their
statements and priceless work. We congratulate Belgium on its commitment as Chair
of the Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict.
Fifteen years ago, resolution 1612 (2005) set important benchmarks by
establishing both the Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict and the
monitoring and reporting mechanism. Through the mechanism and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General’s commitment, undeniable progress has
been made. Nevertheless, the current trend is worrisome. Over 25,000 serious
violations against children were recorded in 2019. The coronavirus disease pandemic
is likely to worsen that trend, as children suffer the most from the impact of denial
of access to humanitarian assistance.
Regarding the annexes to the annual report, Luxembourg is concerned at the
premature removal from the lists of the Saudi coalition and the Tatmadaw. In relation
to the former, 222 cases of murder and mutilation of children have been recorded,
while 205 cases of violations have been recorded in connection with the latter.
Accordingly, we join the others who have requested an independent assessment of
the basis on which the addition and removal of entities are decided.
Education remains under attack, with schools being destroyed or closed,
teachers threatened or killed, sometimes in front of their students, and many
children denied access to education. The Sahel region has seen a significant rise in
such attacks. Over 3,300 schools have been closed, thus affecting nearly 650,000
children. Luxembourg notes that Burkina Faso and Cameroon have been added to
the list of situations of concern.
In West Africa, Luxembourg’s cooperation agency has set education and
vocational training as its priority, providing particular support to a funding system
for training and specialization. Education is an essential element that makes children
less vulnerable to forced recruitment.
In this twentieth anniversary year of the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict,
Luxembourg reiterates its full support to the mandate of Special Representative
Gamba de Potgieter and will continue to provide support to her office in Brussels.
The Special Representative’s work and recommendations must be taken into account,
especially in the planning and formulation of peacekeeping mandates. It would be
appropriate for the Special Representative to be invited more systematically to brief
the Security Council on specific geographic situations.
Luxembourg has endorsed the Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, the Safe Schools Declaration and
the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers, and encourages all Member States to do the same.

86/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 46
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Malta to the United Nations
Malta thanks the French presidency of the Security Council for organizing
this important open debate on children and armed conflict.
Malta fully aligns itself with the statements submitted by the European Union
and on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
Malta is pleased to note that progress has been made since the adoption of the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement
of children in armed conflict, 20 years ago, and of resolution 1612 (2005), 15 years
ago. However, we remain gravely concerned that children continue to be subjected
to multiple forms of intersectional risks and vulnerabilities. The coronavirus disease
pandemic has only heightened the gravity of the situation, and Malta avails itself of
this opportunity to once again reiterate its support for the Secretary-General’s call
for a global ceasefire.
Malta thanks the Secretary-General for his report on children and armed
conflict (S/2020/525). It is shocking that the United Nations has verified 25,000
grave violations against children and 7,747 instances of recruitment of children.
We stress that the killing, maiming, torture and rape of children are completely
unacceptable, and the fact that such cases are happening all around the globe further
underscores the need for collective action.
We strongly condemn all attacks on schools and hospitals, which are in
complete violation of international humanitarian law and show the utmost contempt
for human life. Accountability, especially in such cases, is of crucial importance,
as those crimes cannot go unpunished. In that connection, Malta also highlights the
role of international mechanisms, including the International Criminal Court.
We are proud to have co-sponsored the General Assembly resolution
establishing 9 September as the International Day to Protect Education from
Attack (resolution 74/275), as we stand convinced that education is not only an
investment in the future of individual children but also an investment in society and
international peace.
Malta joins Special Representative Gamba de Potgieter in urging the inclusion
of child protection provisions, such as securing the release of all children associated
with parties to conflict, prioritizing their reintegration and immediately ending
their recruitment and abuse. In that connection, we would like to underline the
psychological impact that conflict has on children and the need to make sure that
the mental consequences of conflict are duly addressed. It is crucial that we do not
give up on children who have been involved with armed groups and exposed to
extremist ideologies.

20-0890687/137

S/2020/594

Annex 47
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Mexico to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Mexico thanks France for convening this open debate and recognizes the work
of Belgium as Chair of the Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his report on the issue (S/2020/525).
This open debate is taking place as part of the fifteenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), which established the monitoring and reporting
mechanism and the Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict, and the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict. We welcome the
recent accessions of the Gambia and Myanmar to the Optional Protocol and call on
all States that have yet to do so to consider ratifying that instrument.
We recognize that, since the establishment of the mechanism, significant
progress has been made in releasing minors from armed groups and adopting
action plans and specific recommendations, as well as that the Working Group
has conducted field visits. Those achievements are the result of the effective work
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General Virginia Gamba de Potgieter,
who has also placed special emphasis on the urgent need to finance sustainable and
comprehensive reintegration programmes with a gender focus.
During its most recent participation in the Security Council, Mexico chaired
the Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict and led the Working Group’s
first field visit to a country on its agenda, namely, Nepal. The well-being of children
remains of the highest priority for Mexico; accordingly, during our next term as an
elected member of the Council, we will continue to promote initiatives that prevent
their suffering.
We welcome the presidential statement, adopted in February, which
incorporates the protection of minors across relevant activities in the areas of conflict
prevention and sustainable peace (S/PRST/2020/3), as well as the practical guidance
for mediators to protect children in situations of armed conflict.
The Secretary-General’s recent report describes the challenges in
implementing the children and armed conflict agenda. The recording of over 25,000
serious violations against children in 19 situations is particularly dramatic. The
number of recorded violations against children — murder, mutilation, recruitment
and use of child soldiers, kidnapping and sexual violence, which disproportionately
affects girls, continues to be used as a weapon of war and, because it is taboo,
discourages victims from speaking out — is abhorrent. The fact that nearly 7,500
children, including some as young as 6 years old, have been recruited and used by
armed groups warrants unequivocal condemnation. Moreover, justice mechanisms
must be strengthened so that such crimes do not go unpunished. Victim assistance
mechanisms must also be strengthened so that they may cope with the serious
physical and emotional toll of those atrocities.
Mexico is concerned at the growing number of incidents of denial of
humanitarian assistance, particularly by non-State actors, where minors have
been affected, and at the persistent attacks on schools and hospitals by the various
parties to conflict. All such actions constitute serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, which are unacceptable and abominable and
must not remain unpunished.

88/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Regarding our hemisphere, as indicated in the Secretary-General’s report, we
acknowledge the decrease in cases of recruitment in Colombia, as well as the policies
adopted towards the end of 2019 by that country’s Presidential Council for Human
Rights to prevent the recruitment and use of children and sexual violence against
children. However, we note with concern that some armed groups, such as the Ejército
de Liberación Nacional and dissident groups of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia, continue to recruit children. This must stop immediately.
In the light of the coronavirus disease pandemic, there is a need to pay greater
attention to the impact of the pandemic on child solder reintegration programmes,
which have been suspended, partly because of a lack of access to health services. It
is vital to provide the necessary psychosocial support needed by children who are
removed from the ranks of armed groups. Those are essential services that should
not be interrupted. Universal health coverage cannot leave behind children affected
by armed conflict.
In Mexico’s view, it is fundamental that human beings, especially children, are
put at the centre of our policies. The needs and aspirations of youth have a common
denominator: education. Unfortunately, that right remains one of the main casualties
of armed conflict. The United Nations should redouble its efforts to ensure that
education, as both a prevention and reintegration tool, can be accessed.
Therefore, we call for the relevant parties to: implement and observe
international humanitarian law and human rights law, especially child protection
laws, and strengthen accountability for all violations of serious violations against
children; promote measures to ensure safe, timely and unhindered humanitarian
access with a view to facilitating humanitarian assistance and child protection
services; enhance support to the monitoring and reporting mechanism on grave
violations of children’s rights in situations of armed conflict, which is necessary in
order to continue ascertaining that the applicable legal framework is used effectively
on the ground — we underscore the efforts to document cases of release, recruitment
and reintegration, while recognizing that improvements are needed in the areas of
training, disaggregated data and statistics; and strengthen peacekeeping mandates
through child protection advisers and support reintegration programmes with a
gender focus that also envisage mental health and psychosocial support. Without
comprehensive programmes, stigmatization can have serious consequences on the
development of children, including their recruitment.
As a member of the Security Council for the period 2021-2022, Mexico will
spare no effort to continue moving forward this priority agenda.

20-0890689/137

S/2020/594

Annex 48
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Morocco to the United Nations
My delegation would like to thank the French presidency of the Security
Council for the month of June 2020 for organizing today’s open Security Council
video-teleconference on a very important question — children and armed conflict —
as we are celebrating this year the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement
of children in armed conflict. We would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba,
and the Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Henrietta Fore, for their comprehensive
and enlightening insights.
Twenty years ago, the world committed to taking action on combating the
use of children in armed conflict. The adoption of the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict was a milestone that contributed to the release of more than 145,000 boys
and girls from armed groups and the prevention of the recruitment and use of millions
of children around the world. For two decades, tangible progress has been made in
the protection of children in situations of armed conflict, notably with the adoption
of international standards for the protection of children and the implementation of
strategies and programs to protect war-affected children.
However, children continue to be the primary victims of conflict. The last few
years have unfortunately been marked by an alarming recurrence and intensification
of conflicts with devastating effects on civil populations, including children. With
the proliferation of conflicts, we no longer count the situations where children are
recruited and exploited by armed groups. Several statistics are presented, but, in
fact, no one knows the real number of children victims of war. Even if they have been
released after being abducted, many have experienced horrific scenes during their
detention that have been traumatic for their psychological development. How can we
expect them to be able to overcome their suffering and start their lives over? These
children need our support as a priority.
The international community would benefit from a global, comprehensive,
strategic and coordinated approach to this challenge consisting of concrete and
immediate actions that not only tackle the ongoing situations of armed conflicts,
but also emphasize the prevention aspect. At the same time, the approach should be
pragmatic, combining both incentive and deterrent measures, particularly in terms
of accountability and the fight against impunity.
The Kingdom of Morocco condemns in the strongest terms all forms of violence
against children, their abduction by armed groups, their use as human shields or as
hostages, and their recruitment in refugee camps. Morocco has assiduously joined
international efforts to end the involvement of children in armed conflict. It has
acceded to all the international instruments relating to the rights of the child and was
among the first countries to sign and ratify the Optional Protocol on the involvement
of children in armed conflict, as well as the Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, also known as the Paris Principles.
As part of the extension of its commitments to protecting the rights of children
wherever they are, the Kingdom of Morocco endorsed the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers,
the Safe Schools Declaration and other instruments highlighting the importance
of child protection for a range of related issues. The Kingdom of Morocco thanks
Ms. Virginia Gamba for presenting the annual report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2020/525) and welcomes the removal of the Coalition
90/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

to Support Legitimacy in Yemen from the list of groups violating children’s rights
annexed to the report.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Morocco condemns in the strongest terms
all forms of violence against children, in all contexts and under all circumstances,
including in armed conflicts. The importance that my country attaches to the rights
of the child at the international level is manifest, in particular, in its presidency of
the UNICEF Executive Board in 2019 and its vice-presidency of the Board this year.
I take this opportunity to reiterate to Ms. Fore and UNICEF our great appreciation
for the remarkable work that she and her staff are doing and for their selflessness in
promoting the well-being of all children around the world, despite the difficulties,
with the ultimate objective of leaving no child behind.

20-0890691/137

S/2020/594

Annex 49
Statement by Permanent Representative of Myanmar to the
United Nations, Hau Do Suan
My delegation welcomes the delisting of the Tatmadaw — the Myanmar
Armed Forces — from the violation of recruitment and use of children, which is
mentioned in this year’s annual report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/525). We
thank the Secretary-General for giving due recognition of Myanmar’s commitment
to and efforts aimed at ending violations against children. We shall continue to work
relentlessly to fulfil our strong commitment to ending all violations against children
and building a safe and bright future for them.
Over the past eight years, Myanmar has taken many steps to prevent and end
recruitment and use of children. One significant action was the recent ratification of
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement
of children in armed conflict, following, in July 2019, the enactment of a new Child
Rights Law. It demonstrates our commitment to aligning our national policies and
regulations with the Convention.
The new Child Rights Law prohibits all forms of violence against children as
well as the recruitment of persons under the age of 18. The Law provides stronger
legal protection for children affected by armed conflict and criminalizes the six
grave violations against children. In January 2019, the Government established an
interministerial committee for the prevention of the six grave violations during
armed conflict.
Since 2012, over 1,000 child soldiers have been released and reintegrated into
their communities. The Government provides each former child soldier with onetime financial assistance as well as educational and livelihood support to help them
reintegrate into society.
In collaboration with the International Labour Organization (ILO) to end
forced labour, the Government has established a complaint mechanism to prevent
underage recruitment for military service. Recently, in June this year, Myanmar
ratified the ILO Minimum Age Convention, 1973. In line with the Joint Action
Plan, the Tatmadaw issued three command orders prohibiting recruitment and use
of minors in 2019. It also issued a command order on rules of engagement in 2017.
With regard to the grave violations, the Government has adopted a national
action plan on the prevention of killing, maiming, and sexual violence against
children in armed conflict. As part of the action plan, the Government will soon
be launching nationwide awareness-raising activities. The country task force on
monitoring and reporting will be able to play an important role to provide technical
assistance in the implementation of the national action plan.
Despite tremendous challenges posed by increased armed clashes in Rakhine
state, the Government has scaled up its efforts to grant humanitarian access to
displaced people, especially women and children. The World Food Programme
and the International Committee of the Red Cross have been granted permission
to provide food and emergency items to affected people in Rakhine state and
southern parts of Chin state. The Government’s response to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic adheres to the principle of leaving no one behind.
Myanmar welcomes the policy brief entitled The Impact of COVID-19
on children. My delegation also supported the joint statement in response to the
Secretary-General’s call on countries to prioritize children’s safety, education amid
the COVID-19 pandemic. In response to the devastating effects of the pandemic on
vulnerable people, especially children, Myanmar has reinforced domestic preventive
92/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

mechanisms and enhanced cooperation with international partners, including the
United Nations.
On 9 May, in response to the Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire,
the Tatmadaw announced a three-month nationwide unilateral ceasefire to help fight
the COVID-19 pandemic. The unilateral ceasefire will be applied to all areas except
where terrorist groups have taken positions.
The Government is also supporting and encouraging engagement between
the country task force for monitoring and reporting and the armed ethnic groups
signatories to the Nationwide Ceasefire Agreement (NCA) to prevent recruitment
and use of children. Efforts are being made to find a lasting solution to the ongoing
armed conflict through political means. During the third session of the Union Peace
Conference — the 21st Century Panglong Conference — an article prohibiting the
six grave violations was adopted as part of the NCA.
I thank Special Representative Gamba and her Office, UNICEF and the United
Nations country team for their commendable efforts and crucial contributions in
the successful implementation of the joint action plan. We also appreciate the work
of the Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, with
which we will continue to cooperate. We are committed to maintaining and further
strengthening the existing mutual understanding, trust and cooperation between
Myanmar and the United Nations in our common efforts aimed at ending in the near
future all grave violations against children.

20-0890693/137

S/2020/594

Annex 50
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Namibia to the
United Nations, Neville Gertze
I congratulate France on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of June 2020 and thank the President of the Council for
organizing this important annual open debate on children and armed conflict.
I would also like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict and the Executive Director of UNICEF, as well
as the civil society representative, for their insightful briefings. I further thank the
Secretary-General for his annual report on children and armed conflict (S/2020/525).
As we mark 15 years since the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), which
established the United Nations-led monitoring and reporting mechanism and the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, it is important to recognize the
progress that has been made in this field since 2005. Tangible results have been
achieved to prevent violations against children in situations of armed conflict:
32 action plans have been signed, more than 155,000 children have been released
from parties to conflict, and 12 armed forces and groups have been removed from
the annexes to the report of the Secretary-General through the implementation
and completion of such action plans. The Security Council Working Group has
also conducted essential work, notably in the adoption of over 60 country-specific
recommendations on children and armed conflict.
Nevertheless, despite this progress and the existence of relevant legal norms
around the world, grave violations against children in conflicts continue unabated.
As outlined in the latest report of the Secretary-General, in 2019, the United Nations
verified over 25,000 grave violations against children in 19 conflicts. Some 7,747
children were verified as having been recruited and used, mostly by non-State actors.
Some 10,173 children were verified as having been killed and maimed.
The report of the Secretary-General further highlights 735 verified cases of
rape or other forms of sexual violence committed against children. The SecretaryGeneral warns that these crimes are vastly underreported. In this regard, we reiterate
our support and commitment to the various Security Council resolutions adopted
under the women and peace and security agenda, including, most recently, resolution
2467 (2019), which, inter alia, encourages Member States to ensure that prevention
of and responses to sexual violence in conflict is non-discriminatory and specific
and respects the rights and prioritizes the needs of survivors, including vulnerable
or targeted groups.
I take this opportunity to remind States Members of the United Nations of
the importance of accountability for all crimes committed against children. As the
report of the Secretary-General warns,
“[t]he lack of protection, of holistic services for survivors and of accountability
mechanisms disincentivize survivors, their families and witnesses from
reporting violations” (S/2020/525, para. 10).
As an international community, we must do far better in this domain.
Namibia also wishes to highlight the increase in attacks against schools. As
the concept note prepared by France highlights,
“[a]ccess to safe, quality education is one of the critical needs of children
affected by armed conflict. It is fundamental both to children’s well-being and
to the fulfilment of their most basic rights”.
94/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Attacks against schools, and therefore their closure, are fertile ground for the forced
recruitment of young people by armed groups. The impact of the coronavirus disease
pandemic on schools and students cannot be underestimated either.
Many of the parties listed in the annex to the Secretary-General’s report
for not having put in place measures to improve the protection of children during
the reporting period are from the African continent. As part of the African Union
(AU) Agenda 2063 and its ten-year implementation plans, the Heads of State and
Government decided in the AU’s Fiftieth Anniversary Solemn Declaration, dated
26 May 2013, “not to bequeath the burden of conflicts to the next generation of
Africans” and therefore to silence the guns by 2020 through the African Union
Master Road Map of Practical Steps to Silence the Guns in Africa by Year 2020.
As the aforementioned numbers demonstrate, ensuring the silencing of the guns
on the African continent is essential, most notably to protect children and future
generations of the continent. Namibia takes this opportunity to acknowledge and
welcome the parties that have put in place during the reporting period measures
aimed at improving the protection of children, notably the State actors from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia and South Sudan.
This year also marks the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict. Namibia ratified this all-encompassing, vital Optional Protocol in
2002. Namibia has taken other important steps to ensure the protection of children
in armed conflict. In August 1999, under the Namibian presidency of the Security
Council, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1261 (1999) — the first
resolution of the Council on the targeting of children in armed conflict, including
the recruitment and use of child soldiers (see S/PV.4037).
Furthermore, article 15 of the 1990 Namibian Constitution enshrines children’s
rights. In particular, article 15.2 notes that
“[c]hildren are entitled to be protected from economic exploitation and shall
not be employed in or required to perform work that is likely to be hazardous
or to interfere with their education, or to be harmful to their health or physical,
mental, spiritual, moral or social development”.
Namibia has also finalized the operationalization of the Child Care and Protection
Act 3 of 2015 to further give effect to the rights of children as contained in the
Namibian Constitution and international agreements binding on Namibia.
In conclusion, I wish to underscore that ensuring the protection of the lives
and futures of children affected by armed conflict is not only the right thing to do,
but it is also in the interests of all. Children represent the future. We must ensure
that they are protected.

20-0890695/137

S/2020/594

Annex 51
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Nepal to the
United Nations, Amrit Bahadur Rai
I wish to begin by congratulating France on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of June. I welcome the convening of this highlevel video-teleconference on children and armed conflict.
I would also like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, for presenting
the report of the Secretary-General on the topic before us (S/2020/525). We also
extend our thanks to Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director of UNICEF, and the
civil society representative for their briefings.
Children are among the most vulnerable population groups in conflicts and
crises. Because of the profound effects of conflicts and crises on their physical and
mental well-being, they may easily become victims. During conflicts, they may
be killed, maimed, sexually abused, abducted or even recruited as child soldiers.
Furthermore, they may be denied their rights to education and health and access to
humanitarian support.
The report of the Secretary-General highlights that in 2019 there were over
25,000 cases of grave violations against children. It underlines the serious concerns
about the violations of international humanitarian law and international human
rights law.
During such crises as the coronavirus disease pandemic, children are
disproportionately affected. They bear unfathomable losses due to disruptions in
education systems and other socioeconomic impacts. Such impacts have long-lasting
effects not only on the lives of this generation but also on future generations.
Nepal stresses the need for adequate resources and international cooperation
for protecting children and ensuring them better lives, education and well-being.
Children should be protected during both conflicts and crises alike. They are an
important pillar of all peaceful and prosperous societies.
Nepal has always supported international efforts aimed at ending the
involvement of children in armed conflict. It is party to the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict and to the Paris Principles and Commitments on Children Associated with
Armed Forces or Armed Groups. Nepal also welcomes the “Practical guidance
for mediators to protect children in situations of armed conflict”, launched by the
Secretary-General on 12 February 2020.
Nepal’s Children’s Act (2018) has ensured all rights for children, requires
the State to make necessary arrangements for their basic needs and includes the
maintenance, protection, health and education of children in need of special
protection. The Act also guarantees that no child shall be deployed in the army,
the police or in any armed group, or be used for armed conflict or political purpose
directly or indirectly. It prohibits an attack on or hindrance to the operation and
management of any school, including the place, services or facilities of schools,
which are always to be used for the best interests of children, without excuse during
times of armed conflict or in any adverse situation whatsoever.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the importance of providing children
with education, skills and livelihood opportunities in order to help them build a
dignified life. This is also crucial for the success of peacebuilding and prevention
efforts as well as for ensuring a peaceful today and tomorrow.
96/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 52
Statement by the High-level Focal Point for Children and Armed
Conflict and the Head of Human Security of NATO, Clare Hutchinson
I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to address this body on the occasion of
today’s open debate on children and armed conflict.
I would first like to acknowledge the considerable and impactful work that the
Security Council has done over the years through its Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, and to note that much has been achieved.
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization has long recognized the fact that
protecting children in armed conflict is an important aspect of any comprehensive
strategy to resolve conflict and a key component of durable peace and security. NATO
has mainstreamed child protection into its work since the 2012 NATO summit, held in
Chicago, with a view towards practical, field-oriented measures to address conflictrelated violations against children. This approach was given concrete structure with
the adoption by the North Atlantic Council of the Protection of Children in Armed
Conflict — the Way Forward policy in 2015, and was reaffirmed by the Alliance in
its most recent summit, in Brussels in 2018. NATO is also considering avenues to
strengthen its policy framework on children and armed conflict in the near future,
in the light of lessons learned.
However, a key measure of any successful policy is its impact on the ground
in places where children are in harm’s way. Crucial to impactful action to protect
conflict-affected children are both awareness by our own forces and experts, on the
one hand, and the full integration of child protection in our work with partners, on
the other hand. Together with the United Nations, we have developed practical, fieldoriented measures to address conflict-related violations against children, including
adopting standard operating procedures for monitoring the six grave violations and
an updated training package for our troops on children and armed conflict, which
should be released shortly.
In Afghanistan, NATO’s Resolute Support Mission, a non-combat mission,
is established to train, advise and assist the Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces. The Mission continues to prioritize child-protection principles in its training
and capacity-building and played an active part in the development of the 2017
Afghan National Army child-protection policy. Since 2016, a senior child protection
adviser in place in our Resolute Support Mission in Afghanistan has undertaken
policy advocacy with all Afghan security forces, ensuring that child protection is
addressed. NATO officials continue to raise the issue of the protection of children in
their political and military engagements with senior officials.
While we are proud of what we have achieved, there is still much to do. We
continue to reach out to the Afghan security forces and our United Nations and
non-governmental organization partners to ensure that training and policy goals to
better protect children are maintained and deepened and to reinforce our political
commitment.
Fifteen years ago this month, also under a French presidency of the Security
Council, the world stood up and adopted resolution 1612 (2005), making a choice
to protect conflict-affected children around the world not just in statements but
in concrete action (see S/PV.5235). NATO stands with the entire international
community in recognizing that we all have a collective responsibility in guaranteeing
that all children everywhere are protected, not only in word but also in deed.

20-0890697/137

S/2020/594

Annex 53
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
The Nordic countries — Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and Norway —
are deeply concerned about the continued increase in verified violations and abuses
against children, including the denial of humanitarian access. This trend can and
must be reversed.
First and foremost, parties to conflict must respect international law, including
international humanitarian law and human rights law. Violations and abuses against
children during armed conflict have immediate and long-term negative impacts not
only on children themselves but also on their communities and societies. Equally,
protecting children and upholding their rights in situations of armed conflict
contributes to conflict prevention and peacebuilding by supporting successful
reconciliation, reintegration and development.
Education is a human right that is guaranteed in international human rights
law. It is fundamental for human, social and economic development and a key element
to achieving lasting peace and sustainable development. Continued access to safe
education can help protect children and youth from the impacts of armed conflict.
We must all do more to provide and protect education in emergencies, protracted
crises and conflict, with a special emphasis on girls’ access to education.
The Safe Schools Declaration is an important protection tool in this context,
with its primary objective of preventing the military use of schools and stopping
attacks on schools during armed conflicts. As we celebrate its fifth anniversary, we
are pleased that 104 States have so far endorsed the Declaration. We welcome the
concrete steps endorsing States are taking to implement the Safe Schools Declaration,
and we encourage all States to join and implement it.
The Nordic countries also remain particularly concerned about the continued
silence and stigma related to sexual and gender-based violence. We must speak openly
and frankly about these terrible crimes and their impacts if we are to truly combat
and prevent them. To this end, at the international conference on ending sexual and
gender-based violence in humanitarian crises held in Oslo last year, States made
significant pledges for increased funding and renewed action. We urge all States and
organizations to translate these commitments into action.
We must also recommit to ensuring the successful reintegration of children
formerly associated with armed or violent groups. This is not only in the best
interests of the child but also an important contribution to building sustainable and
peaceful societies. The human rights of children formerly associated with armed or
violent groups must be fully respected, in line with international law, including the
Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Resolution 2427 (2018) also provides an important framework, as it stresses
accountability for all violations and abuses against children, not just the gravest
crimes. As such, the resolution represents a new standard for the prevention of
human rights violations and abuses and violations of international humanitarian law.
It is now up to all of us to translate this resolution into reality.
Children involved in armed conflict need not only comprehensive support, care
and protection, but also justice. Securing accountability for conflict-related crimes
involving children is of the utmost importance, and we would like to recognize the
important work of the Justice Rapid Response initiative, which is a global facility
that provides rapidly deployable specialized justice experts, and thank these experts
for their efforts.
98/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict (S/2020/525) and wish to highlight the importance we attach to a transparent
process that ensures all relevant States and parties to conflict are included in the
report and its annexes. In addition, we highlight that the mere signing of an action
plan should not form the basis for a delisting in the Secretary-General’s report.
We reiterate our strong support for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Gamba de Potgieter, who
plays an essential role at the global, regional and national levels by advocating
children’s protection and the rights of the child and providing practical guidance, in
particular the “Practical guidance for mediators to protect children in situations of
armed conflict”, which was launched by the Office of the Special Representative in
February 2020, with the support of Sweden and Belgium.
This issue has remained on our agenda for far too long. Parties to conflict and
the international community can and must do more to protect the increasing number
of children and young people affected by armed conflict and to ensure that they be
included in peacebuilding and development processes. The Nordic countries again
urge all States Members of the United Nations to ensure that children in armed
conflict get the attention, protection and respect for their human rights to which they
are entitled.

20-0890699/137

S/2020/594

Annex 54
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Pakistan to the
United Nations
We thank the Permanent Mission of France for convening today’s very
important Security Council open debate via video-teleconference on the issue of
children and armed conflict. We also thank Ms. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms.
Henrietta Fore, Executive Director of UNICEF, and the civil society representative
for their insightful briefings.
In the last few decades, particularly after the adoption of resolution 1612
(2005) and the Secretary-General’s effective outreach efforts, a comprehensive
normative framework has been developed in protecting children’s rights. As a
result, the theme of children and armed conflict has been mainstreamed into the
Security Council’s work. The work done by the Special Representative and regular
monitoring, reporting and action plans have all helped. Yet a lot more still needs
to be done. Despite progress, violations and abuses of international law affecting
children are rampant, and this disturbing trend shows no signs of abating.
The facts revealed in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/525) are
stark. Children remain at the front line of armed conflicts around the world. The
tragedy of children being used and abused in, for and by armed conflicts continues
unabated, as the United Nations has verified that over 25,000 such grave violations
took place last year alone. Moreover, the ongoing coronavirus disease pandemic
has further exacerbated difficulties in the protection of children affected by armed
conflicts, with humanitarian agencies finding it difficult to conduct their work
safely. Unfortunately, the scale and intensity of today’s conflicts are stretching our
capacity to protect children. Particularly in situations of foreign occupation and
alien domination, we are witnessing the worst form of atrocities against children.
Nowhere is this grim reality starker than in today’s Indian-occupied Jammu
and Kashmir. In this regard, I wish to draw the Council’s attention to the latest report
of the Secretary General, which has expressed deep concerns about the continued
use of torture, pellet guns and illegal detention against children in occupied Jammu
and Kashmir by the Indian security forces.
The Secretary-General’s report also raises alarm on the
“the [illegal] detention of [Kashmiri] children, including their arrest during
night raids, internment at army camps, torture in detention and detention
without charge or due process” (S/2020/525, para. 204).
Accordingly, the report cites in particular 68 verified instances where children
between the ages of 9 and 17 were detained by Indian security services in Jammu
and Kashmir on national-security-related charges. In view of these serious concerns,
the Secretary-General has urged the Indian Government to immediately end such
practices and take preventive measures to protect children, including by ending the
use of pellets against children.
We are not surprised by the findings in the Secretary-General’s report. Over
the past 70 years, succeeding generations of Kashmiri children have suffered the
brutality of the occupying Indian forces. In the wake of India’s illegal and unilateral
actions of 5 August 2019, these atrocities have been redoubled. Even after 10 months,
the Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmir remains under a digital and physical
lockdown. Harrowing and spine-chilling stories abound — of widespread torture
and arbitrary arrests and of how thousands of people, including children, have been
removed from their homes by occupation forces in the dead of the night, taken away
100/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

without a trace. Some have even been extrajudicially killed in so-called cordonand-search operations and fake encounters. The worsening situation and increased
attacks against children in Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmir as reported in the
Secretary-General’s report calls for the Security Council’s intervention in the form of
holding India accountable for its clear grave breaches of international humanitarian
law and war crimes in Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmir.
Pakistan fully supports the mandate of the Special Representative, which is
adequate for dealing with situations of armed conflict. While the mandate does not
need accretion, we would like to see the political consensus around it strengthened.
We firmly believe that the legal parameters of the mandate established by Security
Council resolutions must be respected. Our singular focus should remain on situations
of armed conflict. In this context, we wish to state for the record that the references
in the report of the Secretary- General to certain situations in Pakistan are not within
the purview of the mandate established to address children and armed conflict. We
hope that this principle will be kept in mind in the preparation of future reports.

20-08906101/137

S/2020/594

Annex 55
Statement by the Permanent Observer Mission of the State of
Palestine to the United Nations
The annual report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2020/525) reflects the tragic reality of children around the world who, living in
situations of armed conflict, continue to be subjected to shocking human rights
violations and abuses and to violations of international humanitarian law. Despite
strong laws in place, implementation and accountability remain largely absent. As
a result, the number of children who are at risk of being killed, maimed, recruited,
subject to sexual violence or abductions, and of suffering from attacks on schools
and hospitals and the denial of humanitarian access continues to rise.
This same lack of implementation and absence of accountability has caused
exponentially growing suffering for generations of Palestinian children living under
Israeli occupation in the occupied State of Palestine, including East Jerusalem.
Tragically, the situation of Palestinian children is very relevant as we discuss the
importance of the monitoring and reporting mechanism established by the Security
Council in 2005 pursuant to resolution 1612 (2005), for its purpose was not only
to gather and document evidence on the six grave violations but also to provide a
mechanism for accountability. Unfortunately, despite the creation of the monitoring
and reporting mechanism and Member States’ support for it, and despite continual
reports of grave violations against Palestinian children by Israel, the occupying
Power, the children and armed conflict framework has grossly failed to foster
accountability or the compliance by the Israeli occupying forces with international
child-protection standards.
Unquestionably, the international community’s unwillingness to enforce
international law when it comes to Israel has only fuelled and emboldened its
lawlessness and the culture of impunity in the Government and the occupying
forces. We reiterate that, according to the established criteria and the thorough
documentation available to the Security Council, the perpetration of such violations
and crimes warrants that Israel, its army and its settlers be put on the list of parties
that commit grave violations against children.
The absence of such inclusion has not only perpetuated an environment of
impunity leading to the loss of more Palestinian children’s lives, but it has also
undermined the credibility of the list, exposing it to the criticism of politicization.
Similar criticism can be lodged against the report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict. In the section on Israel and the State of Palestine, the
report continues to blatantly ignore the prevailing context of military occupation.
We continue to appeal to the Secretary-General and the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to rectify this omission in future reports.
The State of Palestine will continue to exert all efforts aimed at protecting
Palestinian children as we wait for the international community, including the Security
Council, to finally carry out its obligations under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, respect the relevant United Nations resolutions
and muster the political will to act immediately and without selectivity in order to
stop precluding the protection of Palestinian children under Israeli occupation. This
starts and ends with holding Israel accountable.

102/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 56
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Peru to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
We would like to thank the French Presidency for convening today’s open
debate. We welcome the valuable briefings by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba
de Potgieter, the Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Henrietta Fore, and the
representative of civil society.
Peru wishes to highlight its commitment to the children and armed conflict
agenda. Children are one of the most vulnerable segments of the population because
of their defencelessness and dependence, both of which greatly increase during
armed conflicts. Accordingly, we condemn all forms of violence against children,
including physical and psychological violence.
We wish to highlight the anniversary of several important milestones in this
agenda: the twentieth anniversary of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict; the fifteenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), which created the monitoring
and reporting mechanism and established the Security Council Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict; and the fifth anniversary of the Safe Schools
Declaration. These and all other instruments aimed at protecting children in armed
conflict demonstrate the international community’s interest in the problem.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, we cannot but express great concern about the
recurrence of new cases of grave violations of children’s rights every year. We note
with concern that the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/525) once again
describes an increase in the number of such violations, by both State and non-State
actors. We also wish to express great concern about cases of sexual violence, sexual
slavery and forced marriage, which continue to be used as a tactic of war and which
disproportionately affects girls.
As part of the general civilian population, children are subjects of international
law and are entitled to minimum standards of protection under humanitarian law.
Furthermore, they also enjoy rights pursuant to specific human rights instruments.
In that context, we would like to highlight Common Article 1 of the four Geneva
Conventions of 1949, on the obligation to respect and ensure respect for the
Conventions’ provisions. It is therefore incumbent on the Security Council, and
on all States Members of the United Nations, to make a greater commitment to
implementing urgent and effective measures to reverse the trend towards increased
violations and ensure the due protection of all children during armed conflicts, in
accordance with the obligations established under international law.
Emphasis should be placed on preventive measures to stop the statistics from
continuing to rise, on rehabilitation actions to help the recovery of victims of these
grave violations and ensure their future, and on corrective measures involving
exemplary sanctions against the perpetrators to prevent these situations from
recurring. Peru agrees with the Secretary-General’s call to all actors involved —
listed and unlisted — to take all the necessary and effective measures to end and
prevent the grave violations described in the report.
The serious effects of the coronavirus disease pandemic throughout the
world should lead us to reflect on the importance of complying with the obligations
of international humanitarian law, which guarantees the immunity of civilian
infrastructure, especially schools and hospitals. Our vulnerability to the impacts
20-08906103/137

S/2020/594

of disease and climate change should lead us to strengthen the protection of this
infrastructure and ensure that the provision of services is not disrupted. If we do
not ensure this, societies affected by armed conflict risk dangerously reversing
their development and pushing their populations into conflict, thereby creating a
threat to international peace and security. In this regard, Peru resolutely supports
the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire to help contain the coronavirus.
We welcome the efforts of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict aimed at making progress on the children
and armed conflict agenda. We also stress the priority that the Secretary-General
attaches to this issue as a vital element in building sustainable peace.
Finally, in the framework of its firm commitment to the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, Peru will continue to work constructively
in favour of the children and armed conflict agenda, in order to ensure their wellbeing and guarantee the exercise of their fundamental rights.

104/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 57
Statement by the Chargée d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission
of the Philippines to the United Nations, Kira Christianne
Danganan Azucena
The Philippines commends the French presidency of the Security Council for
organizing today’s timely debate on a very important agenda item. Indeed, resolution
1612 (2005) may be considered a true United Nations success story for bringing
about important breakthroughs in child protection around the world. We also thank
the briefers for their enlightening statements.
Philippine law and Philippine society hold children in the highest regard. Even
before they are born, the Philippine Constitution already protects them. Children
take pride of place in the family. Their health, education, well-being and future are
important concerns of their families and of the State. The Philippines maintains that
a State without children is a State on the brink of extinction.
Children do not belong on the battlefield. They have absolutely no role in
conflict. They belong in school; they must be nurtured and reared to be future leaders.
Children are “zones of peace”, protected from all forms of abuse and violence, never
to know first-hand the horrors of war.
Since 2002, the Philippines has established procedures for the handling and
treatment of children involved in armed conflict. The Juvenile Justice and Welfare
Act of 2006 contains provisions to address the needs of children involved in armed
conflict who have committed acts that will make them criminally liable under
existing laws. In 2016, the Children’s Emergency Relief and Protection Act was
passed to ensure the protection of the fundamental rights of children before, during
and after emergency situations.
In January 2019, the Philippines passed Republic Act No. 11188 — the
Special Protection of Children in Situations of Armed Conflict Act — as a way
of implementing the protection guaranteed to children under the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in
armed conflict. This law takes into account Security Council resolutions related
to children and armed conflict as well as resolution 1820 (2008), on women and
peace and security. Republic Act No. 11188 considers as paramount the best interests
of children and imposes criminal liability for grave violations of children’s rights,
including the killing or maiming of children, the recruitment or use of children
in armed conflict, rape and other forms of sexual violence against children, the
abduction of children, attacks against schools or hospitals, and the denial of
humanitarian access to children.
In June 2019, the Implementing Rules and Regulations for the Special
Protection of Children in Situations of Armed Conflict Act were adopted. A process
flow for rescued children was also set up. The Council for the Welfare of Children
heads the interagency committee that monitors the implementation of the law and the
Implementing Rules and Regulations. Other entities in the interagency committee
include the Departments of Education, Social Welfare and Development, the Interior
and Local Government, and National Defence. The Armed Forces of the Philippines,
the National Commission on Indigenous Peoples, the Philippine Commission on
Women, the National Commission on Muslim Filipinos and the Presidential Adviser
on the Peace Process are also members of this committee.
Having struggled for decades with armed rebel groups and separatist
movements, the Philippines has had its fair share of conflict. During the siege of
Marawi by elements of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham in 2017, thousands of
20-08906105/137

S/2020/594

families had to leave their homes and find shelter elsewhere. Children had to leave
their schools. Some were even brainwashed and recruited by the rebels. As part of
its reintegration programme, the Philippine Government established the Payapa at
Masaganang Pamayanan programme — the Peaceful and Prosperous Community
Programme — which provides sustainable livelihood and protective services to
individuals and families, and psychosocial counselling, support and cash to former
rebels, including children.
The Philippines is also implementing a conditional cash-transfer programme,
the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Programme, better known as the 4Ps, for the
purposes of alleviating poverty. One of the conditions for the disbursement
of cash is that children stay in school. During the current coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, the Philippines partnered with financial institutions and the
private sector to deliver much-needed cash assistance to families affected by the
pandemic. Even with the challenges of responding to the COVID-19 pandemic, the
Philippine Government, together with civil society actors, continues to strengthen
protection mechanisms for children affected and displaced by armed conflict by
raising awareness of Republic Act No. 11188, publicizing violations and updating,
inter alia, the Protocol on the Monitoring, Reporting and Response System on the
Grave Child Rights Violations in the Context of Armed Conflict to align it with
Republic Act No. 11188.
For many people, education is an important gateway out of poverty. The
Philippine Government prioritizes the return of children displaced by the conflict
in Marawi to their schools. While elementary and high-school education in public
schools had always been free, university education in state colleges and universities
has been tuition-free since 2017. It is a step towards removing every obstacle to the
full realization of children’s potential.
To protect children in situations of armed conflict, it is imperative that childprotection measures be integrated into peace processes. It is also crucial that all
efforts be exerted to end conflict. The Philippines supports the call of the SecretaryGeneral for a global ceasefire during the COVID-19 pandemic. The Philippine
Government also believes that there must be a global consensus to keep children
out of conflict during this pandemic and beyond. The Philippines reiterates its
commitment to meeting this goal.

106/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 58
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Poland to the United Nations
Poland would like to thank France for organizing today’s important open
debate on children and armed conflict. I extend our thanks to the briefers — the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
the Executive Director of UNICEF and Mariam from civil society — for their
briefings. Poland welcomes the annual report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict for 2019 (S/2020/525) and reiterates its full support for the
children and armed conflict agenda.
We welcome the focus of today’s debate on the fifteenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), which established the United Nations monitoring
and reporting mechanism and the Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. We consider it important to acknowledge the progress achieved in
the last 15 years. Data collection on the grave violations has greatly improved since
the launch of the United Nations monitoring and reporting mechanism in 2005. This
data provides the basis for the annual report of the Secretary-General and the listing
in its annexes of perpetrators of violations, which has proven powerful in influencing
warring parties’ behaviour and promoting accountability and compliance with
international law. The listing process has led to the signing of action plans by more
than 30 parties to conflict, of whom 12 have fully complied with their commitments
and been delisted.
With regard to the report of the Secretary-General and the challenges that
remain for the children and armed conflict agenda, the report for 2019 identifies
more than 20 countries, including Iraq, Syria and Yemen, with verified cases of
grave violations against children, including an alarming number of instances
involving State actors. It proves that we must call for the protection of children
to be considered in all phases of the conflict cycle. Only a concerted effort by the
international community in its entirety, including the United Nations, Member States
and civil society, can put an end to the issue of children in armed conflicts.
The abduction of 1,683 children, rape and other forms of sexual violence
continued to be vastly underreported, with 735 verified cases; these, together with
the approximately 4,400 incidents of denial of humanitarian access to children and
927 attacks on schools and hospitals, are only few of violations to be named in
this year’s report. These numbers should be a call o States Members of the United
Nations to make concerted efforts towards ensuring, first and foremost, the safety
of all children. Poland calls upon all parties to allow safe, timely and unimpeded
humanitarian access in order to aid children and ensure the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel and assets.
To prevent grave violations against children, Member States must fight
impunity and ensure accountability, including through such mechanisms of
international justice as the International Criminal Court. Alongside justice and
accountability, we must ensure psychosocial support for survivors who are victims
of grave violations. We cannot forget that, even with professional help, victims’
trauma will endure for years.
Moreover, Poland is concerned about the streamlining of mandates and
budget cuts affecting child protection advisers. Today, more than ever, dedicated
child protection advisers are needed to monitor and report on grave violations,
operationalize action plans and strengthen the overall child-protection architecture
in United Nations missions. We consider dedicated child-protection-adviser posts
in United Nations peace operations and political missions to be essential for the
effective protection of the rights of children.
20-08906107/137

S/2020/594

With respect to our priorities and activities, the protection of children and
persons with disabilities in humanitarian crises was one of Poland’s priorities during
its term as a non-permanent member of the Security Council. Poland prioritized
protecting children in armed conflicts and placed a major focus on children born of
sexual violence, the reintegration of children formerly associated with armed groups
and armed forces, and the protection of children with disabilities. In the light of
the outrageous phenomenon of child recruitment by armed forces or armed groups,
Poland recognizes the importance of constant psychological support for children
and youth.
Poland is especially concerned about the increase of violence against
educational facilities, students and teachers. We welcome and support initiatives
aimed at putting an end to the use of schools and universities for military purposes,
including the 2014 Lucens Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities from
Military Use during Armed Conflict. To confirm our commitment to the effective
implementation of the Guidelines, Poland signed the Safe Schools Declaration. We
believe that such initiatives constitute an important step towards the protection
and promotion of the rights of the child, especially in the conflict situations.
Poland welcomes the decision of the General Assembly to establish 9 September
as the International Day to Protect Education from Attack (General Assembly
resolution 74/275).
It is especially relevant that the Warsaw process, which is an initiative
inaugurated last year by the United States and Poland to tackle security problems in
the Middle East, is also discussing humanitarian and refugee issues, with emphasis
on vulnerable groups. The refugee crises and forced displacements in the Middle East
are among the most pressing issues to be addressed by the international community
and are still causing a dire humanitarian situation, especially in Syria, Iraq and
Yemen. Children and young people are particularly affected. These conflicts deprive
children of one of their basic needs and rights — safety. Children are being maimed,
abducted and attacked, recruited to fight and sexually abused. They are also being
denied access to education and humanitarian aid. Such traumas deprive them of
their childhood and their dignity and leave permanent marks on their adult lives.
Violations of the rights of the child not only endanger their lives, but also undermine
the overall stability and welfare of our societies.
Those issues were further developed during the meeting of the Warsaw
process working group on humanitarian issues and refugees that took place from
4 to 6 February, in Brasilia. The main purpose of the meeting was to work out
political solutions, better coordination and structural interventions leading to the
reduction of the impact of the humanitarian crises on children and youth in the
Middle East.
Due to the disproportionate impact of conflict on children, the Warsaw
process working group on humanitarian issues and refugees focused its attention
on the issues of education and child protection in a broad sense, acknowledging
that mental health and psychosocial support are critical components of humanitarian
responses. To this end, delegations discussed key child-protection and education
challenges and solutions for displaced populations in the Middle East and focused on
innovative practices enabling children to continue education and find psychological
support during displacement.
One of Poland’s priorities in the development-cooperation field in Lebanon is
supporting human capital by improving the quality of formal and informal education,
in particular by improving teaching conditions, strengthening the language skills of
Syrian students and increasing access to social services of those at risk of exclusion.

108/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Almost 54 per cent of Syrian children of school age do not attend school in Lebanon,
mainly due to poverty and major differences in school curricula.
Since 2016, the Polish non-governmental organization the Polish Centre
for International Aid has been implementing a humanitarian project focused on
providing financial support for the health and education centre in Al-Bireh, some
four kilometres from the Syrian border. The centre is used by Syrian and Lebanese
children and youth attending vocational classes. Provided that the number of
available places is not exceeded each year, children of Syrian refugees are admitted
without any prerequisites. In total, the programme will benefit over 15, 000 people.
Last year, together with its German counterpart, Poland implemented a project
that focused on renovating six public schools in northern Lebanon. The scope of
work included, inter alia, reconstruction of classrooms, roof repairs, water-sanitary
installations, and providing access to the buildings and classrooms for children with
disabilities. Poland’s total budget for the project was €3 million.
Finally, with regard to the coronavirus (COVID-19) disease, it is noteworthy
that the ongoing pandemic brings additional concerns, as children affected by
war face heightened vulnerabilities owing to the fragile contexts in which they
live. We are particularly concerned about the growing scale of sexual and genderbased violence and the lack of access to education, in particular for girls. While
the outbreak has exacerbated humanitarian need, restrictions to mitigate its spread
also challenge the delivery of assistance and hamper efforts to monitor, report and
respond to violations of children’s rights. It is imperative that child protection and
well-being be prioritized in the COVID-19 response and that efforts to document and
respond to grave violations continue.

20-08906109/137

S/2020/594

Annex 59
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Portugal to the United Nations
We thank France for convening today’s open debate and express our gratitude
to the briefers for their valuable briefings.
Portugal is fully aligned with the statements submitted by the European Union
and the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict (S/2020/594, annexes 32
and 24, respectively) and would like to make some additional remarks.
The protection of children in armed conflict is pivotal in the peace, security
and development agenda. We welcome the report of the Secretary-General covering
2019 (S/2020/525). In this regard, we wish to express our deepest regret for the 25,000
serious violations against children verified by the United Nations — a figure that has
grown in comparison to the previous reporting period, in which 24,000 violations
were registered (see S/2019/509). More than half of these violations were committed
by non-State actors and a third were committed by Government and international
forces. We would also like to reaffirm Portugal’s support for the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict. The
recently published Practical guidance for mediators to protect children in situations
of armed conflict is a commendable important action-oriented document.
The year 2020 marks the fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1612 (2005),
which established the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and the
monitoring and reporting mechanism. Notwithstanding the challenges posed by the
ongoing coronavirus disease pandemic, it is essential that the mechanism remains
operational. The collection and reporting of information in a transparent and accurate
way remains a key priority.
We would like to highlight the importance of the Optional Protocol to the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict. This year, as we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of this legal instrument, we call on States not yet having done so to ratify
the Optional Protocol.
Besides the Optional Protocol, Portugal has also endorsed the Principles and
Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups — the
Paris Principles — the Safe Schools Declaration and the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers.
In armed conflicts, children, including those associated with armed groups or
born to their members, must be regarded and treated primarily as victims. As stated
in resolution 2467 (2019), a survivor-centred approach must guide the prevention of,
and response to, conflict-related sexual violence. On the other hand, the vulnerability
of children with disabilities in armed conflict also deserves our careful attention, as
established in resolution 2475 (2019).
Attacks on schools have a particularly long-lasting effect, risking the future
of entire generations and disproportionately affecting girls. The safeguarding of
educational opportunities, under Sustainable Development Goal 4, is therefore
crucial and contributes to preventing recruitment as well as child, early and
forced marriage.
We need to work on the reintegration of children and the rehabilitation of their
families and communities. The protection of children can be a first step to resolving
or mitigating conflicts. Establishing it as priority in negotiations in peace processes
and ceasefire agreements can create engagement between parties to conflict.

110/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Finally, Portugal recognizes and supports the work of UNICEF and other
United Nations bodies in this field. We call for States to cooperate with these
entities, as well as with civil society organizations, to protect the rights of children in
armed conflict.

20-08906111/137

S/2020/594

Annex 60
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Qatar to the
United Nations, Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani
[Original: Arabic]
I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council and to thank you for convening this meeting. I should also like
to thank Ms. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, and Ms. Henrietta Fore, the Executive
Director of the United Nations Children’s Fund, for their briefings.
We are meeting today in unprecedented circumstances, as the entire world
is confronted with the challenge of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
In such difficult times, it is our humanitarian duty to think about children and
vulnerable groups in conflict zones, who are being threatened by the epidemic even
as they are also the victims of violations by parties to conflicts of their obligations
under international humanitarian law.
The adoption by the Security Council of its historic resolution 1612 (2005),
which established the monitoring and reporting mechanism on children and armed
conflict and the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, raised hopes
that we might be able to end the abuses suffered by children in armed conflict.
Regrettably, however, the report (S/2020/525) of the Secretary-General reveals the
seriousness of the violations to which children in conflict zones are subjected and
the failure of the parties to various conflicts to fulfil their legal obligations. This has
had disastrous consequences for children’s upbringing and future, the price of which
will paid by their societies and countries.
Everyone had hoped that this meeting would be dedicated to celebrating the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, which
was ratified by 170 States and subsequently reinforced by the Paris Principles
and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, the
Safe Schools Declaration and the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the
Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers.
While we acknowledge the successes achieved in that regard, the harsh
conditions faced by children in conflict zones require the international community to
redouble its efforts to protect children, ensure compliance with international law, put
an end to such crimes and hold the perpetrators accountable via legal mechanisms.
We therefore add our voice to those of the States that have been calling for
the relevant annual reports to include a consolidated, accurate list of perpetrators
compiled on the basis of impartial and evidence-based accounts. We also stress
the importance of identifying and holding accountable the perpetrators, thereby
ensuring that victims obtain justice and international law is observed.
Access to safe quality education is one of the basic needs of children affected
by armed conflict, and is essential to their well-being and ability to enjoy their
most basic rights. Education is a basic element of reintegrating affected children
and enabling them to resume their lives after conflict, not to mention the role that
education plays in preventing children from being recruited and used in armed
conflict in the first place. Sadly, however, educational institutions are among those
most damaged by armed conflicts. As the Secretary-General confirms in his report,
hundreds of schools have been attacked and thousands of children have left school.

112/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Given the disastrous effects of such attacks, the parties to various conflicts
must be compelled not to target educational institutions, and they must be held liable
for the legal consequences of doing so. At the same time, international efforts to
achieve Goals 4 and 16 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development must be
intensified.
The COVID-19 pandemic poses a serious threat to children in conflict zones.
The closure of schools will cause an increasing number of children to join armed
groups, thereby threatening their lives and futures. We therefore reaffirm our
support for the Secretary-General’s call for ceasefires in various armed conflicts, so
that efforts can be focused on responding to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Qatar attaches great importance to ensuring that children in areas of armed
conflict are able to receive an education. Accordingly, my country has launched
several initiatives to deliver education in such areas. In September 2018, on the
margins of the opening of the session of the General Assembly, His Highness the
Emir of Qatar announced that the country had pledged $100 million to provide
quality education by 2021 in areas experiencing conflict and in which conditions
are precarious. The programmes and initiatives developed by the Education Above
All foundation, the patron of which is Her Highness Sheikha Moza bint Nasser,
President of Qatar Foundation for Education, Science and Community Development,
have been highly successful and garnered international recognition. The Education
Above All Foundation, together with UNICEF and more than 80 global partners,
is providing quality education to 10 million children in more than 50 countries and
has developed pioneering programmes to facilitate distance learning at home in
different languages.
Qatar, in keeping with its efforts to protect children in conflict, is proud
that, on 28 May 2020, the General Assembly adopted resolution 74/275, designating
9 September as the International Day to Protect Education from Attack. Qatar
presented that resolution at the initiative of Her Highness Sheikha Moza bint Nasser,
President of Qatar Foundation for Education, Science and Community Development,
and it was co-sponsored by 60 other States.
As part of our effort to support the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and enable it to fulfil
its mandate to prevent violations from being committed against children and to
protect them and reintegrate them into society, and in keeping with the partnership
agreement that was signed in November 2019 by Qatar and the Office of the Special
Representative, work is under way in Doha to open the Analysis and Communication
Centre of the Office of the Special Representative. That centre will prepare studies,
provide analyses and assessments, hold workshops, raise awareness and engage in
capacity-building in relation to the protection of children in armed conflict.
In conclusion, Qatar will continue to support all international efforts to protect
children in armed conflict and to work with the Security Council and other United
Nations agencies to achieve this noble humanitarian goal.

20-08906113/137

S/2020/594

Annex 61
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations, Cho Hyun
My delegation commends you, Sir, for convening today’s timely open videoteleconference of the Security Council on children and armed conflict, and expresses
its deep appreciation to the briefers for their enlightening interventions.
Since the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), 15 years ago, there has been
meaningful progress in our efforts to protect children from armed conflicts. However,
the Secretary-General’s annual report on children and armed conflict (S/2020/525)
clearly illustrates that significant gaps remain between our goals and the harsh
realities on the ground. Government forces and non-State armed groups alike have
increased the intensity and frequency of their attacks against children, and sexual
and gender-based violence against children horrifically persists unabated.
In addition, the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
raises grave concerns regarding the safety and well-being of children in armed
conflicts. As the Secretary-General emphasized in his April global appeal to “protect
our children” amid the pandemic, children in armed conflict are among the most
vulnerable groups and deserve to be accorded our highest priority.
It is in this context that I am particularly concerned over the Secretary-General’s
report that the denial of humanitarian access to children saw a shocking increase of
over 400 per cent in 2019. Full, comprehensive and unhindered humanitarian access
to children, including those in detention, should form an integral part of our efforts
to minimize the negative impact on children.
Against this troubling backdrop, and while aligning myself with the statement
by the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and
Armed Conflict, I would like to highlight the following four points of particular
importance to my delegation.
First, the Republic of Korea urges all parties to conflict to support the
Secretary-General’s timely appeal for an immediate global ceasefire to collectively
tackle the COVID-19 crisis. Any military threat or attempt to incite violence must
stop. The entire global population is now facing a common threat, and protecting
vulnerable populations, especially children in armed conflict, requires us to work
together in solidarity to silence the guns. In this regard, my delegation strongly
hopes that the Security Council will be able to unite to come up with substantive
measures to support the Secretary-General’s urgent appeal for an immediate global
ceasefire. It is better late than never.
Secondly, the reintegration of children affected by armed conflict is a strategic
investment that can help break the vicious cycle of violence. The Republic of Korea,
as a member of the Steering Committee of the Global Coalition for Reintegration
of Child Soldiers, commends and supports the work of the Office of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and UNICEF. Child reintegration
programmes must take a community-based approach to avoid stigmatization, and
I emphasize the importance of education and vocational training programmes,
which help ensure that communities enjoy the concrete benefits that reintegration
programmes bring.
Thirdly, we must ensure accountability for all violations against children.
Strengthening accountability and ending impunity are key to ending gross violations
and preventing recurrence. Violators must be held accountable through both national
and international justice systems. Furthermore, we must support and strengthen the
tools we have to document and address violations, including the United Nations-led
114/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

monitoring and reporting mechanism, the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict and the Secretary-General’s annual report.
Fourthly, the Republic of Korea strongly supports the child-protection mandate
in United Nations peacekeeping operations. We particularly emphasize the important
role carried out by senior child protection advisers and sections in peacekeeping
missions, and believe that they should be adequately resourced to implement childprotection mandates, including in the context of transition and downsizing.
Efforts to prevent violations against children today are a high-yield investment
that will prevent future violence and crimes. The Republic of Korea reaffirms its
driving commitment in working with the United Nations, as well as all Member
States, with a view to better protecting children from the scourge of armed conflicts.

20-08906115/137

S/2020/594

Annex 62
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of San
Marino to the United Nations, Damiano Beleffi
San Marino aligns itself with the statement submitted by the representative of
Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important meeting,
and the Secretary-General for his annual report (S/2020/525).
San Marino continues to firmly believe in and support the Security Council’s
children and armed conflict mandate.
Thanks to the resolution 1612 (2005), adopted 15 years ago, which established
the monitoring and reporting mechanism and the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, we can proudly affirm that we have achieved positive
results in our common cause of preventing and ending grave violations against
children in armed conflict. In this regard, I would also like to thank Mrs. Virginia
Gamba de Potgieter and her staff, who, with great dedication, have finalized a terrific
number of action plans and commitments.
Despite the successful results, we also have to recognize that great concerns
remain. The number of verified violations against children is still very worrisome,
while education, which should be one of our priorities, is still under attack. We
are particularly worried about the impact of the coronavirus disease on vulnerable
groups, such as children in armed conflicts. Some restrictive measures adopted,
such as the closure of schools, inadvertently expose children to abuse, exploitation
and recruitment. In addition, closed schools can easily be used for military purposes.
We need to better protect safe and quality education for these children. In
this regard, San Marino joined the Safe Schools Declaration, an important tool that
promotes the protection of students, teachers and schools, with the aim of allowing
young people to continue their education, giving them hope for their future.
San Marino also recently co-sponsored General Assembly resolution 74/275,
on the International Day to Protect Education from Attack.
Furthermore, due to the pandemic, rehabilitation and reintegration programmes
for children have been, or will have to be, put on hold. This is very worrisome, since
these programmes are crucial for the well-being of these children.
While humanitarian need is rising, the humanitarian space is shrinking. We
are particularly concerned over the record number of incidents related to the denial
of humanitarian access. The new restrictions imposed due to the pandemic risk are
worsening the situation. We cannot allow this to happen: the delivery of humanitarian
assistance must be guaranteed, especially now.
Finally, we should not forget that, as stated in paragraph 15 of the SecretaryGeneral’s report, “[p]eace remains the most powerful means to reduce violations
against children”. Therefore, San Marino calls on all parties to join the SecretaryGeneral’s appeal for a global ceasefire.
San Marino firmly believes that, especially during difficult times, the
international community has to stay united, while fully supporting international
humanitarian law and human rights law. This year marks 20 years since the adoption
of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. We encourage all parties to accede this
fundamental instrument for the prevention of the recruitment of child soldiers, as well
as other tools, such as the Paris Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated
116/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

with Armed Forces or Armed Groups and the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping
and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers.
Together we can continue to achieve positive results for our common cause: to
end and prevent horrific violations against children and support their recovery and
empowerment for a better and more peaceful future for all.

20-08906117/137

S/2020/594

Annex 63
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saudi Arabia to the
United Nations, Abdallah Y. Al-Mouallimi
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on the assumption by
France of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of June, express my
delegation’s support for your tireless efforts in managing the Council’s work and
wish you continued success.
The issue of the protection of children in armed conflicts is acquiring ever
greater importance. Such protection could help to break the cycle that perpetuates
these conflicts in the long term. It is all the more significant given the role that
today’s children will play in building their homelands and societies and bringing
about their future stability and prosperity. Strengthening the protection of children
in armed conflicts can be used as a peacebuilding tool to address the negative effects
of those conflicts on children, thereby contributing to transforming the present
situation of the affected societies into a more stable future. The Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia therefore believes that the protection of children in armed conflicts around the
world is the shared responsibility of all parties in the international community, and
calls for collective confrontation and concerted efforts to address the ramifications
of armed conflicts for children. These efforts should be crystallized by taking a
number of important steps.
First of all, strict and effective measures should be taken against armed militias
that use children as human shields or recruit them and force them to become involved
in armed conflicts. Measures should also be taken against the States that back such
militias, support them with money and weapons and fuel them with extremist ideas
to spread their destructive ideologies. Such practices end up implanting violent
extremist tendencies in many of those innocent children and the communities to
which they belong.
Secondly, the occupation of States should be condemned. Such occupations
engage in brutal practices towards civilians and children. They violate their rights,
deprive them of their freedoms and impose painful realities on those children and
their communities. It is important to hold occupiers accountable and compel them
to desist from their violations and comply with the relevant international terms of
reference. The practices of the Israeli occupation authorities are the most egregious
example. That occupation’s atrocities against the defenceless children of Palestine —
which include murder, displacement, imprisonment and torture — demand a strong
and firm stand by the international community and the Security Council.
Thirdly, we must invest in efforts to help children who face social neglect
as a result of such practices. They must be provided with the necessary health,
psychological and social support through rehabilitation and integration programmes,
and guaranteed access to uninterrupted education during conflicts. Education
provides victims with alternatives. It enables children and young people to acquire
the skills and achieve the economic security necessary to break the cycle of violence.
Moreover, it addresses one of the root causes of conflict by instilling and promoting
the values of peace and a culture of tolerance in children’s hearts and minds.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia emphasizes that protection of civilians
and children, especially in armed conflicts, is of the utmost importance. In that
connection, my country has joined many international frameworks. It has acceded
to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, as well as the Geneva Convention and
118/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

a number of protocols thereto. It is also a member of the steering committee of the
Global Coalition for Reintegration of Child Soldiers and a member of the Friends
of Reintegration Group. I reiterate my country’s commitment to international law
and international humanitarian law and its determination that all measures possible
should be taken to protect children in armed conflicts.
My country welcomes the removal of the Coalition to Support Legitimacy in
Yemen from the list annexed to the 2020 report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2020/525) of parties that have not put in place adequate
measures to improve the protection of children. That development is a reflection
of the ability of Coalition countries to provide a model for protecting children
during armed conflicts. It is a testament to the Coalition’s commitment to protecting
children and the effectiveness of its significant and ongoing measures to strengthen
the protection of children in the conflict in Yemen in accordance with international
standards. The most notable of these measures are as follows.
A child protection unit has been established to develop mechanisms to
strengthen the protection of children in armed conflict and meet obligations under
international law.
Children recruited by Houthi militias are cared for and provided with health
and psychological support prior to being handed over to the Yemeni Government
to be reintegrated into society. Support is provided to the Yemeni Government’s
programmes in Yemen to rehabilitate children prior to their being returned to
their families.
Ongoing proactive engagement with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict has resulted in the signing of a
memorandum of understanding with the United Nations and the development of an
action plan.
Additional preventive measures are being taken to protect children in the
ongoing armed conflict in Yemen.
In that regard, we affirm our support for the mandate of Ms. Virginia
Gamba de Potgieter, Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict, and we look forward to continuing constructive cooperation
between her and the Coalition to develop mechanisms for the protection of children
in the armed conflict in Yemen. We stress that the Coalition must be provided with
sufficient information regarding the allegations made against it in the report in order
to conduct the relevant investigations.
My country values the major role the Secretary-General plays in ending and
resolving armed conflicts, and his efforts to strengthen the protection of children in
times of conflict. The Coalition to Support Legitimacy in Yemen has been responsive
to the Secretary-General’s recent call for a ceasefire in Yemen, and Saudi Arabia
has supported the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire in the light of the
coronavirus disease pandemic, as well as the efforts of his Special Envoy for Yemen
to push forward the political process.
These positions flow from a firm faith that a comprehensive political solution
to the conflict in Yemen can be reached on the basis of the three terms of reference,
namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative, the outcomes of the Comprehensive
National Dialogue Conference and the relevant Security Council resolutions,
particularly resolution 2216 (2015).
That conflict was instigated by an illegitimate coup staged by the Houthi
militia, backed by Iran, with no regard for its consequences for the Yemeni people.
The resources of Yemen have been plundered. Its people have been plunged into
20-08906119/137

S/2020/594

chaos, hunger and disease. Its children have been exploited. All this damage has been
done for authoritarian gains. The international community and the Security Council
should take strict measures to support of the efforts of the Secretary-General and
his Special Envoy with regard to that insurrectionist militia, which rejects peace,
and compel it to accept a political solution to avoid further suffering for the Yemeni
people, especially children.

120/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 64
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Slovakia to the
United Nations, Michal Mlynár
Slovakia aligns itself with the statements submitted on behalf of the European
Union and of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
We thank the Secretary-General for his latest report on the impact of armed
conflict on children (S/2020/525) and for providing clear recommendations. We
appreciate the briefings by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, and the Executive
Director of UNICEF, Henrietta Fore, as well as their tireless work for children.
Slovakia ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, endorsed the Paris Principles
and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, the
Safe Schools Declaration as well as the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and
the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers, and we call on others
to join us in this regard.
As we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Optional
Protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict this year, there is no better
time to reiterate the call for its universal ratification, and we encourage those States
that have not yet signed or ratified the Protocol to do so without delay.
This year we also celebrate fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of the
landmark resolution 1612 (2005), on children and armed conflict, establishing the
United Nations-led monitoring and reporting mechanism and the Working Group
of the Security Council on Children and Armed Conflict. The monitoring and
reporting mechanism, together with the Secretary-General’s annual report and the
annex thereto, has been useful in deterring grave violations against children.
Regrettably, numbers of grave violations committed against children are
still not decreasing, and the Secretary-General’s latest report highlights that they
tripled in the last decade. There is still a huge lack of compliance with international
humanitarian law, international human rights law and international refugee law.
Criminalization and accountability are key elements to eliminate these grave
violations, and Member States have to ensure them proactively at the national level
as well as by deeper cooperation at the international level. Therefore, it is important
that the naming of perpetrators — an important step, but only the first one — be
followed by the more important step of accountability.
Another worrisome trend is the growing number of children in detention,
often as the result of allegations of those children being associated with armed
forces or groups. These children need to be treated first and foremost as victims. All
Member States should support the release and reintegration of child soldiers through
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration programmes. We urge the United
Nations and its Member States to develop, in collaboration with host communities,
reintegration programmes that emphasize psychosocial support, education and
training opportunities. In this regard, we welcome the efforts of the Global Coalition
for the Reintegration of Child Soldiers as well as the “Act to Protect children affected
by conflict” campaign.

20-08906121/137

S/2020/594

Annex 65
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Slovenia to the United Nations
We wish to thank the French presidency of the Security Council, for convening
this open debate; the Secretary-General, for his annual report (S/2020/525); the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter; the Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Henrietta
Fore; and Mariam, for sharing her experience.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statements presented by the European Union,
and by Canada on behalf of Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict, and
wishes to add some remarks in its national capacity.
The year 2020 marks the anniversaries of two milestones in the normative
framework for the protection of children affected by armed conflict: the twentieth
anniversary of the agreement of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, and the
fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of Security Council resolution 1612 (2005),
on children and armed conflict, which established the landmark monitoring and
reporting mechanism.
Nonetheless, the latest annual report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict reminds us that there is still a long way ahead of us. We are deeply
concerned that in 2019 there were more than 25,000 grave violations committed
against children in armed conflicts, an alarming increase of cases of denial of
humanitarian access to children, continuous attacks on schools and hospitals and
inconceivable prevalence of sexual violence against girls and boys.
It is therefore of key importance to ensure unfailing respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights law by all parties to conflicts around the
world. For the protection of children and preventing grave violations against them,
accountability and the fight against impunity should be strengthened. We call on all
those States not yet having done so to consider ratifying the Optional Protocol and
joining the Paris Principles and Commitments on Children Associated with Armed
Forces or Armed Groups, the Safe School Declaration and the Vancouver Principles
on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers.
We share the concerns that the coronavirus disease pandemic and its
consequences exacerbate the plight of children affected by armed conflicts around
the world, including by impeding activities to protect the children. In particular, the
pandemic has worsened access to education, health care and clean drinking water.
Education is one of the few signs of hope for children affected by armed conflicts.
The Secretary-General’s report also shows some promising developments in
2019, since fewer children were killed and maimed, recruited and used and abducted
than the year before. More than 13,200 children were released or separated from
armed forces or armed groups. This progress was possible due to continued efforts
by the Special Representative and her Office, the Security Council and its Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, UNICEF, child protection advisers in field
missions and all others in this network of protection, and we would like to commend
them for their tireless work.
Slovenia is not just a strong advocate of child protection in international
forums, but also contributes to the efforts on the ground to lessen the burden of
children affected by conflicts. In 2019 and 2020, Slovenia supported several projects
for children from Ukraine, Palestine and Syria, as well as providing humanitarian aid
to UNICEF for Yemeni children. In addition, projects aimed at empowering children
to become actors for peace were conducted in more than 20 countries worldwide.
122/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 66
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Spain to the United Nations
It is a pleasure to submit this statement on behalf of a group of States endorsing
the Safe Schools Declaration.
In the fifth anniversary of its launch, the Safe Schools Declaration has become
a well-known political commitment to the protection and continuation of education
in armed conflict, which includes a pledge to use the Guidelines for Protecting
Schools and Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict. Since the first
International Conference on Safe Schools in Oslo, in May 2015, followed by the
Conference of Buenos Aires in 2017 and the Conference in Palma de Mallorca in
2019, 104 States have joined this international community. As such, the Safe Schools
Declaration is moving towards its progressive universalization.
We are appalled by the number of grave violations against children in
2019, as verified in the Secretary-General’s report on children and armed conflict
(S/2020/525), amounting to 25,000 violations in 19 situations, and most particularly
by attacks against schools, teachers and students, as well as by the 400 per cent
increase in the denial of humanitarian access to children. We call on all parties to
facilitate safe, rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access.
We urge all parties to armed conflict to fully comply with international law
— including human rights law, international humanitarian law and international
refugee law — to facilitate safe access to education in armed conflict and to apply
effective protection measures for children in armed conflict.
We support child protection mandates in peace operations and genderresponsive measures in the protection of education. Increased accountability, in order
both to fight impunity and to prevent grave violations against children, including by
resorting to the International Criminal Court, when applicable, as a court of last
resort is key. We call for increasing the effective protection of children in prevention,
response and accountability measures.
In this regard, the Secretary-General´s report is a fundamental tool for
holding accountable perpetrators of grave violations against children, for changing
the behaviour of warring parties and for informing the positive action of the Security
Council. In this regard, the annexes containing the list of perpetrators play a key part
in the efficiency of the report.
We request the Secretary-General to continue supporting an impartial,
independent and legitimate monitoring and reporting mechanism and a list of
perpetrators based on the facts in the different situations of the children and armed
conflict agenda, as well as to release his reports on children and armed conflict
further in advance of future open debates in order to follow up thoroughly on this
important issue. We wish to highlight the importance we place on a transparent
process in this regard and to reiterate that the signing of an action plan alone should
not form the basis for delisting in the Secretary-General’s report.
Education is a human right and a precondition for development. Continued
access to safe education can help protect children and youth from the impacts of
armed conflict. Access to education throughout a conflict is essential. It ensures
that no generation is left behind and greatly aids a country’s ability to recover from
conflict and to achieve sustainable development.
Attacks on schools not only deprive girls and boys of learning opportunities,
but can also put them at risk of injury or death, while increasing the risk of recruitment,
forced labour, sexual abuse or child, early and forced marriage. Such attacks can
20-08906123/137

S/2020/594

lead to higher drop-out rates as parents opt to keep their children at home. Girls are
often disproportionately impacted and are less likely to return to school even when
the situation has become safer.
We wish to highlight the role of the Safe Schools Declaration, which includes
the Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use during
Armed Conflict. Its implementation is enhancing the protection of students, teachers
and schools. The Declaration and the Guidelines have planted the seed for a new
standard of international behaviour that will help safeguard the civilian character
of educational facilities during wartime. We commend all States that have endorsed
and are implementing the Declaration. We are building a community of practice that
strengthens the protection of children and education.
We welcome the fourth International Conference on Safe Schools, which will
take place in Nigeria, and we call once again on all States that have not yet done so
to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration and to benefit from the exchange of positive
experiences in its implementation.

124/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 67
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Sri Lanka to the
United Nations
Sri Lanka warmly congratulates France on its assumption of the presidency
for the month of June and is confident that it will be a successful tenure. The
convening of this open debate on children and armed conflict is appreciated and
timely as the scale, severity and recurrence of violations and abuses against children
in such conditions remain a grave concern. Despite global efforts to end and prevent
violations against children in situations of armed conflict, they continue to be
targeted, greatly impeding their right to a normal childhood and development. This
has also been exacerbated by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
For nearly three decades, Sri Lanka suffered at the hands of brutal terrorism,
propagated by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), which is designated as
a terrorist organization by 32 countries, whose modus operandi included the forcible
recruitment of children as soldiers.
UNICEF reports indicated overwhelming evidence of recruitment of children,
often forced, throughout areas under LTTE control as well as from Governmentcontrolled areas in the north and east. As of September 2007, the total number of
children known to have been recruited by the LTTE since January 2002 was well
over 6,000, although the real number was thought to be much higher, including
40 children orphaned by the 2004 tsunami that ravaged certain coastal areas of
the island.
In fact, in the lead-up to the end of the conflict, in February 2009, the UNICEF
Representative in Sri Lanka expressed its gravest concerns for children, stating that
it had “clear indications that the LTTE [had] intensified forcible recruitment of
civilians and that children as young as 14 years old [were] now being targeted.”
As a country that maintains a zero-tolerance policy on the recruitment and
use of children in armed conflict, one of the immediate priorities of the Government
of Sri Lanka following the end of separatist terrorism in 2009 was the rehabilitation
of these child soldiers, reuniting them with their families and addressing their
educational needs. The programme launched under the Commissioner of Probation
and Child Care Services resulted in the rehabilitation and reintegration of all former
child soldiers, numbering 594, which is a success story in this respect for Sri Lanka
to share with the world.
Recognizing that access to safe, quality education is a critical need,
particularly for children affected by armed conflict, all the former child soldiers were
supported by the Government of Sri Lanka in their education by facilitating school
enrolment, with the provision of school supplies and financial assistance, including
scholarships. Education being a key component of reintegration programmes for
children associated with armed groups, special attention was paid to those whose
education had been disrupted due to such conscription and who were seeking
to complete their formal education. As a result, the rehabilitation programme
implemented in Sri Lanka enabled a number of former child soldiers to participate
in national school examinations. With education being a central goal of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, such policies have contributed to the pursuit
of achieving this objective.
These initiatives provided opportunities for children who had lost their
childhood to terrorism, and Sri Lanka is pleased to note that 11 children had taken
university entrance examinations, with 4 being successful, either during or after
their rehabilitation programme. Three were able to receive a university education.
20-08906125/137

S/2020/594

Many others have participated in vocational training programmes offered by the
Commissioner General of Rehabilitation, which made a transformative contribution
to these conflict-affected societies by facilitating the employment of many of these
former child soldiers as accounts clerks, computer instructors, mechanics, carpenters,
farmers, fishermen or in the garment-manufacturing industry.
In recognition that involvement in violent conflict and loss of loved ones
cause trauma and other psychosocial effects that could severely hamper a child’s
growth and education, those requiring special attention with regard to these aspects
were identified and provided with care, including professional counselling. This
was accomplished through the education system as well as community and civil
society groups. A special screening process was also carried out to identify former
child soldiers who were physically disabled, recovering from injury, and others who
required medical intervention.
As a concerted policy, no former child soldiers were prosecuted, with priority
being accorded to their investigations and to the speedy conclusion of their cases.
In these efforts, the Government collaborated with United Nations agencies, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and civil society organizations, including
international non-governmental organizations and non-governmental organizations
with knowledge and experience in dealing with children exposed to armed conflict,
with a view to their rehabilitation.
On the international front, Sri Lanka is a State party to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and the Optional Protocols thereto on the sale of children, child
prostitution and pornography and on the involvement of children in armed conflict.
Sri Lanka has also endorsed the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the
Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers. As we commemorate the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Optional Protocol on the involvement of
children in armed conflict, Sri Lanka, as one of the first States to have ratified the
Protocol, takes this opportunity to reiterate its firm commitment to the promotion
and protection of children’s rights.
All signatories abiding by these international legal instruments in spirit and
letter would make the world better for the young generations of today and tomorrow.
However, we as nations must also work towards holding non-State actors formally
accountable for engaging in the abhorrent practice of using children in the arena
of armed conflict. Further, States must also desist from supporting such non-State
actors, as such support could be interpreted as an endorsement of an illegal policy.
Let us all pledge to unwaveringly secure childhood, in accordance with its norms of
a safe development to adulthood, so as to better the world.

126/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Annex 68
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the
United Nations
[Original: English and French]
Switzerland would like to thank France for having organized this virtual
debate and the speakers for their valuable contributions.
Switzerland wishes to express its deep concern at the continuation of armed
conflicts in various parts of the world and their devastating impact on children.
Switzerland would like to recall that, in situations of armed conflict, children must
be considered primarily as victims and treated as such; this includes children who
are linked to armed groups or whose parents are so affiliated. We encourage the
Security Council to strengthen its commitment to the protection of children in armed
conflict. The call of the Secretary-General for an immediate global ceasefire is
important and must be supported by the Council.
This year, we are celebrating the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1612 (2005) and the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict. In this context, Switzerland encourages the Secretary-General
to continue to provide a complete, impartial and precise list of parties that commit
grave violations of the rights of the child. The Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict is important for reviewing the reports of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism and making recommendations to the Council on possible
measures to promote the protection of children affected by armed conflict. In
addition, Switzerland wishes to stress the following three points.
First of all, Switzerland is concerned about the aggravating effects of the
coronavirus-disease pandemic on the situation of children in armed conflict, and in
particular that of girls, who are particularly exposed to the risks and consequences
of conflict. Wherever access by humanitarian actors is restricted, the well-being of
children is at risk. That is why Switzerland urges all parties to conflict to guarantee
humanitarian actors unhindered access to affected populations.
Secondly, Switzerland calls on the Council to take concrete steps to end
attacks on schools. We regret that an increase in such attacks was observed over
the past year. Deprived of the protective environment school provides, children are
more exposed to the risks of exploitation, such as recruitment by armed groups, early
marriage and forced labour. We encourage Member States to deter armed forces and
non-State armed groups from occupying schools left empty due to the pandemic and
to join the Safe Schools Declaration.
Thirdly, the protection of children in armed conflict must be integrated
into all conflict-prevention activities. In this regard, we welcome the launch of the
Practical guidance for mediators to protect children in situations of armed conflict.
Protecting children is an integral part of lasting peace. That is why Switzerland is
committed to ensuring that children have who have participated in fighting or lived
in conflict zones are taken care of with particular attention and closely supported in
their reintegration into a safe environment. Protecting children means empowering
them to build peace.

20-08906127/137

S/2020/594

Annex 69
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Thailand to the
United Nations
Thailand welcomes the annual report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/525),
which provides strategic guidance to Member States on how to strengthen child
protection. We further note with appreciation the hard work and dedication of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
on this issue.
Thailand also calls on all parties to adhere to the Secretary-General’s appeal
for an immediate global ceasefire, and to prioritize humanitarian access to children
and the most vulnerable in situations of armed conflict. Thailand wishes to highlight
the elements we believe deserve special emphasis in today’s discussion.
First, we need to form a stronger partnership, especially among States, United
Nations agencies and civil society. Thailand welcomes the continued engagement
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General with States. Beyond that, all
stakeholders, including civil society, must work closely together to address various
emerging issues such as the evolving tactics used to recruit children, including
through online and social media platforms. In addition to law enforcement, strong
community advocacy and education can provide the best defence for children against
falling prey to recruitment. Thailand also commends the global ACT to Protect
Children Affected by Conflict campaign, which is aimed at generating greater
awareness and action to protect children affected by war.
Secondly, we have to synergize various international efforts in child protection
for the best interests of the child. This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. Thailand reaffirms its firm commitment
to the Convention and its Optional Protocol and is ready to support fellow States
parties in fulfilling their obligations wherever appropriate.
Thailand joins the international community in viewing with concern the
plight of children affected by armed conflict. Thailand condemns all violations and
crimes against children in situations of armed conflict and supports the effective
implementation of relevant Security Council resolutions on this issue.
We fully support the launch of the new Practical guidance for mediators
to protect children in situations of armed conflict. In our view, not only should we
promote children’s participation in a meaningful and sustainable manner, but their
voices and needs must be taken into account in any effort to resolve conflict at any
phase, while ensuring the best interests of the child.
Looking ahead, relevant bodies within the United Nations system should
work in a more coordinated and integrated manner so that their actions are
mutually reinforcing.
Thirdly, we need a comprehensive approach to the protection of children in
armed conflict, from prevention through to post-conflict management and the social
reintegration of affected children.
Thailand stresses the importance of ensuring that the rights of children
are protected, and that the legal infrastructure is in place to enable their active
participation in society. In this regard, we stress the importance of resolution 2427
(2018), which underlines the need to prevent violations against children in countries
affected by armed conflict and in their immediately surrounding regions. We
therefore encourage further regional engagement on this issue.
128/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

It is equally imperative that we create an environment conducive to the
reintegration of children associated with, or having fallen victim to recruitment
by, armed forces and armed groups. Access to quality education for children, for
instance, is one of the key factors in enhancing children’s capacities and participation
in both prevention and reintegration processes.
To put an end to any conflict and ensure sustainable peace, Thailand urges
all stakeholders to ingrain a sustainability mindset, together with development
approaches, into efforts to address the root causes of armed conflict, such as
limited access to quality education and health services; poverty; discrimination;
gender inequality; social injustice; and economic and social exclusion of persons
and communities vulnerable to and at risk of radicalization, violent extremism
and terrorism.
Fourthly, mainstreaming child protection into relevant United Nations
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and political missions is vital. And, in this connection,
fifthly, training and capacity-building, including training of trainers, should be
accorded priority.
In armed conflict situations, peacekeepers are often at the forefront of
protecting civilians, including children. As part of the task of early peacebuilding,
our peacekeepers have been providing a safe learning environment for local
children, with basic education and development learning centres, in their assigned
United Nations peacekeeping missions. Our female peacekeepers also play a vital
role in building trust and ensuring a protective environment for vulnerable groups,
including children.
We underscore the importance of having clear mandates and guidelines for
effective operations and for smooth transitions from peacekeeping to post-conflict
development. Peacekeepers and peacebuilders also need specific predeployment and
in-mission training on issues concerning children affected by armed conflict.
For our part, Thai peacekeepers are trained as a standard procedure to assist
the local population in their efforts to prevent a relapse into armed conflict and
to ensure sustainable development. Training elements include international law,
child protection, gender-based issues, protection of civilians, conflict-related sexual
violence and cultural sensitivity.
We also stress the importance of sharing knowledge, best practices and
lessons learned. Thailand is therefore committed to further collaboration, including
by working to become a regional centre of excellence on the issue of children and
armed conflict.
Last but not least, mainstreaming child protection into relevant United Nations
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and political missions is particularly critical in helping
local communities address the impacts and challenges of the coronavirus disease,
especially against the risk of children becoming victims of trafficking and all forms
of violence, as well as recruitment as child soldiers.
The international community must exert all efforts to put an end to the
suffering of children in armed conflict. Thailand endeavours to do our part and
looks forward to working with others to amplify our efforts.

20-08906129/137

S/2020/594

Annex 70
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Turkey to the United Nations
At the outset, I would like to express our appreciation to the French presidency
for convening today’s Security Council open debate on children and armed
conflict. We thank the briefers — the Executive Director of UNICEF, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and dear
Mariam of Mali — for their valuable and informative contributions.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2020/525) and
to commend the efforts of the United Nations to advance the children and armed
conflict agenda.
This year we mark the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1612 (2005), which was a milestone in the children and armed conflict agenda
in its establishment of two important mechanisms, namely, the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict and the United Nations-led monitoring and
reporting mechanism.
The year 2020 also marks the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Right of the Child on the involvement of
children in armed conflict. This anniversary provides an opportunity to take stock
of our achievements and to further discuss necessary efforts to keep children from
harm’s way as the severe effects of conflicts on children continue to constitute a
significant challenge.
The Secretary-General’s report highlights over 25,000 verified grave violations
against children in 2019, in 19 situations. Although there is a slight decrease from
previous years, the number is still high and it shows that much more remains to
be done.
Children continue to suffer immensely in many places around the world,
including Syria, Palestine and Myanmar. Furthermore, the coronavirus disease
pandemic, which presents an unprecedented global health crisis, causes serious
impacts on countries in armed conflict, with children being among the most
vulnerable groups. In this context, Turkey reiterates its support to the Secretary
General’s appeal for a global ceasefire during the course of the pandemic.
Meeting the fundamental humanitarian needs of children in conflicts and
emergencies, including for the provision of health services, must be one of our
priorities. In the meantime, investing in the education of all children, particularly
girls, requires our special attention.
In addition, we see the repatriation and reintegration of children as important
aspects of the agenda. Turkey fully subscribes to the Secretary-General’s appeal to
the countries concerned to take steps for the voluntary repatriation of their citizens,
particularly women and children affiliated with Da’esh.
Unfortunately, in Syria, the suffering of children continues unabated. The
crimes of Al-Assad’s brutal regime in the form of indiscriminate air strikes, barrel
bombs, chemical weapons, artillery shelling and the targeting of civilians and civilian
infrastructure are not the only menaces Syrian children face. The well-documented
crimes of the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) terrorist organization and its Syrian
branch, the Democratic Union Party/Kurdish People’s Protection Units (PYD/YPG),
in relation to the recruitment of young girls and boys over the years are a source of
grave concern.

130/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

PYD/YPG employs the same tactics as other terrorist organizations operating
in Syria, such as Da’esh, Al-Qaida, Al-Nusra and other affiliated groups. As such,
they deserve no less condemnation.
As a reminder, let me recall a few recent examples of the PKK/YPG’s notorious
terrorist activities in Syria. On 28 April, PKK/YPG carried out a bomb attack in
a market in Afrin, killing 40 civilians, including 11 children. It was followed by
another one, in El-Bab on 10 May. In just these two attacks, PKK/YPG killed more
than 50 civilians.
The Secretary-General’s latest report provides damning insights into the
horrific treatment of children at the hands of the PKK, as well as in areas under its
control. As highlighted in the report and as no different than in previous years, YPG
recruited the highest number of children in Syria in 2019. YPG also topped the lists
in the abduction of children, deprivation of liberty of children and using schools
and medical facilities for military purposes. This terrorist group targets schools,
converts them into ammunition storages and deprives children of their fundamental
right of education.
We fully support United Nations efforts to document PKK/PYD/YPG’s
and other terrorist groups’ crimes. At the same time, we must stress the need to
demonstrate a unified front against terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. As
such, we will not approve any act that could be exploited by terrorists in their search
for recognition and legitimacy. That is why we condemned the signing of an “action
plan” last year with a well-known PKK terrorist, Ferhat Abdi Şahin, also known as
Mazloum Abdi, for whom INTERPOL had issued a red notice.
In the same vein, I should underline that we do not accept, and cannot remain
idle before, a terrorist organization being praised for committing to limiting its level
of criminality. We just heard from Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Gamba that, despite an increasing number of parties having signed commitments
with the United Nations to end their violations in different areas, numbers do
not seem to be dropping. This is indeed not surprising; believing that a terrorist
organization, whose primary method is to inflict fear through violence would be
bound by commitments under an international legal framework is an illusion.
However, what is surprising and equally disturbing is to see that the burden
of the failure of PKK/YPG to abide by its commitments is cast upon a Member
State. This attempt to whitewash the crimes of this terrorist organization perpetrated
against children through such pretexts is regrettable. This approach needs to be
urgently reversed.
My Government fully shares and supports the agenda of the United Nations in
addressing the situation of children in armed conflict. For that, we show utmost care
and take all precautions under international humanitarian law. We will continue to
work closely and in complete transparency with the Special Representative’s Office
to make sure that all the information they receive is correct and complete.
We also take all necessary measures to alleviate the suffering of children
fleeing armed conflict. Of the almost 4 million Syrians having fled to Turkey for
obvious reasons, 1.7 million are children under 18. We have mobilized our resources
to provide proper and dignified living conditions for Syrian children who are under
temporary protection in Turkey, from free education to health care.
In conclusion, I would like to underline Turkey’s unwavering support to all
international and regional efforts related to the protection of children.

20-08906131/137

S/2020/594

Annex 71
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United Arab
Emirates to the United Nations, Lana Nusseibeh
I would like to thank you, Sir, for organizing this open video-teleconference
on children and armed conflict. I also thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Virginia Gamba and UNICEF Executive Director Henrietta Fore for their
insightful briefings today.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is having broad-reaching and
long-term impacts on lives and livelihoods. For children living in conflict situations,
this adds yet another layer of vulnerability. They already struggle to access health
services and coverage for their basic needs, including access to education. The
weakening of their social protection systems incentivizes child recruitment by armed
groups as well as their sexual exploitation.
In order to mitigate the impact of armed conflict on children, the United Arab
Emirates takes this opportunity to renew once again its support for and commitment
to the Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire. We note with concern that
lack of political will has prevented the silencing of guns in most conflict situations.
The United Arab Emirates continues to prioritize the provision of medical
care in conflict situations around the world, which has a direct impact on children
and their communities. As part of the United Arab Emirates’ efforts to support the
global fight against COVID-19, we have provided aid to more than 60 countries.
Our humanitarian efforts are also directed towards the long-term interests of
children threatened by conflict, including such interests as education. The United
Arab Emirates firmly believes that education is not only the right of every child, but
also an essential tool for uplifting entire communities. The concept note highlights
how access to safe, high-quality education and vocational training is one of the
critical needs of children affected by armed conflict, and the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2020/525) similarly emphasizes that ending the cycle of violence for
children in armed conflict requires comprehensive reintegration programmes that
must include education and vocational training.
Since 2017, the United Arab Emirates has worked with partners such as
UNICEF to support the education of 20 million children in 59 countries, including
through the rebuilding of 16 schools in Mosul and Baghdad in the past year alone. We
have also funded two pre-pilot programmes in Iraq and Colombia so that refugees
and vulnerable migrants can get a UNESCO Qualifications Passport in order to have
access to higher education and employment opportunities in the future.
My country is deeply concerned by the high level of grave violations against
children in 2019 described in the Secretary-General’s report this year. In particular,
we are alarmed by the sharp increase in the number of verified incidents of denial
of humanitarian access to children, the overwhelming majority of which were
perpetrated by non-State actors, particularly in Yemen, Mali, the Central African
Republic and Syria.
The vulnerable situation of children is particularly troubling in the Middle
East, where the number of violations continues to be unacceptably high. In the longest
and most entrenched of the crises in our region, we are appalled by Israel’s neglect
of children in the occupied Palestinian territories and its detention of hundreds of
Palestinian children in 2019. The current plans for annexation threaten to further
undermine their rights.

132/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

In Yemen, the Houthis continue to be listed for grave violations, including
killing, maiming and recruiting children, deliberately attacking schools and hospitals,
and using dozens of schools for military purposes. We are deeply concerned by and
condemn in the strongest terms the Houthis’ escalating obstruction of humanitarian
relief efforts, with the Secretary-General verifying 1,553 such incidents attributed
to the Houthis, an increase of nearly 650 per cent from the already high number
of incidents of Houthi obstruction in 2018. These actions by the Houthis are
exacerbating the devastating effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on families in the
areas under their control.
Extremist and terrorist groups in our region also continue to pose a serious
threat to children. Da’esh in Syria and Iraq, Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham in Syria, AlShabaab in Somalia and Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula in Yemen, for example,
deliberately kill, abduct and sexually abuse children, as well as recruit children for
suicide bombings.
We welcome the delisting of the coalition to support legitimacy in Yemen, as
a recognition from the United Nations of the Coalition’s unwavering commitment to
protecting all civilians in armed conflict, especially children, and the precautionary
and protective measures the coalition has taken to strengthen the protection of
children in Yemen. Together with other coalition member States, we reiterate that the
coalition will continue to uphold its commitments and obligations under international
law, including international humanitarian law, as well as relevant Security Council
resolutions on the protection of children in armed conflict. On behalf of the United
Arab Emirates, as a coalition member, allow me to take this opportunity to express
the coalition’s deep appreciation of and full support for the critical mandate and
work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and her Office. We
look forward to continuing to work closely with her to strengthen the protection of
children in Yemen and around the world.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reiterates its continued commitment
to upholding the rights of children around the world and to the valuable architecture
established by the Council 15 years ago. We urge other Member States to promote a
qualitative leap in implementation. In order to do so effectively, full engagement and
consultation between the United Nations and Member States are critical to strengthen
child protection capacities and develop strategies to prevent grave violations.

20-08906133/137

S/2020/594

Annex 72
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Uruguay to the
United Nations
Uruguay thanks France for convening this open debate and aligns itself with
the statement submitted by Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends on Children in
Armed Conflict.
Uruguay expresses its deep concern about the increase in serious violations
that continue being perpetrated against children. In 2019, more than 25,000 grave
violations were verified by the United Nations, as compared to over 24,000 violations
in 2018. The high occurrence of sexual violence and of indiscriminate attacks
on hospitals and schools, as well as the exponential increase of cases of denial of
humanitarian assistance to children, is particularly alarming during the coronavirus
disease pandemic, when children desperately need to be protected and to have access
to basic life-saving medical and humanitarian assistance.
Implementing the children and armed conflict agenda is becoming more
pressing than ever. Uruguay would like to emphasize the following points we view
as relevant towards that end.
First, strict compliance with international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law is a necessity. Uruguay encourages all Member States to ratify and
implement the Optional Protocol to the Convention of the Rights of the Child on
the involvement of children in armed conflict. The twentieth anniversary of the
conclusion of this international instrument is an appropriate moment to advance
towards its universal ratification and full implementation. Uruguay endorsed the
Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed
Groups, the Paris Commitments and the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and
the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers, and calls on other
States to do the same.
The alarming number and increasing cruelty of intentional attacks targeting
hospitals and schools and their personnel, as well as against children seeking
medical care or education, make the full implementation of resolution 2286 (2016)
indispensable. Those countries not yet having done so should endorse the Safe
Schools Declaration.
Secondly, the effective reintegration of children, in particular those associated
with armed forces or armed groups, should be prioritized. Such children should
always be treated primarily as victims within the framework of legislation and a
juvenile legal system oriented towards their rehabilitation. Long-term, sustainable
programmes and services for children victims of conflict are required. They should
include psychosocial support, education and vocational training, and take into
consideration the specific needs of girls.
Thirdly, this delegation wants to stress the transforming and fundamental
role of education. Education is also key to preventing conflicts and achieving
reintegration. Sustainable Development Goal 4 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development underscores that every child has the right to quality education, which
has an important role in reducing poverty and inequality. Education provides children
professional opportunities and economic security and prevents them from resorting
to crime or from being re-recruited.
Fourthly, it is essential to take advantage of all instruments and mechanisms
that the United Nations has at its disposal to fulfil the children and armed conflict
mandate. My delegation wishes to highlight the role of the Special Representative
134/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

and her team, as well as that of UNICEF. They can count on Uruguay’s full support
in their efforts to protect children from conflict.
Likewise, the monitoring and reporting mechanism and the list annexed to the
report of the Secretary-General are effective tools that have a tangible impact on the
protection of children. When there is documented evidence that parties to conflict
committed grave violations against children, they must be included in the list. When
it comes to attacks against children, there is no place on that list for waivers or
exemptions of any kind. For the list to be effective, it must be complete, exhaustive,
independent and impartial. Otherwise, its credibility will be undermined, and its
role in condemning and its ability to respond to and prevent such violations will
be weakened.
Peacekeeping operations are also relevant instruments. It must be ensured that
child advisers participate in these missions and that adequate instruction is provided
to peacekeepers. In that regard, Uruguay provides predeployment training to its
troops on child protection issues, among other matters.
Violators must be held accountable for their crimes and face justice. This will
end impunity and ensure that violations are not repeated. States should cooperate
with the International Criminal Court, and the Security Council should refer cases
to the Court when appropriate.
In conclusion, the coronavirus disease means that millions of boys and girls
living in fragile settings face additional vulnerabilities. Children trapped between
the horror of war and the impact of the pandemic need stronger political will and
multilateral action from Member States. This is imperative to counter the current
global health crisis, which is already transforming into a protection crisis, from
having catastrophic consequences for the new generations. The unprecedented
crisis caused by the pandemic also represents an unprecedented opportunity for
cooperation and solidarity. We need to take advantage of this opportunity to protect
our children and safeguard our societies’ most valuable treasures.

20-08906135/137

S/2020/594

Annex 73
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Yemen to the United Nations
Allow me, at the outset, to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I wish you and your friendly
delegation every success.
The Republic of Yemen has acceded to numerous international instruments
on child protection and enacted several national legislations consistent with their
provisions to reflect the commitment of the Yemeni Government to those instruments,
including the Convention on the Rights of the Child, its Optional Protocol on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and the Paris Principles and Guidelines on
Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups. We endorsed an action
plan to end and prevent the recruitment and use of children in 2014, as well as the
Safe Schools Declaration of 2017, and signed onto a road map in 2018 by which
joint committees were established to implement it in partnership with the UNICEF
country team. We also issued a military order, signed by the Deputy Commanderin-Chief of the Armed Forces, ensuring guiding principles on child recruitment
and, on 20 February 2020, directives by the President of the Republic of Yemen,
Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, ordering the adoption of a mechanism
to verify the age of members of the armed forces and establish liaison focal points
within military units in accordance with the understandings of the road map with
the country team.
The Government of Yemen welcomes the delisting of the coalition from
annex I, section B, and commends the dedicated efforts of the coalition to establish
a child protection unit and provide for the financing of the Ma’rib rehabilitation
centre for former child soldiers recruited by the Houthis, which involved extensive
coordination with the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict. My Government is determined to update the
monitoring mechanism and looks forward to establishing an alternative mechanism
with new methodology for the selection of reliable sources. In the context of the
Yemeni conflict, such a mechanism will be instrumental in enhancing the accuracy,
reliability and objectivity of the information gathered, particularly in Houthicontrolled areas, where the country task team consistently faces obstructions and
threats and operates in an unsafe environment that severely limits the team’s ability
to carry out its mandate and ensure transparent and credible reporting.
In accordance with the national and international commitments towards
children in Yemen, the Government of Yemen is sparing no effort to implement all
the necessary measures to protect children and fully preserve their rights. To that
end, the Government of Yemen remains committed to implementing the road map
and has taken significant steps to reintegrate former child soldiers into society. In
that regard, we look forward to enhanced coordination with the country task team to
ensure the full implementation of the road map.
We also wish to stress the need to fund the reintegration and rehabilitation
programmes in Yemen. We urge international donors to provide the critical funding
needed to save Yemeni children from the oppression and terror of the Houthi militias
in areas under their control.
With regard to education and vocational training, the country task team
should place more focus on issues related to the manipulation of school curricula
by the Houthis. The severe consequences of such actions are most evident in Yemen
where the Houthis’ imposition of extremist ideologies in school curricula and
summer camps has increased trends of child use and recruitment and brainwashed
and militarized Yemen’s children. In addition, the military use of schools by the
136/137

20-08906

S/2020/594

Houthis deprives children of their basic right to quality education and puts them at
risk of recruitment and use by the Houthis and other armed groups, which exploit
the poor economic and financial hardships of Yemeni families in areas under their
control to recruit and use children in their absurd war against the Yemeni people.

20-08906137/137
