asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6935

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6935th meeting
Tuesday, 19 March 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin/Mr. Pankin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Carr
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Menan
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2013/133)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-26331 (E)

*1326331*

S/PV.6935

I am grateful to the Russian delegation for organizing
this open debate on a crucially important subject.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2013/133)
The President (spoke in Russian): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Afghanistan, Canada, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany, India, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lithuania, Slovakia, Spain,
Turkey and Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Australia, His Excellency Mr. Bob
Carr, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Denmark, His
Excellency Mr. Villy Søvndal, and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Finland, His Excellency Mr. Erkki
Tuomioja.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Vygaudas
Ušackas, Special Representative of the European Union
for Afghanistan, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2013/164, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Australia. I also wish to draw
Council members’ attention to document S/2013/133,
which contains the report of the Secretary-General on
the situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security.
I welcome the presence here today of the SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and I invite
him to take the floor.
The Secretary-General: I am pleased to brief the
Security Council today on the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

2

This has been an intense period of activity as we
look ahead to 2014. The United Nations is reflecting on
its future role, and we are preparing for the challenges
ahead. Our core priorities should guide us going
forward. We should continue providing good offices,
including support for elections, and maintain our work
for reconciliation and regional cooperation. We must
stand firm for human rights, and we must advance
development. Humanitarian action is also crucial to our
future role. It is especially important in order for us
to address Afghanistan’s chronic vulnerability and the
impact of the transition. I would like to speak briefly on
all of those issues today.
Afghanistan’s political climate is dominated by
the 2014 elections. Broad participation and a credible
process are essential to reaching the goal of a widely
accepted leadership transition. Let me stress that the
elections are Afghan-led and Afghan-managed. Now
is the time to take critical decisions. The Government
has committed to making the elections an inclusive,
consultative and transparent process. I welcome the
active and responsible participation of all stakeholders
in building a widely accepted electoral framework. I
also welcome President Karzai’s emphasis on adopting
electoral legislation at the opening of the National
Assembly. Agreement on an impartial, credible and
independent mechanism for electoral dispute resolution
will be critical. Another core element is the appointment
of a respected, widely accepted chairperson to the
Independent Electoral Commission. That Commission,
along with the Ministry of Finance and donors, will
have to engage seriously on the task of finding solutions
to electoral funding that are realistic and satisfactory to
all.
The Government favours an electronic national
identity card project. That is an important initiative with
wide-ranging potential applications. It should be used,
to the extent possible, in the 2014 and 2015 elections.
At the same time, it is important to understand that
there may be few improvements in voter identification
for elections during those years. That makes other
checks and balances, including generally agreed-on
rules of the game and anti-fraud measures, all the more
essential. The principle of respect for the independence
of the electoral management body in the conduct of its
constitutional duties is vital.

13-26331

S/PV.6935

Afghanistan’s greatest need is for peace. I welcome
January’s joint United States-Afghan declaration
supporting greater coherence in reconciliation efforts.
Expectations must be realistic. Reconciliation efforts
will not be quick or easy. The United Nations is
pushing for a culture of peace, including support for
a second phase of the Afghan People’s Dialogue on
Peace. Afghanistan’s people must come together, not
only to shun conflict but also to assume leadership and
ownership of the transition process for the sake of a
united Afghanistan. That is essential if we are to end
the more than 30 years of conflict and establish true
and lasting peace.
Our human rights efforts are built on constructive
engagement. We have reported on the torture and illtreatment of conflict-related detainees. A presidential
fact-finding commission also heard widespread
testimony of abuse and put forward 11 recommendations
to address the problem. On civilian casualties, the
Government and international forces have taken
measures to reduce the adverse impact of their
operations. Anti-Government groups must now live up
to their public statements and international obligations
and cease targeting civilians, using children in suicide
operations, attacking public places and using victimactivated pressure-plate explosives. Such actions are
crimes under international law.
I am especially concerned about the 20 per cent
increase in civilian casualties among women and
girls in 2012. UNAMA’s monitoring of civilian
casualties prompted two statements from the Taliban
that perhaps indicate a willingness to engage. I
encourage a meaningful dialogue aimed at reducing
the intolerable, continuing death toll and at protecting
civilians. I welcome the speech President Karzai gave
on International Women’s Day, especially his focus
on raising the awareness of gender issues among
men. But I remain deeply disturbed that, despite some
improvements in prosecuting cases of violence, there
is still a pervasive climate of impunity in Afghanistan
when it comes to the abuse of women and girls,
who have the inviolable right to live free of fear or
attacks. Women and girls are key to a better future
for Afghanistan; protecting them is central to peace,
prosperity and stability for everyone in the country.
That calls for strict application of the Elimination of
Violence against Women Law and ensuring that women
and girls can participate more actively in public life.

13-26331

We have to strengthen the way we provide
development assistance in order to strengthen Afghan
ownership. For its part, the Government must maintain
momentum on putting in place the economic governance
reforms needed to increase the sustainability of security
and political transitions. Tackling the illicit economy is
also critical to boosting economic confidence. The High
Office of Oversight and Anti-Corruption, together with
the United Nations, has documented the scope of the
corruption that is tearing at Afghanistan’s economic and
social fabric. I am also concerned that the Opium Risk
Assessment shows an increase in poppy cultivation. But
there have been positive developments on the counternarcotics front. Earlier this month, Afghan authorities
made their largest seizure so far this year, taking some
23 tons of heroin, morphine and precursor chemicals.
In addition to counter-narcotics, we face the
continuing challenge of responding to the needs of
returnees and internally displaced persons (IDPs). I
am committed to finding lasting solutions to postconflict displacement. We have elements for success in
the Solutions Strategy for Afghan Refugees to Support
Voluntary Repatriation, Sustainable Reintegration
and Assistance to Host Countries and in the national
Afghan policy on IDPs.
We must prepare to look ahead beyond 2014. In a
recent meeting with United Nations officials, Afghan
representatives emphasized that they will need not
less United Nations engagement, but engagement of
a different kind. They consistently called for better
coordination in the work of agencies, funds and
programmes, so as to prevent gaps and overlaps, among
themselves and with others. The Afghan representatives
also broadly appreciated the need for a special political
mission, with an evolving focus and scope. The United
Nations must reinforce Afghan efforts. We aim to
strengthen Afghan political processes and institutions.
We want to boost the ability to deliver nationally and
in different regions. We must bring to a close the time
of parallel structures and efforts by the international
community and fully integrate our support for
Afghanistan.
To fulfil its mandate, the Mission must maintain its
ability to reach out across the country and to meet the
many demands it faces during this crucial period. As
such, while the budget of UNAMA for 2013 reflected
significant reductions, I do not envisage additional
reductions for 2014. We can then more realistically

3

S/PV.6935

assess the reorientation of the United Nations presence
in Afghanistan after the transition.
The success we have achieved so far comes thanks
in large measure to the dedication of my Special
Representative Ján Kubiš and all of the women and
men — national and international — who have worked
with commitment and dedication. We are ultimately
responsible for their security and their ability to support
the Afghan people.
We are approaching a moment of transition in
Afghanistan, a country that has survived decades of
upheaval. Let us work as hard as possible to ensure that
this transition leads to the stable, prosperous and safe
future that the country’s people deserve.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today’s important
meeting, which includes the extension of the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) mandate. I also wish to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for the month
of March.
We convey our gratitude to the Secretary-General
for his remarks, his presence and his report (S/2013/133),
which provides a comprehensive picture of the situation
on the ground. I also extend my appreciation to Special
Representative Kubiš for joining us today. And I wish
to thank the Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Carr, for honouring us with his presence and
participation.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
members of the Council for the spirit of cooperation
and openness shown during the course of negotiations.
A special thanks goes to Ambassador Quinlan and his
team at the Australian Mission to the United Nations
for the able manner in which they led the process.
In just two days, on 21 March, the Afghan New Year
will begin, a year in which transition to full Afghan
responsibility is central to our efforts, a year that will
take us to the next elections, a year to bring an end to
war, and a year for building confidence and resilience.
Since the adoption of the UNAMA mandate last
year, Afghanistan and the international community

4

have placed a new focus on the needs of the transition
period, which involves strengthening peace and security
and the realization of national priorities. Together
with the international community, we developed the
parameters of future cooperation to ensure the building
of a peaceful, stable and prosperous Afghanistan that
is able to stand on its own feet. We did that through
continuing dialogue with our partners and agreements
made at the NATO Summit in Chicago last May, at the
Heart of Asia Ministerial Conference in Kabul in June
and at the Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan in July.
More will need to be done to crystallize all aspects of
cooperation between Afghanistan and the international
community, including the shaping of our relations
within the region.
A successful and orderly transition to Afghan
ownership and leadership is about a continuous focus
on five priority areas.
First, strengthening Afghan national sovereignty
and national ownership and leadership are central to
transition. After more than a decade of shared efforts,
the strengthening of sovereignty entails normalization
through security, political and economic transition. For
the Afghan people, national sovereignty means taking
full responsibility for their destiny.
With the announcement of the fourth tranche of
the transition in December 2012, the assumption of
full security responsibility by Afghan forces is more
tangible than ever. By the end of that stage, 87 per cent
of the Afghan population will be living in areas where
Afghan security forces are in charge of security.
The Afghan people are keenly focused on a
successful political transition, and all eyes are on the
election next spring. The Government of Afghanistan
is committed to fair, democratic, transparent and
inclusive elections in which the men and women of
Afghanistan will again shape their political future.
Preparations for the elections are well under way.
There is an overwhelming consensus that a successful
and credible election will be necessary for stability and
lasting peace.
At the same time, peace talks and reconciliation
with the armed opposition are essential for a successful
election. The Afghan Government is doing its utmost
to ensure the success of the reconciliation process. The
High Peace Council recently took the necessary steps
to galvanize the reconciliation efforts. The support of
the international community, and in particular of some

13-26331

S/PV.6935

countries in the region, is important for an Afghanled and Afghan-owned reconciliation process. As we
work to move the peace process forward, the role of the
Security Council will remain imperative. We welcome
the adoption of resolution 2082 (2012), which refined
the Taliban sanctions regime in view of Afghanistan’s
leadership of the reconciliation process.
Secondly, during transition and the decade of
transformation to follow, the relationship between
Afghanistan and our international partners will evolve.
Strategic partnership agreements, such as those we
finalized in the past two years, are key for shaping longterm relationships and for stability during the transition
and beyond. Afghanistan has established bilateral
strategic partnerships with a number of countries,
including the agreement between Afghanistan and the
United States signed in May, which was followed by
the recognition of Afghanistan as a major non-NATO
ally of the United States. Talks are ongoing to conclude
the security agreement between the two countries,
which will be finalized in due course. Just last month,
we signed a strategic partnership with Norway. We are
now defining the parameters of similar partnerships
with Denmark and Finland. With the transition,
Afghanistan is entering a new era of relations with
international partners. We are committed to basing our
strategic cooperation on bilateral frameworks, which
is an important step towards the normalization of the
situation.
Our close partnership with NATO has been a
significant source of progress for stabilization efforts.
We look forward to furthering our partnership into
the transformation decade ahead. In that context, we
welcome the important discussions that took place
at the meetings of the NATO North Atlantic Council
at the level of Defence Ministers held in Brussels on
21 to 22 February, where NATO took concrete steps
towards planning improved capabilities and reinforced
its commitment to the NATO post-2014 role of training,
advising and assisting Afghan National Security Forces.
Such strategic cooperation will ensure the future
sustainability of Afghan National Security Forces.
Thirdly, economic transition and aid delivery will
be crucial for the sustainability of the transition. That
requires the commitment of the international community
in supporting our self-reliance strategy through the
transformation decade. The Tokyo Conference in July
was about not letting the drawdown of international
combat forces affect Afghanistan’s strides towards

13-26331

stability and prosperity. It will be important to see
how the realization of the mutual commitments made
in Tokyo will help us to address humanitarian and
development challenges, which is essential not only
for stability but also for sustainability in Afghanistan.
Afghanistan is committed to upholding the agreements
made in Tokyo, which include commitments in the
areas of equitable elections; good governance and the
rule of law; human rights, including women’s rights;
and inclusive and sustainable development. We look
forward to continuing to work with our international
partners on the basis of the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework.
The economic transition is also about improving
aid effectiveness, ensuring alignment with national
priorities, and accountability for and transparency of aid
spending. Aid delivery and efficiency are particularly
important at a time when not only do we face economic
instability as a result of conflict, but unemployment
and poverty remain significant problems. Building
the capacity of Afghan institutions to address the
challenges ahead will be essential. It is crucial that
the international community’s support be in line with
national priorities and channelled through the Afghan
budget, as agreed at the 2010 Kabul Conference. It is
also important that aid delivery be based on emerging
needs on the ground and directed to areas where need is
greatest. Afghanistan is ready to be held accountable for
every penny it spends. We believe that the commitments
made in Tokyo will facilitate a sustainable economic
future for Afghanistan.
Fourthly, relations with Afghanistan’s neighbours
and with countries in our greater region are critical
for stability and progress. Afghanistan is developing
its bilateral and multilateral relations in all areas
with countries in the region. We are in the centre of
the Heart of Asia Process and see that cooperation as
essential for peace and stability. Our partnerships with
all countries in the region can be mutually beneficial;
Afghanistan can serve as an economic bridge in an
increasingly globalized region that is seeking progress
and prosperity. At the Heart of Asia meeting in Kabul in
June 2012, participating countries agreed upon a series
of confidence-building measures regarding a range of
issues, a number of which were endorsed in February in
Baku. We look forward to the next ministerial meeting
in Almaty in April.
We are engaged with a number of countries on
our path to normalization, which includes helping

5

S/PV.6935

our reconciliation process. Most recently, we have
continued trilateral discussions with Pakistan and
the United Kingdom, as well as other forums, to help
cooperation. We are hopeful about the outcome of our
joint efforts.
Fifthly, a successful transition will require
effective partnership with the United Nations. Since
2001, the United Nations has been at the centre of the
coordination of international efforts in Afghanistan,
and we appreciate the important role it has played.
More recently, we have seen how the United Nations
is adjusting its role to meet the transition needs. In that
regard, the United Nations underwent a comprehensive
review of its activities in Afghanistan in 2011. In his
recent report, the Secretary-General emphasizes the
importance of realigning the relationship between
the international community and the Government of
Afghanistan, and it reflects on the role of the United
Nations beyond the transition.
As we complete the transition and transfer full
responsibility to the Afghan Government, we can
envisage the normalization of United Nations activities
in the years to come. Aid coherence, One UN and
greater accountability are important for Afghanistan,
for the United Nations itself and for donor countries.
Afghanistan looks forward to close cooperation
with UNAMA in the coming year as it continues its
efforts towards the priority areas of good offices in
support of Afghan-led political processes, human
rights, development coherence and the coordination of
humanitarian assistance. In that regard, we welcome the
renewal of the UNAMA mandate, which has continually
evolved to reflect and reinforce the principles of Afghan
ownership and leadership.
The end of the transition will signal the beginning
of a new chapter — one marked by national resilience
and the strategic goal of self-reliance. While the
nature of the international community’s engagement
with Afghanistan is evolving, its continued support
will be vital. The full realization of sovereignty and
self-reliance will make Afghanistan a more effective
partner for the world, but achieving that requires the
trust, confidence and long-term commitment of the
international community. Afghanistan looks forward
to lasting cooperation with our international partners
towards enduring peace, stability and prosperity in the
country.
The President (spoke in Russian): It is my
understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to
6

the vote on the draft resolution before it. I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Azerbaijan, China, France,
Guatemala, Luxembourg, Morocco, Pakistan,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Togo, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America
The President (spoke in Russian): There were
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2096 (2013).
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Carr (Australia): I am pleased that my first
address to the Security Council is about the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
I acknowledge the Russian presidency for the month
of March. I acknowledge, as well, the presence of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Afghanistan’s
Permanent Representative, Zahir Tanin. I also recognize
Special Representative Ján Kubiš for his leadership of
the United Nations Mission in Kabul.
This year’s UNAMA mandate will cover a crucial
period for Afghanistan. The Government will work to
address the economic and fiscal impact of transition,
intensify its preparations for the presidential election
in 2014, lead progress in the reconciliation process and
take lead responsibility for security.
As the transition moves forward, UNAMA’s
support to Afghanistan will become more, not less,
important. As Afghanistan moves through transition
to its transformation decade, it is important to
note the progress that has been made over the past
10 years. Through the leadership of its Government,
the determination of its fine people and the support of
the international community, Afghanistan has come
a long way. Large parts of the country have been
made significantly safer. Afghan people now live
much longer. Nearly 8 million people are enrolled in
schools today, including more than 2.7 million girls.
Approximately 85 per cent of the population have
access to health care. The Afghan economy is growing
at 8 per cent per annum. Security gains have ensured
that Afghanistan will never again be a safe haven for
international terrorism. Development and governance
gains have helped to ensure that the international

13-26331

S/PV.6935

community will have a stable partner. I am confident
that the years ahead will see the Afghan Government
protect those gains.
But to achieve that, the international community
must remain in Afghanistan. We must send a clear
message that Afghanistan will not stand alone.
International support has been instrumental to
Afghanistan’s progress. At the Chicago Summit and the
Tokyo Conference last year, we committed to standing
with Afghanistan well beyond transition.
The Council’s mandate for UNAMA will provide
the Mission with the certainty and capacity it needs to
support Afghanistan. As the Secretary-General noted
in his report (S/2013/133), it is essential that UNAMA
be resourced to fulfil its mandate, this year and beyond,
and to maintain a meaningful presence in Afghanistan.
Afghanistan will face some significant challenges.
The next 12 months will set the stage for the completion
of Afghanistan’s political and security transitions in
2014. By the end of 2013, Afghanistan will have lead
responsibility for security across the country — a major
milestone. The Afghan National Security Forces have
proved capable as transition has progressed. Australia
is confident that, with consistent international support,
their capacities will continue to improve, as will their
ability to provide security for Afghanistan.
The Afghan Government must also implement
economic and governance reforms to promote growth
and fiscal responsibility. With international support,
that Afghan-led reform process is under way.
UNAMA works with the Afghan Government
and international partners to implement the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework, under which
the international community recognizes and meets
Afghanistan’s legitimate needs for assistance and
Afghanistan remains committed to strengthening
governance and promoting respect for human rights
and the rule of law.
Advancing the opportunities for women and
girls in Afghanistan will remain a major priority for
Australia. We very much welcome the references in
resolution 2096 (2013), on UNAMA, to the need for
measurable objectives to secure the rights of women
and girls, as well as the need to counter discrimination.
We condemn absolutely all forms of violence against
women and girls.

13-26331

Afghanistan must also continue its progress in
fighting corruption and bank fraud, strengthening
human rights and building the capacity of State
institutions. Support for UNAMA is an important
element in those endeavours, and UNAMA’s role in
coordinating and delivering international assistance
remains essential well beyond 2014.
In order to entrench good governance and
conditions for growth, it is essential that Afghan society
be underpinned by solid political foundations. The 2014
elections are fundamental. We encourage the Afghan
Government to drive preparations for the presidential
election.
As those elections near, it is critical that the Afghan
Government set up an appropriate electoral framework.
The Government must lead the way to inclusive
elections which are accepted by the Afghan people. We
encourage them to utilize international assistance and
work with UNAMA to strengthen the integrity of the
election process, consistent with the Mission’s mandate.
A political settlement will be necessary in order
to achieve a secure Afghanistan. Military force alone
will not bring stability. Recent momentum in the
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned reconciliation process
is heartening. Our expectations must remain realistic.
We support the High Peace Council’s efforts to build
the conditions for reconciliation, including by ensuring
that the Security Council’s Taliban sanctions regime is
flexible enough to support an Afghan-led process.
As the Secretary-General notes, UNAMA’s unique
comparative advantage is its broad presence and
political outreach. Adequate resources and an effective
mandate will allow UNAMA to support Afghanistan
through transition and beyond. UNAMA will therefore
be able to meet its long-term commitment to the
Government and the people of Afghanistan.
That mandate provides a sound basis for UNAMA
to continue to support Afghanistan on behalf of the
United Nations and the international community.
Council members, and the wider UN membership, have
a stake in Afghanistan’s future security and stability.
The adoption of resolution 2096 (2013) renewing
UNAMA’s mandate highlights the unity of purpose
between the international community and the Afghan
Government in promoting Afghanistan’s future security
and stability.

7

S/PV.6935

Australia has welcomed the responsibility
of coordinating Security Council discussions on
Afghanistan during our Council term. In that role,
we will continue to work with Afghanistan and
international partners to support the country through
transition and beyond.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): At the outset,
I should like to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing. I welcome Special Representative Kubiš back
to the Security Council and ask him to please share with
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) staff and the United Nations country team
our deep gratitude for their continued hard work and
dedication. I should also like to thank Ambassador
Tanin for his partnership and to congratulate Foreign
Minister Carr and Ambassador Quinlan on Australia’s
assuming leadership of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) and
Afghanistan-related resolutions in the Council.
Afghanistan and the international community
are at an important juncture. As we have seen in
recent weeks, challenges remain, but we continue to
work together to achieve our shared goals. President
Karzai visited Washington in January and discussed
with President Obama strengthening Afghanistan’s
democratic institutions and supporting the country’s
long-term economic and social development. President
Obama and President Karzai also reaffirmed the United
States-Afghanistan enduring strategic partnership
agreement that they signed in May 2012.
Security remains key. The Afghan National Security
Forces now have the lead in overseeing security for
nearly 90 per cent of the Afghan population, and with
the recent announcement of the fourth tranche, 52 new
districts in the north and centre of Afghanistan will
soon be secured by Afghan forces.
As President Obama announced last month, more
than 34,000 American troops will come home from
Afghanistan by February of next year. We expect that
the fifth and final tranche of the transition will be
announced this spring, when Afghans will lead for
security across their entire country.
While transitioning security responsibility to
the Afghans is necessary for stability, it is not itself
sufficient. In that regard, an inclusive and credible
presidential election in 2014 is critical for the country’s
future and to sustaining international assistance to
the people of Afghanistan. The results of the election

8

must produce an outcome that is legitimately accepted
by the Afghan people. The announcement of the
election date by the Independent Election Commission
is an important step, and its timely completion of a
comprehensive operational plan will be another.
We note that Parliament is working on draft
legislation to further establish a lasting electoral
framework, including independent election institutions.
It is important that respected and professional leaders
be appointed to election institutions after a widely
consultative process. We recognize the valuable
contributions of Afghan civil society to those
preparations and the essential work of the United
Nations, notably the recent United Nations electoral
needs assessment mission.
In addition, Afghan-led reconciliation is important
for stability and the best way to end conflict and
bring lasting peace to Afghanistan and the region. We
continue to support the opening of an office in Doha,
Qatar, to facilitate negotiations between the High
Peace Council and the authorized representatives of the
Taliban.
As a part of the outcome of any process, the Taliban
and other armed opposition groups must end violence,
break ties with Al-Qaida and accept Afghanistan’s
Constitution. The outcomes of peace and reconciliation
must respect the historic achievements that a unified
and sovereign Afghanistan has made over the past
decade, including protecting the rights of all citizens
of Afghanistan — women and men — as guaranteed
under the Constitution.
Over the past decade, Afghan women have
emerged from the total oppression imposed by Taliban
rule. Women are essential partners in and contributors
to the building of a strong civil society and a stable
nation. Afghan women hold office at the national,
provincial and local levels, and serve on the High Peace
Council and in provincial peace councils. They start
and run businesses of all kinds and organize to serve
their communities and have their voices heard. As
Afghanistan builds a better future, the contributions,
intrinsic worth and fundamental dignity of Afghan
women must continue to be embraced.
Afghanistan’s progress is due primarily to the grit,
determination and hard work of the Afghan people.
It is they who have come this far. The international
community has provided vital assistance along the way
and will continue to do so.

13-26331

S/PV.6935

Afghanistan’s neighbours must play a constructive
role in the creation of a peaceful and prosperous
Afghanistan. One vehicle is the Istanbul Process, which
will have a ministerial meeting in Almaty next month
and is expected to discuss the six confidence-building
measures of counter-narcotics, counter-terrorism,
trade, regional infrastructure, education and disaster
management. Progress in those areas is vital for a
secure, stable and prosperous Afghanistan.
Since 2002, the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan has played an indispensable role in
the country’s progress. As Afghanistan continues its
transition, UNAMA needs to remain a committed
partner, and we as the Council need to sustain our
support during this crucial time.
UNAMA has weathered significant budget
reductions over the past two years, and we believe that
those cuts have gone as far as they reasonably can.
UNAMA’s resources should be stabilized now and the
Mission allowed to carry out its mandate with its core
functions intact. UNAMA remains a priority and must
be resourced as such. We appreciate the support of the
United Nations in Afghanistan and are pleased to have
extended UNAMA’s mandate for another year.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to start
by expressing my gratitude to the Secretary-General
for his briefing and recent report (S/2013/133) on the
situation in Afghanistan and the current activities of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). I also thank Ambassador Tanin of
Afghanistan for his statement. I would also like to
welcome the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ján Kubiš, and the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Australia, Denmark and Finland.
Azerbaijan welcomes the adoption of resolution
2096 (2013) today, which extends the mandate of
UNAMA for another year. In light of the challenges
of the foreign military drawdown in Afghanistan, the
United Nations should continue its important work
in promoting peace and stability in the country and
supporting the realization of the Afghan Government’s
priorities. The significant impact of budget cuts on
UNAMA’s presence throughout the country and its
ability to deliver on its mandated tasks will require
certain adjustments to its working methods and
approaches. We underline the necessity of allocating
adequate resources in order to enable the Mission to
effectively carry out its core tasks.

13-26331

During the reporting period, the Government
of Afghanistan continued to progress towards the
achievement of the objectives of the transition process.
We welcome the Government’s increasing assertion
of ownership over peace and reconciliation in the
country, as well as the ongoing efforts of the High
Peace Council to establish conditions conducive to an
inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned reconciliation
process. UNAMA’s support to the Council’s activities,
the implementation of the Afghanistan Peace and
Reintegration Programme, and regional dialogue are
important to the promotion of a unified vision among
all Afghans on the peaceful future of the country.
The implementation of the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework requires a vigorous and
sustained engagement on the part of the Government
and the international community in order to deliver on
their respective commitments. The endorsement of the
aid management policy and additional four national
priority programmes by the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board is a welcome development that
will provide for the more rational allocation of donor
resources in line with the Government’s priorities.
The period under review marked the continuation of
the quantitative decrease in security-related incidents.
We note the successful operations by the Afghan and
international security forces to prevent terrorist attacks
in Kabul. The decrease in civilian casualties for the first
time in six years is positive news, although the numbers
are still high, largely due to targeted attacks against
civilians by anti-Government elements. It is incumbent
on all parties in Afghanistan to take maximum measures
to avoid civilian casualties. Insurgents must denounce
the tactic of targeting civilians, which contravenes
religious and humanistic tenets and seriously
undermines the ongoing reconciliation efforts.
The enhanced cooperation between Afghanistan
and its neighbours and other counterparts within
bilateral and multilateral mechanisms on a wide range
of issues — including peace and reconciliation, regional
security challenges, development and humanitarian
assistance — is vital to the long-term stability of the
country and the region. In this regard, we underline
the particular importance of the Istanbul Heart of Asia
Process on Regional Security and Cooperation for a
Secure and Stable Afghanistan, which has already
taken practical shape, while its activities have expanded
significantly.

9

S/PV.6935

As a co-leader in counter-narcotics confidencebuilding measures (CBMs), Azerbaijan convened
its meeting on 25 January in Baku. On 6 February,
we hosted the fourth senior officials meeting of the
Istanbul Process, which endorsed the implementation
plans for all CBMs. We emphasize the need for the
timely realization of all CBMs, and look forward to the
next ministerial meeting of the Process, to be held next
month in Almaty.
Afghanistan occupies a special place in Azerbaijan’s
foreign policy. My country has for many years been a
part of international efforts in Afghanistan. It joined
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) at
its inception and has increased its military participation
therein. Last year, we took a decision to continue our
partnership with NATO in the post-2014 training,
advice and assistance mission in Afghanistan.
Azerbaijan provides its land and airspace to ISAF
countries for transits to Afghanistan. This accounts
for more than 35 per cent of all non-lethal transit.
As the planning for the withdrawal of ISAF forces
and equipment from Afghanistan is under way, the
role of Azerbaijan as a transit country becomes more
significant. The completion of new regional and
national infrastructures, such as the Baku-Tbilisi-Kars
railroad and the new Baku International Sea Trade Port
will further enhance Azerbaijan’s capacities.
Azerbaijan actively participates in relevant
international and regional political initiatives aimed
at promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan,
including the Istanbul Heart of Asia Process, where we
co-chair counter-narcotics and regional infrastructure
confidence-building measures.
Determined as we are to stand by the Government
of Afghanistan and its people in their legitimate
aspirations to become a secure, self-reliant and selfsustaining State, Azerbaijan has been increasing
its bilateral assistance through financial support
and capacity-building programmes in military and
other areas in Afghanistan. Last year, we earmarked
€2 million for the Afghan National Army trust fund.
We attach great priority to assisting Afghanistan
through the implementation of existing and the
development of new capacity-building and training
programmes and initiatives in non-military spheres,
including the civil service, law enforcement,
mine action, border control, customs, health and
rehabilitation, transport and information, and

10

communications technologies (ICT). Our continuous
dialogue and interaction with our Afghan counterparts
in these areas — in particular, the frequent visits in
recent months to Baku and Kabul by high-level officials
from various agencies of both countries — have further
strengthened our bilateral relations. I am pleased to
note that the Azerbaijan International Development
Agency recently earmarked $150,000 for the United
Nations Development Programme in support of the ICT
sphere in Afghanistan.
In conclusion, I would like to express my country’s
continued support for Afghanistan’s sovereignty,
territorial integrity and unity, and to reaffirm our
resolve to further support the efforts of the brotherly
Afghan people to build a better future.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
statement and his recent report on the situation in
Afghanistan (S/2013/133). I should also like to thank
Ambassador Tanin for his important contribution. I
should also like to recognize the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ján Kubiš
at the helm of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), and the leadership of Australia
on this matter within the Security Council.
Today’s debate is taking place at a decisive moment
for Afghanistan as we look ahead to the dual transition
that will take place in 2014: the political transition
culminating in presidential and provincial elections
in April 2014, and the security transition, which will
see the conclusion of the withdrawal of International
Security Assistance Force troops at the end of 2014,
with the full transfer of security responsibilities to the
Afghan security forces. Together, these events will
signal a new phase of sovereignty and independence for
Afghanistan. Attention must therefore be given not only
to how to ensure the steps needed to achieve a successful
transition, which is key to peace and stability in the
country, but also the modalities and configuration of
assistance from the international community following
2014, including the role of the United Nations and
UNAMA, whose mandate the Security Council has
today extended for another year.
With regard to the elections, it is of the utmost
importance that all steps be taken to ensure that we
reach April 2014 with an orderly electoral process. It
will be essential for all Afghan institutions to agree
on a legal framework that will govern this process and

13-26331

S/PV.6935

endow it with clear ground rules. The decision of the
Afghan authorities to request assistance from UNAMA
in this area is a decidedly positive development. We
hope that that support continues and produces tangible
results.
We
also
understand
that
the
ongoing
professionalization of the Afghan National Security
Forces, as well as respect for international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, should
continue to be central elements of a transition that
institutionalizes the protection of civilians and ensures
the leadership and civilian control of the security sector.
On that point we cannot fail to express concern
over the number of civilian victims caused by the
conflict, which, while less than recorded in 2012,
continues to be unacceptable. The rise in the number of
deliberate attacks against civilians merely because they
are believed to support the Government is particularly
alarming, as is the increase in the number of women
and children killed or injured in that same period.
All parties, in particular the anti-Government forces,
responsible for most of the victims, should take the
necessary measures to ensure the protection of civilians
and to fulfil their obligations under international law.
For Argentina, dialogue and reconciliation are
critical in Afghanistan in order to change the dynamic
of the conflict and to address the security challenges.
We understand that any national reconciliation process
that is launched must be headed and led by the Afghans
themselves. In that regard, we support the efforts of
the High Peace Council. At the same time, we wish
to recognize and welcome the steps taken by the
Government of Pakistan so that such a process can take
place. We hope that the emerging positive signs will
lead to a dialogue with clear parametres and objectives.
With regard to the role of the United Nations
in Afghanistan, we believe that UNAMA has a very
important role in the transition phase and post-2014 in
key areas, such as support for the electoral process, the
promotion and protection of human rights, coordination
between donors and the Government, the facilitation of
the peace and reconciliation process, the coordination
of humanitarian assistance, the return and rehabilitation
of refugees and the capacity-building of the Afghan
authorities and institutions, in order to meet the
needs of its population and to increasingly ensure the
exercise of economic, social and cultural rights in the
context of ongoing sustainable development. We must

13-26331

therefore begin a process of reflection on UNAMA’s
future role up to and post-2014. A robust UNAMA
with a clear mandate and the necessary resources for
its implementation are issues of critical importance.
That will signal that the international community
continues to support a democratic, prosperous, stable
and sovereign Afghanistan.
For that reason, we wish to express our satisfaction
with the fact that the UNAMA mandate that we have
renewed today maintains its basic features, including
the Mission’s role with regard to elections at the request
of the Afghan authorities, and the emphasis on the
protection of civilians and the monitoring of violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law in Afghanistan, in particular with
regard to women and children. In the light of the
most recent report of the Secretary-General on sexual
violence in conflict (S/2013/149), we also welcome the
fact that resolution 2096 (2013) continues to underscore
the importance of implementing resolution 1325 (2000)
and the subsequent resolutions on women and peace
and security.
UNAMA has also played, and should continue to
play, a significant role in supporting Afghanistan’s
efforts to promote human rights. We encourage the
Afghan authorities to continue strengthening an
effective system of protection, bearing in mind in
particular the recommendations made by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights in her most recent
report on the situation in the country.
It would not be appropriate on our part to try to
offer recommendations on the way in which the Afghan
people and Government should resolve their difficulties.
However, in conclusion, I would like to briefly point
out three important issues for Argentina.
First, while we encourage the Afghan reconciliation
process, we also believe that justice and the fight against
impunity should be at the heart of the pursuit of lasting
peace. For that reason, we believe that steps should be
taken to strengthen the institutional capacity in order to
ensure accountability in cases of massive human rights
violations, war crimes and crimes against humanity,
in line with the recommendations in the annual report
on the protection of civilians (S/2012/376) and in the
report of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Secondly, according to the report of the SecretaryGeneral, poppy cultivation has increased for the third
consecutive year. That is to say that, despite the efforts

11

S/PV.6935

of the international community, the problem of the
illicit trafficking of opiates continues to be a matter
of serious concern. We understand that dealing with
the issue requires a comprehensive strategy that takes
into account supply and demand and the adoption
of prohibition and socioeconomic measures. For
Argentina, the issue of terrorism and the fight against
drug trafficking are separate matters that require
different and distinct strategies, as well as the clear
commitment of the Government of Afghanistan, the
States of the region and the international community.
Thirdly, we are convinced that the basis for solid
democracy and stable and lasting peace in Afghanistan
can be established only through a focus that includes
the broader dimensions of economic, cultural and social
development, the promotion and protection of human
rights and the strengthening of the rule of law. That is
the future that we desire for the country and to which
the international community is committed.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would,
first of all, like to thank the Secretary-General for
presenting his report on the situation in Afghanistan
and the activities of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (S/2013/133). Togo reiterates
its congratulations to the Secretary-General and to
the staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). We also thank the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan for his statement. Lastly,
I welcome the ministers who have come to New York
in order to take part in this debate convened by the
Russian presidency of the Council.
The situation in Afghanistan remains at the heart
of the concerns of the international community,
which has spared no effort to promote sustainable
peace and development in that country. As a result,
the implementation of the Kabul process regarding
good governance has made progress. International
partners have supported the Afghan Government in
the implementation and follow-up to the commitments
made at the Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan on 8 July
2012. Along those same lines, discussions on defining
the objectives with regard to the core elements of the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework, which must
be achieved before the meeting of senior officials in
July, have continued. We hope that those objectives can
be achieved within the set time frame. In the context
of our debate, my delegation will take up five points,
namely, on the political process, the issue of security,

12

the human rights situation, humanitarian aid and the
drug scourge.
With regard to the political process, the SecretaryGeneral’s report notes the efforts for reconciliation
and the preparations for the elections in 2014. We hope
that the ulema peace conference, to take place under
the auspices of the High Peace Council, the outreach
activities and the inter-Afghan dialogue, promoted
by UNAMA and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), will help to strengthen the basis
of a true reconciliation in the country.
At the same time, we note the readiness stated by
the President of the country to renew contact with the
Taliban who wish to hold talks with the High Council.
To that end, the commitment of the Afghan, Pakistan,
British and French Governments to help bring together
the various sensitivities of Afghan society in the context
of an inclusive dialogue should be welcomed.
The convening and holding of presidential
and provincial elections in a year’s time remain
crucial elements in the political process under way
in Afghanistan. In December 2012, the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2012/907) noted a lack of
compromise between the two houses of the National
Assembly with respect to the appointment of a new
President and members of the Independent Election
Commission. Although the stalemate persists to this
day, we nevertheless note some positive signs, such
as the decision to begin the distribution of electronic
national identity cards, beginning on 21 March 2013,
and the active and continuous participation of political
parties and civil society in electoral activities.
Moreover, we welcome the ongoing support
of UNDP through the ELECT II electoral support
project aimed at strengthening the legal and electoral
capabilities of Afghan institutions. We also welcome the
information exchange sessions aimed at harmonizing
the efforts of international stakeholders in the electoral
process. We also hope that the recommendations
made by the Electoral Assistance Division of the
Department of Political Affairs following the recent
assessment missions will enable the parameters for
electoral assistance on the part of the United Nations
to be defined. We call on the Afghan Government to
preserve the independence of electoral institutions, so
as to prevent a crisis that could undermine the political
process.

13-26331

S/PV.6935

Security in Afghanistan continues to be a matter of
great concern, at a time when a progressive handover
of security responsibilities is taking place from the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) to
Afghan security institutions, which will henceforth be
responsible for the security of almost all of the country.
Indeed, many incidents, in particular the attack against
the Jalalabad airfield in December 2012, the attack
against the National Directorate of Security and its
Director General, violence committed against civilians
and attacks on humanitarian personnel, are all sources
of concern. Togo nevertheless hopes that the capacitybuilding programmes for the Afghan National Police
and National Army and the project to transform the
National Police, which is currently a security force, into
a law enforcement and neighbourhood police force will
help to bring the security situation under control.
We are equally concerned about the human rights
situation, in particular as it pertains to violence against
women. We note, by way of example, the assassination
in December 2012 of the Acting Director of the
Department of Women Affairs in Laghman Province,
which was the second assassination of the incumbent
there in less than five months. We also note a 20 per
cent increase in the number of women and girls killed
or wounded over the past year. Nevertheless, we
welcome the work of the United Nations Population
Fund, UN-Women and the World Health Organization.
Thanks to their support, an intake system has been
established for treating victims of sexual violence and
providing care for them.
With respect to the rights of children, we are grateful
to the United Nations for having created the action
plan for the prevention of underage recruitment and its
annexes on the killing and maiming of children and on
sexual violence against children. We welcome the strong
support from the Afghan Minister for Foreign Affairs
and his commitment to convene the Interministerial
Steering Committee and Technical Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. We also welcome the
decree by President Karzai on 16 February 2013 on
the implementation of recommendations pursuant to
the UNAMA findings regarding torture committed by
many State institutions.
In the curent difficult circumstances, the
humanitarian situation remains fragile, in spite
of efforts to stabilize it. Togo is pleased with the
initiatives undertaken to deal with those difficulties,
in particular the meeting of 23 January 2012 between

13-26331

Afghanistan, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Pakistan and
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
on the implementation of the Solutions Strategy for
Afghan Refugees to Support Voluntary Repatriation,
Sustainable Reintegration and Assistance to Host
Countries. Appropriate solutions must also be found to
the issue of internally displaced persons, as the number
of such individuals continues to grow.
The issue of narcotics in Afghanistan is a recurring
one. According to the preliminary results of the Opium
Risk Assessment 2013 for many areas of the country
by the Ministry of Counter-Narcotics and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, poppy cultivation
has increased for the third consecutive year. Given the
alleged presence of jihadist and mujahideen elements
from Afghanistan and the region among terrorist and
drug-funded jihadist armed groups in the north of Mali,
we believe the Secretary-General should determine
whether illicit drugs produced in Afghanistan or
transiting through it are having any impact on the
region of the Sahel and West Africa.
In conclusion, we would like to express our
great gratitude to the neighbouring countries of
Afghanistan, UNAMA and the United Nations funds
and programmes for their unrelenting efforts, in a
most difficult context, to ensure a more promising
future for Afghanistan, given the withdrawal of
ISAF in December 2014. Clearly, with the announced
withdrawal of the international forces coming up next
year, many challenges remain in spite of the progress
made and the desire of the Afghan authorities to work
to reinstate full international sovereignty for their
country. Here, Togo welcomes the efforts undertaken by
the Afghan authorities to integrate Afghanistan into the
system of globalization through strategic agreements
with neighbouring countries and beyond. The support
of the international community must thus be untiring.
UNAMA’s presence is also crucial, and no effort should
be spared to ensure that it is able to continue its work.
Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing
on Afghanistan. I also thank Ambassador Tanin of
Afghanistan for his statement, and I would like to
welcome Mr. Bob Carr, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Australia, to the Security Council debate today.
Afghanistan faces a number of issues that it must
tackle as it moves towards the security, political and
economic transition in 2014. The phased transfer of lead

13

S/PV.6935

security responsibility from the International Security
Assistance Force to Afghan security institutions is
progressing as planned. The continued efforts of the
Afghan Government to implement the commitments
under the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework,
including preparations for the elections, are noteworthy.
The timely development of a credible electoral
framework through a transparent and participatory
process is the key to holding successful elections. The
work of the High Peace Council in the Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process should
also be duly noted and encouraged.
We also welcome recent progress in the
development arena, including the endorsement of the
aid management policy. Over the course of the past
year, the international community has demonstrated
renewed commitment to providing long-term support
for the Afghan people at conferences in Chicago in
the United States of America, Kabul and Tokyo. Now,
timely and faithful implementation of the commitments
is vital to ensuring a successful transition. While the
Afghan Government’s ownership of the overall process
must be ensured, the sustained assistance of the
international community will be all the more critical
for the peace and stability of Afghanistan leading up to
2014 and beyond.
We welcome the decline in the number of civilian
casualties in 2012, the first such decline in six years. The
international forces and Afghan authorities have made
progress in minimizing the risk of civilian casualties.
However, we are deeply concerned that women, girls
and children continue to suffer enormously, including
through the use of children as suicide bombers and the
targeted killings of women.
Increased efforts to train the Afghanistan national
security forces and provide them with all necessary
support will remain crucial tasks in order to effectively
protect civilians and ensure accountability.
Afghanistan’s refugee situation remains one of the
largest protracted such situations in the world, with
nearly 3 million refugees and half a million internally
displaced persons. We call on the Afghan Government
to enhance its efforts to protect and assist them in order
to ensure their sustainable return.
Another area of concern is the increasing production
of, and trafficking in, narcotics in Afghanistan. With an
increase in poppy cultivation for the third consecutive
year, more efforts are needed to address that threat. We

14

urge the international community and regional partners
to further support Afghan-led efforts to tackle the drug
problem.
The Government of the Republic of Korea has been
actively supporting Afghanistan’s capacity-building.
As part of the provincial peconstruction team (PRT)
evolution strategy, the Korean Government transferred
its PRT base, previously located in Parwan province,
to the Afghan Government at the end of last year, and
is currently running a down-sized PRT. Furthermore,
following a contribution of $15 million to the Afghan
National Army trust fund in 2011, the Korean
Government contributed an additional $15 million to
that trust fund, and another $15 million to the Law and
Order Trust Fund for Afghanistan in 2012.
We appreciate the crucial role of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in assisting the people of Afghanistan and laying the
foundation for sustainable peace and development. With
the adoption of today’s resolution 2096 (2013) to extend
the mandate of UNAMA for a year, we look forward to
the Mission’s continued role in supporting the Afghan
Government in development and governance priorities,
electoral preparations and the peace and reconciliation
process. The Republic of Korea will remain committed
to working with the Afghan Government and its
people and will lend its full support to UNAMA in
implementing its mandate.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this debate
on Afghanistan. I also wish to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his briefing and the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin, for
his statement.
Thanks to the efforts of the Afghan Government
and people, the overall transition of Afghanistan in
recent years has proceeded smoothly, and remarkable
progress has been achieved in peace and reconstruction.
Afghanistan has taken important steps towards the
full realization of the ultimate goal of an Afghanistan
governed by Afghans.
Currently, the situation in Afghanistan is at a critical
juncture of its transition. A stable and prosperous
Afghanistan where all ethnic groups live together in
harmony requires long-term efforts on the part of the
Afghan Government and people, as well as sustained
support and assistance by the international community.
I wish to stress the following four points.

13-26331

S/PV.6935

First, the 2014 presidential and provincial elections
represent an important milestone in the Afghan
political process. China welcomes the efforts made and
the progress achieved by various parties in Afghanistan
in preparing for the 2014 elections. We hope that the
Afghan people will continue to pursue dialogue and
consultations as a way to appropriately address their
differences and ensure the success of the elections, so as
to lay down a sound foundation for the transformation
of the country.
Secondly, China supports the peace and
reconciliation process led by the Afghan Government.
We hope that the Government will listen carefully
to the views of the people and the various political
factions, expand the basis of reconciliation and achieve
greater progress. We support the High Peace Council in
continuing to play a positive role in promoting national
reconciliation, and we welcome the assistance provided
by Pakistan and other regional States.
Thirdly, peace and stability represent the basis for
national reconciliation and economic development in
Afghanistan. The security situation of the country still
remains fragile, and China is concerned by the large
number of civilian casualties. Any act causing innocent
civilian casualties is unacceptable. All parties should
comply with international humanitarian law and other
relevant international law and fulfil their responsibility
to protect civilians.
The transfer of responsibility for security to the
Afghan National Security Forces has entered the fourth
stage. The parties concerned in transferring security
responsibility to the Afghan Government should take a
responsible approach and proceed in an orderly manner
and attend to enhancing the capacity-building of the
Afghan army and police.
Fourthly, there is a need for increased assistance
and continued support for the Kabul process. The
parties concerned should effectively implement their
assistance commitments and, in accordance with the
priorities set forth in the Afghan National Development
Strategy, support Afghanistan in enhancing its capacity
to achieve economic and social development by itself.
China supports Afghanistan in enhancing cooperation
with other regional States on the basis of mutual respect,
equality and mutual benefit.
China supports the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in continuing
to play a central role in coordinating international

13-26331

assistance for Afghan peace and reconstruction.
China welcomes resolution 2096 (2013), adopted by
the Security Council today, on the extension of the
Mission’s mandate. China is in favour of providing
adequate resources to the Mission to implement its
mandate. During the transition period, Afghanistan’s
national institution-building and its capacity for selfgovernance will continue to increase. China hopes that
UNAMA will continue to engage in full consultations
with the Afghan Government on the implementation of
its Security Council mandate.
China has always been committed to good
neighbourly relations with Afghanistan. It attaches
importance to, and takes an active part in, the peace
and reconstruction process of that country. We will
continue to provide assistance to Afghanistan to the
best of our abilities and play a constructive role for the
early realization of peace, stability and development in
Afghanistan.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General and the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan for their remarks. I also welcome the
presence of Mr. Kubiš, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, and of Mr. Ušackas, Special
Representative of the European Union for Afghanistan,
and I associate myself with the latter’s statement.
With the end of the withdrawal of our combat
troops from Afghanistan, a new phase is beginning
in the relations between France and that country,
a different sort of relations based on strengthened
military and civilian cooperation. Since 2008, in Kapisa
and Surobi, the French army had the responsibility of
training the Afghan Security Forces and ensuring the
transition with the local authorities. That task has been
carried out successfully. French soldiers still present
in Afghanistan are focusing now on the withdrawal of
military equipment, on training and on the management
of the military hospital in Kabul and of the airport.
They are therefore in the service of the allied forces
and of the population. A treaty of friendship and
cooperation between our two countries has been signed
and ratified. Financial assistance to Afghanistan has
been distributed. Amounting to about €300 million, it
will help the country to move from a wartime economy
to a peacetime economy.
Afghanistan is on its way to regaining full exercise
of its sovereignty at the end of the transition process. The
international community is committed to maintaining

15

S/PV.6935

its support during the transformation decade. In that
context, I would like to underscore three challenges
that Afghanistan must face.
First, with regard to the fight against drug
production and trafficking, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, in its latest report, paints a
worrisome picture of that situation and of the current
trends. I will not revisit the numbers or the devastating
effects of that scourge in Afghanistan and beyond its
borders. It is clearly a matter of concern for the Afghan
Government and the international community, which
are mobilized together in the framework of the Paris
Pact and the Istanbul Process. The impact of this issue on
the future of Afghanistan is clear. We therefore feel that
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
could legitimately integrate it if not into the heart of
its current mandate, at least into its reflection on its
future in Afghanistan, in full respect for the remit of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and,
it goes without saying, in support of the efforts of the
Afghan Government.
Secondly, the presidential elections of 5 April 2014
and the legislative elections of 2015 will be an important
landmark for the international community and its longterm support for Afghanistan, as agreed in the Tokyo
Framework. We call on the Afghan authorities to
organize credible, inclusive, transparent and peaceful
elections by establishing a reliable electoral census, an
appropriate legislative framework and robust anti-fraud
measures, and by guaranteeing the independence
of the Independent Election Commission. We back
the supporting role of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General’s and the United Nations
Development Programme.
Thirdly, as to reconciliation, only a genuine and
inclusive inter-Afghan political process will ensure
the emergence of a stable and peaceful Afghanistan.
France supports the reconciliation efforts in that
country and is prepared to contribute to them, of course
in agreement with the Afghan authorities. In Chantilly
last December, we welcomed a dialogue session that
included different strata of Afghan society, organized
in full transparency with the Afghan Government and
in full respect for Security Council sanctions. Through
the adoption of resolution 1988 (2011) and 2082 (2012),
we also contributed to reorienting the sanctions regime
in order to make it more conducive to reconciliation.
I conclude by welcoming the adoption of resolution
2096 (2013). We thank Australia for its role as facilitator.
16

We also hope that what has not proved feasible this
year — agreeing on a shorter and clearer text and a
mandate focused on the realities on the ground and the
priorities of the Afghan Government — will do so in
the next. That should bolster the consistency of United
Nations activities on the ground.
Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me to begin by thanking the Russian presidency of the
Security Council for having organized this debate. I
should also like to thank the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative for Afghanistan, Mr. Ján Kubiš,
for their detailed quarterly briefings. I also welcome
Ambassador Tanin and thank him for his statement.
Finally, I also wish to thank Australia, represented today
by its Minister for Foreign Affairs, for its leadership
within the Security Council on this matter.
The report before us today (S/2013/133) comes at a
critical moment in the history of Afghanistan, one year
before the presidential and provincial elections set for
April 2014 and only a few months before the withdrawal
of the International Security Assistance Force from
Afghanistan. During the reporting period, the security
situation in Afghanistan improved significantly. For
the first time in six years, there has been a fall in
the number of civilian casualties, at a time when the
Afghan security forces have begun the fourth phase of
the transition, taking control of territory that is home to
the majority of the country’s population.
The falling number of casualties can be attributed
in part to the Afghan Peace and Reintegration
Programme, which continues its roll-out, and to the
significant role of the High Peace Council. By late
December 2012, more than 6,000 combatants had
joined the programme with the aim of laying down
their arms and joining the Afghan National Army. In
that context, the High Peace Council continues to strive
to establish conditions conducive to reconciliation by
launching direct dialogue with representatives of civil
society, women’s groups, religious leaders and political
figures.
The year 2014 will be a watershed year for
Afghanistan. Two major electoral dates have been set
that are of particular importance because they will
open a new chapter of Afghan history. In that regard,
we must ensure that the elections are organized
successfully by insisting that they be inclusive, reliable
and transparent. In that context, we welcome the efforts
of the Independent Election Commission to prepare

13-26331

S/PV.6935

the elections. In that vein, the participation of political
parties and civil society in the electoral process will
have a positive impact on the coming elections,
endowing them with greater legitimacy and credibility
in the eyes of Afghan citizens.
Afghanistan has made great strides, although many
challenges remain. Cooperation between Afghanistan
and neighbouring countries will be critical in
particular to resolving such issues as the fight against
drug trafficking, counter-terrorism, trade, education,
natural disaster management, and investment. Morocco
commends the many initiatives launched in that respect,
including the high-level meeting on the Istanbul Process
on Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure and
Stable Afghanistan, held in Baku.
Cooperation between Afghanistan and the
international community is equally important, inter
alia, to fulfilling the commitments undertaken in the
framework of the Tokyo Conference. The commitment
of international donors and financial institutions to
rebuilding Afghanistan is necessary if the country is to
implement its national priorities.
In conclusion, my country believes it important for
the process to continue the process that has been under
way for several years to stabilize Afghanistan, which is
emerging from a lengthy conflict, and to help it to stand
on a more solid footing and to rebuild. That will require
the international community’s support, but it must be
Afghan-led and for the benefit the Afghan people. We
commend the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan for their outstanding work in Afghanistan.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank you, Sir, for having
organized this important debate on Afghanistan. I wish
also to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing on the current situation in Afghanistan. Let me
also thank our good colleague Ambassador Tanin for
his encouraging statement.
Rwanda is encouraged, of course, by the positive
developments in Afghanistan, highlighted by the
Secretary-General, despite the challenges that the
Afghan Government is still facing. We appreciate the
work of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) in assisting the people and
Government of Afghanistan, and we are convinced
that resolution 2096 (2013), which was just adopted,
will somehow enable the Mission to better implement

13-26331

its mandate, with a focus on the key priorities in
Afghanistan.
Resolution 2096 (2013) reaffirms the strong
commitment of the Council to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity
of Afghanistan. We therefore express our appreciation
to the International Security Assistance Force for the
work it has done in fighting against anti-Government
forces and in enhancing the capacity of the Afghan
security forces. We welcome the decision to draw down
the international forces comes 2014, which will open a
new era in the history of Afghanistan.
We take note of the decrease in the number of
incidents and civilian casualties for the first time in
six years, but we remain concerned about the terrorist
activities that are still being carried out in Afghanistan
and that undermine the authority of the political and
security institutions of that country. We particularly
condemn the use of human shields and children as suicide
bombers, and we call upon the Afghan authorities, with
the support of the international community, to combat
such terrorist activities.
Besides security, Rwanda also believes that
reconciliation and national unity, through an Afghanled and Afghan-owned process, are of paramount
importance. We commend the efforts of the High Peace
Council to foster reconciliation in Afghanistan, and we
express our appreciation to UNAMA for supporting
that process. We believe that only a highly inclusive
dialogue can bring about lasting peace in Afghanistan.
We welcome the decision taken by some members of
the Taliban to renounce violence and terrorism and to
engage in a political and reconciliation process with
Kabul.
As we all know, reconciliation cannot be considered
in isolation from regional dynamics. We are encouraged
by the progress towards greater regional cooperation
that has beeen made in recent months. We support the
Istanbul Process on Regional Security and Cooperation
for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan. In particular, we
commend neighbouring Pakistan on its support for
peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan, which it has
again demonstrated by releasing 26 Afghan Taliban in
February.
Rwanda welcomes the holding of presidential and
provincial council elections in April 2013. The elections
will be a cornerstone of the ongoing democratic process
in Afghanistan as the drawdown of international forces

17

S/PV.6935

is under way. We commend the Afghan Government
for what it has already achieved in preparing for the
elections. We request UNAMA and the United Nations
Development Programme to continue their support in
enhancing Afghanistan’s electoral capacity.
However, we remain concerned about the human
rights situation in Afghanistan, in particular the
violence against women. In that regard, however, we
need to view the situation from a historical perspective
and to remember what was the condition of women
during the Taliban regime. We are encouraged by the
resolve of the Afghan Government in implementing
the Law on Elimination of Violence against Women in
Afghanistan. We call upon the international community
to continue its support in that regard.
Needless to say, the war in Afghanistan, following
a long period of Taliban obscurantism, had negative
effects on the economic and humanitarian situation
in the country. We deplore the humanitarian crisis in
Afghanistant, where more than 3 million refugees have
been registered in neighbouring Iran and Pakistan, not
to mention the growing number of internally displaced
persons, whose situation is aggravated by natural
disasters and poverty. We welcome the July 2012
Tokyo Confererence, where donors pledged $16 billion
in development assistance. We urge all international
partners to materialize their support and pledges to
Afghanistan, including through the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework.
Let me conclude by commending President
Hamid Karzai and his Government for the tremendous
achievements since 2001. We also commend the
International Security Assistance Force and UNAMA
troop-contributing countries for their sacrifice in the
cause of peace, security and stability in Afghanistan.
I would also like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Bob
Carr, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Australia. I would
like to commend him and our colleague Ambassador
Quinlan for the work well done.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Let me
begin by thanking the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2013/133) and for his comprehensive presentation
to the Council this morning. I also wish to thank his
Special Representative, Mr. Jan Kubiš, for his work
as Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). We welcome the commitment
and dedication of UNAMA’s staff, who, in demanding
conditions, perform crucial work competently. Lastly,
I would like to thank Ambassador Tanin for his very
18

illuminating presentation on the priorities of his
country.
Luxembourg associates itself with the statement to
be made on behalf of the European Union by its Special
Representative for Afghanistan.
I shall address three points, namely, the commitment
of the international community, the key role of the
Afghan authorities and, finally, the protection of human
rights in Afghanistan.
In renewing UNAMA’s mandate today, we rightly
acknowledge the long-term support of the international
community for Afghanistan. The planned withdrawal of
international troops by the end of 2014 should not lead to
a withdrawal of the international community. Instead,
we must move towards a renewal of our commitment
to help Afghanistan achieve its transformation into
a stable and democratic society. The international
community must stand with Afghanistan during that
critical period. Luxembourg has chosen to do just that
by adopting a holistic approach that combines the tools
of diplomacy, development and defence.
In the area of development cooperation, we
particularly support the work of the World Food
Programme in Afghanistan. Based on a multi-year
commitment, we also contribute to the Afghanistan
reconstruction funds administered by the World Bank.
We also contribute in the European context. The
European Union and its member States annually grant
Afghanistan more than €1 billion in development aid.
Luxembourg has participated in the International
Security Assistance Force since 2003. We committed
ourselves at the NATO Chicago Summit to continue our
substantial contribution to the financing of the Afghan
National Security Forces, with an annual contribution
of up to $5 million. Lastly, through the European
Union, my country also participates in the training of
the Afghan police.
The substantial assistance from the international
community will bear fruit only if there is a shared
commitment to implement the commitments made
at the successive international conferences of recent
years. In parallel, Afghanistan must continue its efforts
in the areas of the rule of law, democratic elections, the
fight against corruption, combating drug trаfficking,
and respect for human rights.
That brings me to the second point. Whatever
may be the extent of the support of the international

13-26331

S/PV.6935

community, the genuine key to success is ultimately in
the hands of the Afghans themselves. Their political
will will be crucial. That is why we fully support the
goal of transition so as to enable the Afghan people to
take charge of their own destiny gradually by assuming
responsibility for security and reconstruction. Pride of
place in that ownership effort must go to the electoral
process and the process of reconciliation, both led by
Afghans.
With regard to the preparations for the elections,
we join the Secretary-General’s call in his report urging
the parties concerned to adopt a constructive attitude in
order to avoid a deadlock, whose consequences would be
severe. More generally, as noted by several speakers this
morning, it is important to ensure broad participation
and to put in place a credible and transparent electoral
mechanism, so as to ensure that the outcome of the
elections is widely acknowledged and accepted by the
population. In that regard, it is essential that women can
safely participate as voters and candidates alike in the
upcoming elecctions.
In terms of national reconciliation, we support the
initiatives of the High Peace Council, and we welcome
the regional dimension that efforts at reconciliation
have taken on in recent months.
Human rights is the third, and final, point I would
like to address. Let us not forget that Afghanistan is
first and foremost a country of more than 30 million
people who yearn for a normal life for themselves and
their families, including respect of their fundamental
rights. In that context, we welcome the important place
that is made in the mandate of UNAMA for human
rights in general, and for the rights of women and
children in particular.
With regard to the rights of children, we are very
concerned about the continued recruitment and use of
children by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremist
groups, inter alia, to commit suicide attacks. We are
also concerned by the violations and other serious
abuses against children, in particular the continuation
of attacks against schools.
In contrast, we would like to acknowledge the efforts
of the Afghan Government in the implementation of the
action plan against the recruitment and use of children
in the Afghan National Security Forces, signed on
30 January 2011. It is important that UNAMA continue
to effectively support the Afghan authorities in the
implementation of that plan, and that it devote the

13-26331

capabilities and expertise required by the Council to
that end. Along the same lines, we welcome the appeal
to the Secretary-General that he continue to give special
treatment to the matter of children in armed conflict in
his reports to the Council, in line with the pertinent
resolutions. Indeed, that is an essential element in the
Council’s ability to support and follow up the activities
in the area of protecting children.
In conclusion, Luxembourg would like to reiterate
its full support for the mandate of UNAMA, which we
have just renewed today. It is an ambitious mandate,
one that will serve the Afghan people and testify to the
will of the international community to stand beside the
Afghan people.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): Let me start
by thanking the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2013/133) and his statement this morning. We
welcome back to the Council Special Representative
Ján Kubiš. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Tanin for his contribution to today’s debate, as well
as to thank Foreign Minister Carr and the delegation
of Australia for their leadership in the Council on the
issue before us.
The United Kingdom welcomes today’s adoption of
resolution 2096 (2013), which renews the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) for a further 12 months. Let me take this
opportunity to note the continued leadership of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the hard work of his staff throughout the past year.
I would like to focus my comments today on four
areas, namely, the transition of security responsibility
to the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF), the
progress on, and prospects for, peace and reconciliation,
the preparations for elections in 2014, and, more broadly,
the international community’s long-term commitment
to Afghanistan.
Turning first to the security transition to the
Afghan National Security Forces, let me pay tribute to
all the women and men of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) mission in Afghanistan and
to the members of the Afghan National Security Forces
who work alongside them. They continue to carry out
their duties with great professionalism and courage.
The United Kingdom is grateful for their outstanding
contribution to the peace and security of Afghanistan.

19

S/PV.6935

ISAF has continued to transition security to the
ANSF on schedule. This year, with the announcement
of the fifth tranche, the ANSF will take the leading
responsibility for the security of the whole Afghan
population, approximately 27 million people. As the
ANSF continues to grow in confidence and operational
experience, so will the confidence that the Afghan
population has in them grow. We remain convinced
that they will be ready, willing and able to effectively
manage Afghanistan’s security after 2014, and to tackle
any residual insurgent threat. They will have the full
support of the United Kingdom and of the international
community in doing so.
But tackling security concerns is only part of the
picture. Tangible and lasting progress on peace and
reconciliation must go hand in hand with that. In recent
months, we have seen strong consensus emerge that
a broad, inclusive political settlement offers the best
prospect for peace and stability in Afghanistan.
We particularly welcome the efforts of Afghanistan
and Pakistan to strengthen their relationship and their
common understanding of the Afghan peace and
reconciliation process. In February, the leaders of
both countries agreed to increase cooperation between
military and intelligence establishments, to strengthen
coordination on Taliban prisoner releases from
Pakistani detention, and to support the opening of an
office in Doha for the purpose of peaceful negotiations
between the Afghan High Peace Council and authorized
representatives of the Taliban. That sends a clear
message to the Taliban: now is the time to participate in
a peaceful political process.
Another pillar in a sustainable peace will be credible
elections that reflect the will of the Afghan people.
Afghan-led preparations for presidential and provincial
council elections in 2014 have started, and decisions
have been taken on issues such as voter registration.
The time is short, and the Afghan parliament should
now prioritize consideration of electoral reforms.
It is also important that the Independent Election
Commission and Afghan authorities work to establish
credible mechanisms to deal with complaints and to
prevent fraud.
I have on many occasions emphasized the United
Kingdom’s long-term commitment to the Afghan
people. Let me do so again. The United Kingdom will
deliver on all our commitments to Afghanistan, now
and beyond 2014. The United Kingdom’s support for

20

Afghanistan will be defined by more than just security.
We will pursue a relationship built on prosperity,
diplomacy and development, as set out in the enduring
strategic partnership document signed in 2012.
The Afghan Government, with the support of the
international community, should continue to make
further progress in the areas that underpin sustained
economic growth and development. Those include,
in particular, areas such as education, health and
other basic services for women and girls, as well as
strengthened respect for human rights so that all can
play a full part in the collective life of a stable and
prosperous Afghanistan.
Mutual accountability is of paramount importance
in order to achieve our shared objectives. The United
Kingdom attaches great importance to that and will
seek to play a major role in supporting our shared
responsibilities, holding each other to account for
the promises that we have made. We look forward to
co-chairing the first ministerial review of progress
against the Tokyo commitments in 2014.
As Afghanistan moves from transition into the
transformation decade, we are focused on the great
opportunities and challenges that lie ahead. A stable,
secure and prosperous Afghanistan is in all our
interests, and it is nothing less than that the Afghan
people deserve.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to thank the Russian Federation for convening this
debate. Allow me also to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for the presentation of his report (S/2013/133)
and for joining us today. I also thank Ambassador Zahir
Tanin for his important statement, and I welcome the
presence here today of Minister Bob Carr of Australia.
Our debate today offers us an opportunity to carry
out a timely, in-depth assessment in preparation for
post-2014 Afghanistan. We have commenced another
critical and historic year for Afghanistan and for the
United Nations. As we enter this new phase, we believe
that peace and stability will depend upon the ability of
the Afghan people themselves to ensure not only peace
and security, but also democratic governance, national
reconciliation, the rule of law and the protection of
human rights during the political and military transition
of 2014. In that context I would like to make the four
observations.
First, we consider it is a requirement for peace
and stability, as well as for the normalization of the
13-26331

S/PV.6935

Afghan political arena, that credible, inclusive and
transparent presidential elections be held in 2014, in
strict accordance with the provisions of the Afghan
Constitution. We therefore believe that all of us should
follow closely the progress in electoral reform and
the results of the work of the Independent Election
Commission, as well as the future designation of its
head. Both the Commission as well as the Electoral
Complaints Commission should take advantage of
the ongoing deliberations with the United Nations to
continue strengthening their capacities.
Secondly, we consider that another important step in
the political process is the necessary continuation of the
Afghan-owned and Afghan-led national reconciliation.
We support the efforts of Mr. Salahuddin Rabbani and
the High Peace Council of Afghanistan to pursue the
path of negotiation for a sustainable and lasting peace.
At the same time, it is important to continue sending a
clear message to political dissidents to the effect that
reconciliation dialogue will be held only with those
who renounce violence, have no links with terrorist
organizations and respect the Constitution, including
its provisions on human rights. We welcome the
constructive engagement with Pakistan, including that
conducted in a trilateral format under the auspices of
the United Kingdom, given the fact that Pakistan is an
important partner for Afghanistan and the region.
Thirdly, we commend the steady progress we have
seen in the transfer of responsibility for security matters,
already in its fourth stage, with 87 per cent of the
population now under Afghan security. We understand
that, under the transition, the role of the International
Security Assistance Force will evolve from the area of
combat to that of training, advising and support. In the
post-2014 period, the Afghan security forces will have
to demonstrate the degree to which they are ready to
take on alone the fight against such global problems as
terrorism, transnational organized crime and its links
to illegal drug trafficking.
Fourthly, despite gradual progress in some areas,
the human rights situation continues to be a concern
for numerous reasons. We note that while the number
of civilian casualties and injuries fell by 4 per cent over
the past year, attacks on women and girls were up by
20 per cent, coupled with the deplorable situation that
women and girls continue to face in Afghanistan. We
trust that the Afghan Government will take concrete
measures to protect and guarantee their rights, and we
fully support all United Nations efforts in that area. We

13-26331

commend the thematic reports from the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) on
violence against women, the situation of detainees and
the issue of the protection of civilians. They have had
an impact on the Government, which is already taking
steps to respond to the findings and recommendations
of the report on the situation of detainees.
Turning now to the development of regional
cooperation between Afghanistan and its neighbours, we
support the Istanbul Process. We are encouraged by the
recent meeting in Baku, which endorsed implementation
plans for confidence-building measures. We also
commend the shared vision of Afghanistan, Pakistan
and Iran aimed at finding strategic solutions for Afghan
refugees.
Concerning UNAMA’s mandate, Guatemala
supports its renewal for 12 months. For the transition
to be truly effective and irreversible, Afghanistan’s
institutions must be strong and capable. We believe
that the United Nations in general, and UNAMA in
particular, have an important role to play in the civilian
aspects of the transition. There is reason to maintain a
strong, decentralized presence throughout the country
beyond 2014. We agree with the priorities identified
in paragraph 66 of the Secretary-General’s report. At
the same time, we are responsible for ensuring that
UNAMA has the resources necessary for providing the
required support.
In conclusion, we believe that the United Nations
has the multilateral experience, the capacity for
coordination and the impartiality needed to meet the
challenges and requirements of the transformation
decade beyond 2014. We encourage everyone to pursue
their Tokyo commitments and not to abandon the goals
of the existing partnership between the international
community and Afghanistan. We cannot lose sight of
the broader picture when we know how much there is
still to do. In the Security Council, Guatemala will act
not only on the basis of its support for Afghanistan’s
leadership and ownership of the transition process, but
also on the Council’s primary responsibility to maintain
international peace and security.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): Mr. President,
we welcome your initiative in holding a Security
Council debate on Afghanistan. We are grateful for
the participation of Mr. Bob Carr, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Australia, in today’s debate, and appreciate
Ambassador Quinlan’s leadership of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011).
21

S/PV.6935

Ambassador Zahir Tanin’s statement gave us a
complete perspective on the challenges and opportunities
facing the people of Afghanistan. We thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his informative briefing
today and his strong commitment to addressing the
issues in Afghanistan and the region. The SecretaryGeneral’s latest report on Afghanistan (S/2013/133) is
both synoptic and exhaustive. It updates us on recent
developments, guides our discussion today, and outlines
how the United Nations should help Afghanistan in
the coming years. We thank the Secretary-General
for his recognition of the concrete support being
given by the Government of Pakistan to Afghan peace
and reconciliation efforts. Our commitment to that
process arises from our strong conviction that peace
and stability in Afghanistan are essential to peace and
stability in Pakistan and the entire region.
Afghanistan is on the cusp of three concurrent
security, political and economic transitions, up to 2014
and in the decade of transformation. If those transitions
are managed responsibly and skilfully, Afghanistan
will see security and stability dawn, and so will the
region. We are glad that this time there will be no
precipitous disengagement of the international forces
from Afghanistan. The drawdown is phased and well
planned, and bilateral and regional mechanisms will be
in place to help with the transition.
In the past 10 years, the people of Afghanistan and
Pakistan, NATO, the United States and other countries
have paid a heavy price in blood and resources.
Pakistan’s civilians and military personnel have made
unprecedented sacrifices. All those sacrifices should
not go in vain. The people of Afghanistan must succeed,
and we must succeed with them.
The tide seems to be turning. We are encouraged
by the recent progress in Afghanistan, despite problems
rooted in more than three decades of conflict and
strife. Pakistan has always supported and facilitated
the work of the United Nations in Afghanistan.
Resolution 2096 (2013), which the Security Council
has adopted today, tasks the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to facilitate
national reconciliation, to support the electoral
process and governance and to promote socioeconomic
development. We urge the continued engagement of
the United Nations in institution-building, the peace
process, counter-narcotics efforts, the return and
rehabilitation of refugees and the coordination of
humanitarian assistance.

22

The United Nations long-term political role should
be determined by the realities on the ground and,
more important, by the consent and aspirations of the
people of Afghanistan. We agree with the SecretaryGeneral that our expectations must remain realistic.
If there are temporary setbacks, we must stay the
course. The Council today renewed the mandate
of UNAMA for another 12 months. We take this
opportunity to pay tribute to the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative Ján Kubiš and his team for their
commendable work in Afghanistan.
As an enabler and capacity-builder, the UNAMA
footprint must be supported by adequate resources.
Donor fatigue and fiscal constraints in the international
economic climate should not squeeze the flow of
assistance and investment to Afghanistan. It is
imperative that all pledges be honoured and translated
into action. We welcome the phased transfer of lead
security responsibility from the International Security
Assistance Force to Afghan security institutions.
Pakistan’s bilateral relations with Afghanistan are
driven by a sense of shared destiny. Our cooperation
spans the entire spectrum of political, economic,
educational and cultural relations. To deepen our ties,
we look forward to the early finalization of a strategic
partnership agreement between our two countries,
which is being negotiated.
We are strengthening Pakistan-Afghanistan
military and intelligence cooperation and making the
trilateral mechanism comprising Pakistan, Afghanistan
and the International Security Assistance Force more
effective. The stability and sanctity of our international
border with Afghanistan is a shared responsibility. In
that spirit, Pakistan has proposed setting up a mechanism
at the Interior Minister’s level to devise and enforce
a border management regime in order to interdict all
kinds of criminals, including terrorists, drug traffickers
and smugglers. Pakistan has also established more than
1,000 posts along its border with Afghanistan. More
than 140,000 Pakistani troops are deployed on our
side of the border, at huge financial cost. Illegal crossborder movement will drop dramatically if security is
beefed up on the other side of the border as well.
Pakistan is committed to an Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process. We
agree with the Secretary-General that Afghanistan
will be able to achieve stability, growth and prosperity
only if there is peace in that country. Pakistan supports

13-26331

S/PV.6935

the efforts of the High Peace Council to promote
reconciliation in Afghanistan. We endorsed the travelban exemptions inserted into resolution 2082 (2012)
last December. We hope that those exemptions will lead
to the desired flexibility for engagement and dialogue.
At the request of the High Peace Council, Pakistan
has released a number of Taliban prisoners in good
faith and after giving prior intermission to the Afghan
authorities. Inclusivity will guarantee the success of
the reconciliation process. All stakeholders must be
on board. Instead of being hamstrung by caveats and
qualifications, all sides would benefit from building
on convergences, however thin they may appear at the
moment. Afghanistan’s international partners have an
important role in helping the principal interlocutors
to move towards that direction, but only the people
of Afghanistan can craft a road map for national
reconciliation and determine their political future.

representatives from 13 countries. In follow-up, we
are working to establish a regional contact group on
counter-narcotics.

Multiple regional approaches are being pursued to
deal with the complex challenges of peace, security and
economic reconstruction in Afghanistan. We are also
actively participating with regional and international
partners under various trilateral and quadrilateral
formats. Our effort is to keep them concentric,
coordinated and noncompetitive. In that regard, the
summit-level meetings among the United Kingdom,
Afghanistan and Pakistan have been most useful. All
those processes should culminate in economic and
commercial cooperation and help the neighbourhood
root out terrorism, extremism and illicit narcotics. We
must counter terrorists’ hideous narratives masqueraded
as ideology and staunch their flawed symbolism. They
do not speak for Islam or for Muslims.

The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of the
Russian Federation.

Counter-narcotics should be one of the top
priorities. We appreciate the efforts being made by the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
and the International Narcotics Control Board to track
and control the production and trafficking of illicit
narcotics. That serious threat demands massive efforts
and resources. We strongly recommend measures to
enhance the capacity of the Afghanistan National
Security Forces in that regard. UNAMA could also play
a supportive role to the UNODC activities in counternarcotics. Pakistan’s Anti-Narcotics Force is stretched
to its limits in interdicting drug traffickers from
across the borders. We are trying to evolve a regional
approach to tackle the problem. In November 2012,
Pakistan organized the regional ministerial conference
on counter-narcotics, which was attended by high-level

13-26331

The spotlight on the security and political
issues often eclipses the humanitarian situation in
Afghanistan. Pakistan still hosts more than 3 million
Afghan refugees. More refugees should be repatriated
to Afghanistan and absorbed there. Creating pull
factors in Afghanistan is part of the solution strategy
on Afghan refugees agreed to in Geneva this year. We
count on the international community’s support for the
implementation of the strategy.
We wish the valiant people of Afghanistan a bright
and prosperous future. As they move towards that
destination, Pakistan will remain their committed and
steadfast partner. What we need most is faith in each
other and a vision for a common future.

We thank the Secretary-General for his briefing
on the situation in Afghanistan. We welcome the
participation in today’s meeting of the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, Mr. Ján
Kubiš. We also would like to thank the representative
of Afghanistan, Mr. Tanin, for his detailed briefing.
Afghanistan is approaching a watershed in
2014, when important events are scheduled to take
place — presidential and provincial elections, the
withdrawal of the international military contingents,
the re-hatting of the residual military presence and
the so-called international training mission. Although
there has been an ongoing process of national
reconciliation and tangible changes in the social fabric
of Afghan society, the current situation in Afghanistan
raises certain concerns with regard to the future of the
country and the region as a whole.
Terrorism, extremism and drug crimes are far
from being eradicated in Afghanistan. We have not
yet seen a breakthrough with regard armed combat
with the Taliban. Many Afghan provinces remain
fully or partially under Taliban control, and the
Taliban continues to carry out terrorist attacks across
Afghanistan. Of particular concern is the continuing
spread of terrorist activities from the northern
provinces of Afghanistan into Central Asian countries.

23

S/PV.6935

Those countries, along with the Russian Federation,
are member States of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization and partners in the Commonwealth of
Independent States. The danger remains that leaders
of the International Security Assistance Force, NATO
and troop-contributing countries could unjustifiably
or artificially accelerate the process of transferring
responsibilities for the security of the country to
Afghan armed forces without taking into account the
true situation in those regions where the transfers occur
or the state of preparedness and military capacity of
the relevant sub-units of the Afghan National Security
Forces. For example, we do not understand how it is
that the completetion of the process is being planned
for the summer of this year, in terms of its fourth and
fifth phases, which cover the most problematic areas of
the country.
We attach great importance to the role of Pakistan
in the settlement of Afghanistan. It was our hope that
the conclusion of a treaty on strategic partnership — the
drafting of which was agreed between Afghanistan and
Pakistan in London in February — would facilitate
enhanced security in the region and the achievement of
a political settlement in Afghanistan, however difficult
that may seem today.
However, dialogue with the armed opposition will
be positive only if led by the Afghan Government and if
the armed fighters comply strictly with the principles of
reconciliation by laying down their arms, recognizing
the Constitution and cutting all ties with Al-Qaida
and other terrorist organizations. Those principles
must guide negotiations with the Taliban, inter alia,
through the contact office in Doha. It is unfortunate
that attempts to dilute those three principles continue.
It is important that, in exchange for concluding a
reconciliation agreement, the Taliban not cause the
country to lose all of its gains of the past 11 years.
We believe that the Security Council sanctions
regime must remain the most important counterterrorism tool — with respect to individuals, groups,
entities and organizations involved with the Taliban — in
building peace, stability and security in Afghanistan.
We support the measures agreed by the Security
Council to improve the sanctions regime in terms of
the Taliban, stipulating, inter alia, the establishment
of strengthened, flexible and transparent procedures
aimed at improved functioning through closer contact
with the Afghan Government. In the future we will
continue to work to ensure the effectiveness of the

24

sanctions as well as strict compliance by States with
their relevant international obligations.
The Russian Federation has consistently supported
the Afghan Government’s efforts to achieve national
reconciliation, combat violence and terrorism and
establish conditions for the long-term stabilization of
the country and the entire region. We will continue
to assist Afghanistan in strengthening the military
capacities of the Afghan national security forces.
Thus, upon the request of the Government, in 2012,
we voluntarily provided arms and armaments for the
Afghan National Police.
The prospect of a continuous, long-term, foreign
military presence in Afghanistan is not welcomed by
us nor by other States of the region. After completing
the stabilization mission, the foreign contingents will
no longer have a role. Moreover, far from acting to
deter terrorism, their presence has become a factor
in additional regional tensions. It is important that
military bases be truly transferred to the Afghan armed
forces, which means that they must be under Afghan
leadership and staffed by Afghan fighters.
It is also important to resolve the issue of drugs in
Afghanistan in order to ensure long-term stability there,
given that the 2014 factor could undermine advances
achieved in the security sector and risk Afghanistan’s
becoming a breeding ground for terrorism and organized
crime. All of the factors of the Afghan drug threat can
be considered to constitute threats to international
peace and security.
It is our shared responsibility to our Afghan
partners to take the necessary measures to stem the
drug threat. We therefore consider it necessary and
unavoidable to eliminate the opium poppy fields and
the drug processing laboratories in Afghanistan, just
as is being done to combat drugs issuing from other
regions, such as Latin America. We remain convinced
that every effort must be aimed at supporting the
efforts not only of the Afghan national forces but also
of the international presence, based on the principle
that whosoever effectively controls the territory bears
responsibility for whatever takes place upon it.
We are disappointed that NATO did not respond to
the Collective Security Treaty Oorganization (CSTO)
proposal to cooperate in that area and that the ISAF
has opposed CSTO participation in counter-narcotics
activities. We also do not understand why there is

13-26331

S/PV.6935

opposition to the addition of specific appropriate tasks
to the UNAMA mandate.
In the context of the necessary activation of the
international forces, we attach great priority to carrying
out the tasks set forth during the third ministerial
conference of the Paris Pact initiative on stemming
the Afghan drug threat, which took place in Vienna
on 16 February 2012, as an important step towards an
agreement on including drug traffickers on the United
Nations sanctions list.
We welcome any rational measure to provide active
assistance to Afghanistan and its neighbouring States
aimed at countering the global drug trafficking threat.
The Russian Federation is increasing its contribution
to such assistance through the United Nations. A
great impetus in efforts to counter the Afghan drug
threat could be provided through large joint projects
aimed at Afghanistan involving the United Nations
and development projects in Central Asia. Regional
organizations and neighbouring countries should
contribute to the normalization of Afghanistan and
adjacent areas, in particular through comprehensive
economic cooperation.
We consider it appropriate to improve activities
under existing formats, first and foremost the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO). Afghanistan and
other SCO observer States can actively participate in the
organization’s activities to draft preventive measures
to counter regional threats. We welcome UNAMA’s
intention to actively cooperation with the SCO.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Denmark.
Mr. Søvndal (Denmark): I thank you, Sir, for
giving me the floor. Let me, from the outset, fully align
myself with the statement made by the European Union
delegation on behalf of the European Union. I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his thoughtful
and thorough report (S/2013/133) and for his informative
briefing. Let me also welcome the 12-month extension
of UNAMA’s mandate.
Afghanistan has made tremendous leaps forward
since 2001. The security, political and economic
transition processes leading up to 2014 are all well
under way, although the situation remains fragile.
The Afghan national security forces are making good
headway in taking the lead in security operations

13-26331

across the country. Preparations are under way for the
presidential elections in 2014 and for the parliamentary
elections the year after. And economically, Afghanistan
has seen a steady growth in the past decade, even if
the country is still dependent on international aid.
That progress is due to the determined efforts of the
Government of Afghanistan and the concerted support
of the international community and the United Nations.
However, there is no room for complacency. We all
have to stay focused. There is a real risk that much of
what has been achieved could be lost, if our efforts are
not sustained.
As for Denmark, I can assure the Council that we
will continue to support the Afghan people on their path
towards a democratic, stable and secure Afghanistan.
Recently, the Danish Government announced a twoyear plan for Danish engagement in Afghanistan for
the period 2013-2014. Within that framework, we have
just decided to withdraw our combat troops six months
earlier than previously foreseen. We remain committed
to assisting the Afghan people beyond 2014 with
training, advice, assistance and financial support to the
Afghan National Security Forces and with development
assistance. I am pleased to inform the Council that
Danish development assistance will actually increase in
the years from 2013 to 2017 to an average of 530 million
Danish kroner per year — approximately $100 million
per year — making Afghanistan the largest recipient
of Danish development assistance. We urge others to
follow that example.
As reflected in the briefing and the other statements
today, there is already a lot of attention focussed on
next year’s presidential elections. It is vital that those
elections be inclusive and transparent and that the
result be broadly accepted by the Afghan people. This
is especially important because Afghans clearly have
taken to their hearts the concept of electing their future
leaders. I would like to take this opportunity to welcome
the role of UNAMA and of the United Nations system
in assisting the Afghan Government in preparing for
the elections.
We see a strong need for a dynamic UNAMA in
the years to come. UNAMA should continue to use its
good offices and its political outreach in support of
Afghan-led political processes. It should also continue
to promote human rights, including the rights of women
and children, and support the strengthening of the
capacity of Afghan institutions.

25

S/PV.6935

To that end, UNAMA needs adequate resources.
We are concerned about the recent cuts in UNAMA’s
2013 budget and would like to stress the importance
of providing the Mission with adequate resources. It is
vital that we do not hamper the ability of UNAMA to
fulfil its mandate at this critical time.

years. Good governance, democracy and the rule of
law are some of the most important areas that we need
to support in the coming years. At the same time, we
expect the Afghan Government to fulfil its obligations
under the mutual commitments made, including the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework.

As recognized by the Secretary-General in
his report, UNAMA and the other United Nations
organizations present in Afghanistan must adjust
as the security, political and economic transition in
Afghanistan progresses. The role of the United Nations
must, of course, reflect increased Afghan leadership
and ownership. We are therefore looking forward to
a thorough discussion of the future role of the United
Nations and UNAMA in Afghanistan as we approach
the transformation decade.

Human rights, particularly women’s rights, are the
cornerstone of Afghanistan’s development. To that end,
Finland will continue its cooperation with Afghanistan
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on
women, peace and security.

Only by working together can the Afghan
Government and its international partners realize the
vision of the transformation decade for Afghanistan.
The Afghan Government and people can rest assured
that Denmark will not leave Afghanistan in 2014. Our
cooperation will change as our military presence is
drawn down, but our support of Afghanistan and of the
Afghan people remains steadfast.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Finland.
Mr. Tuomioja (Finland): Finland aligns itself with
the statement of the European Union.
The situation in Afghanistan is at a turning point.
Afghanistan is going through multiple transition
processes at the same time. Those processes are
interlinked and equally important. The Afghan
National Security Forces will soon be fully responsible
for security in the whole country.
The Government of Afghanistan is committed to
crucial reforms in governance. There is still a lot of
work to be done in that sector, and Afghanistan should
not be left alone during these critical years. Finland is
fully committed to supporting Afghanistan when the
country embarks on the transformation decade.
Afghanistan has become one of Finland’s largest
development partners. Our total official development
assistance to Afghanistan between 2013 and 2017 is
scheduled to be almost $200 million.

Ever since the overthrow of the Taliban, there have
been important gains in strengthening human rights and
the rule of law. Nevertheless, a lot remains to be done,
and no backsliding can be allowed. Afghan citizens, in
particular women, still face insecurity in public spaces
and at home, as well as a lack of access to an effective
and fair justice system and legal representation.
It is of vital importance for Afghanistan’s
development that there be a strong international civilian
presence, under Afghan leadership, in the country after
the withdrawal of the International Security Assistance
Force. UNAMA has a central role in supporting
Afghanistan’s development efforts, providing good
offices for the peace process, promoting and protecting
human rights and coordinating international aid efforts.
We are extremely concerned about the budget cuts
that UNAMA is facing. If fully implemented, those
cuts would seriously hamper the Mission’s ability to
maintain a meaningful presence across the country.
It is imperative that UNAMA be granted adequate
resources to fully perform its mandated tasks. I would
respectfully urge the Security Council to do everything
in its power to ensure that UNAMA is granted adequate
resources to fulfil its important mandate. We owe that
to the people of Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to Mr. Vygaudas Ušackas, Special Representative
of the European Union for Afghanistan.
Mr. Ušackas (European Union) (spoke in Russian):
I should like at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you
and the Russian Federation on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March.

International aid is needed to build on the gains
that the Afghan Government has achieved in the past

26

13-26331

S/PV.6935

(spoke in English)
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU) and its member States. The
acceding country Croatia; the candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Iceland and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidates
Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina; the European
Free Trade Association country Norway, member of
the European Economic Area; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2013/133) and presentation, as
well as Ambassador Tanin for his report.
Last July in Tokyo the international conference
reaffirmed the partnership between the Government
of Afghanistan and the international community. The
Tokyo Framework is the core structure governing
mutual accountability between Afghanistan and its
development partners. Its implementation remains
paramount in achieving a successful transition and
transformation in Afghanistan. In that regard, the
EU welcomes the recently presented progress in the
Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board meeting,
endorsing four national priority programmes. The
finalized set of those programmes should allow for the
more rational allocation of donors’ resources in line
with the country’s priorities.
Afghanistan has made substantial economic
progress over the past 10 years, but a number of
challenges remain. As Afghanistan continues to move
towards economic self-reliance, it will be vital to build
confidence in the Afghan economy and attract and
retain foreign and domestic investment. It is important
that this confidence not be undermined. Therefore, it is
vital that the International Monetary Fund programme
remain on track and that the structural reforms
suggested by the World Bank on private mining
investment, the introduction of the planned value-added
tax, deep customs reforms to reduce opportunities for
corruption and leakage at borders, the improvement
of land management and land acquisition, and the
strengthening of internal and external controls will be
put in place.
Corruption continues to be a major problem that
touches the lives of many ordinary Afghans. It is vital
that the Afghan Government visibly tackle this issue in

13-26331

order to strengthen the legitimacy of the State, improve
service delivery for citizens and establish a business
environment conducive to domestic and foreign
investment.
Enduring peace in Afghanistan will have to rest
on a political settlement comprising all national,
regional and international stakeholders. We believe
that reconciliation has to be a totally inclusive, Afghanled and Afghan-owned process. Nevertheless, the
European Union and its member States stand ready to
support the process with the advice and assistance we
have to offer, drawing from our own rich experience in
conflict resolution.
The EU will continue to support the High Peace
Council. We also welcome the recent developments
in the infra-Afghan dialogue towards reconciliation,
including efforts to open an office in Doha, as well as
the positive steps towards an improvement in relations
with Pakistan and Afghanistan. Several EU member
States have also facilitated important events, including
the Chantilly talks in France and the United Kingdom’s
trilaterals between the United Kingdom, Afghanistan
and Pakistan.
With regard to the human rights situation, the
European Union thanks the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for publishing the
report on the treatment of conflict-related detainees in
Afghan custody in January 2013, and we welcome the
constructive response of the Government of Afghanistan
to that report. We thank UNAMA for publishing its
annual report on protection of civilians in armed
conflict, and we support its recommendations. We also
thank UNAMA for the report on the implementation
of the law on elimination of violence against women
in Afghanistan, and encourage the Afghan Government
to continue to work towards better implementation
of this law. In this vein, we also wish to reiterate the
importance of the full implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and all subsequent resolutions on women
and peace and security.
We encourage the Government of Afghanistan to
appoint new, qualified human rights commissioners
as soon as possible. The delay in their appointment
continues to constrain the functioning of the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission.
The EU will continue its support for civilian policing,
which is essential to strengthening the rule of law
and contributes to the promotion of human rights.

27

S/PV.6935

Assistance to the Afghan National Police while it is
refocusing on these tasks is of significant importance.
With regard to the elections, the European Union
welcomes and is committed to continuing to support the
efforts of the Special Representative in implementing
his mandate with regard to the holding of presidential
elections in April 2014 and parliamentary elections
in 2015 — elections that should be Afghan-owned
and Afghan-driven, inclusive, transparent and with a
legitimate outcome broadly accepted by the Afghans.
We emphasize the importance of adopting a sound
legal electoral framework, including the establishment
of a credible complaints mechanism. We encourage the
Government of Afghanistan to appoint the chairman
of the Independent Electoral Commission and its
commissioners through a consultative process so that
they may be accepted by the Afghans as impartial
and competent. We stress the importance of the
Commission putting in place a robust mechanism
for fraud prevention. Election preparations should be
transparent and inclusive, and they should involve
all relevant stakeholders, including the Independent
Electoral Commission, the Parliament, the Government,
the opposition, political parties and civil society.
Counter-narcotics is a cross-cutting issue and should
be tackled in a holistic way. The EU is contributing to the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime programme
in Afghanistan, as well as complementary regional
elements on enhancing border management. Moreover,
the European Union is promoting the development of a
national policy for agriculture, encouraging alternative
livelihoods to poppy production. The EU is also
supporting the Heart of Asia process and the creation
of a new regional paradigm that would help to reconcile
respective security interests and gradually build new
patterns of mutual interdependence, interconnectivity,
trust and confidence.
The EU reiterates its full support for UNAMA’s
essential role during the transition and beyond.
UNAMA will have a vital role to play in enabling
Afghanistan and the international community to work
effectively together to fulfil the commitments made
in Tokyo and in monitoring the human rights and
humanitarian situation. UNAMA must be properly
mandated, adequately present in the country and
sufficiently resourced to fulfil that role, in particular
during the transition year 2014. To this end, we support
the proposed extension of a strong UNAMA mandate.

28

As the Special Representative for the European
Union in Afghanistan for the past three years, I have
witnessed the progress that we have collectively
achieved in support of Afghanistan. We must all draw
lessons from the past. We have to demonstrate the
staying power of continued support for Afghanistan
through the transformation decade.
Respecting the Bonn and Tokyo commitments is
important not only for Afghan citizens, but as a sign
of progress to taxpayers in the donor countries. The
exceptional support pledged in Chicago and Tokyo will
be continued only if the presidential elections in 2014
are conducted in a credible, inclusive and transparent
manner and produce a legitimate outcome; if genuine
steps are undertaken to deal with corruption, justice
and human rights, especially those of women; and if an
environment conducive to economic development and
revenue generation is created. We count on Afghanistan
to show real commitment to achieving our agreed
objectives, and we will need Afghanistan’s neighbours
to take the lead on regional cooperation, together with
and in support of the Government of Afghanistan.
In conclusion, I can assure the Council once again
that the European Union is committed to Afghanistan
for the long term. In that regard, we look forward to
the swift conclusion of our cooperation agreement on
partnership and development as soon as possible.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French):
I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to address the
Council.
(spoke in English)
This meeting is particularly timely, given the
renewal of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) mandate today. The year ahead
will be a crucial test for Afghan leaders. The future
of a sustainable and functional Afghan democracy can
rest only upon credible and constitutional elections.
We welcomed the Independent Election Commission’s
announcement last fall that the next presidential
elections will take place on 5 April 2014, and Canada
notes that President Karzai’s tenure is coming to a close
at the end of his second mandate.
Canada encourages the Independent Electoral
Commission (IEC) and the Afghan Government to
press forward with the strengthening of the electoral

13-26331

S/PV.6935

process. We note with concern that the likelihood of
irregularities and fraud remains high and must be
mitigated well in advance of elections. It is essential,
in our view, that the democratic opposition be able to
exercise its full rights, as prescribed by the Constitution
and as affirmed by Afghans themselves. To that end,
we encourage the Government to ensure that the
process is transparent and inclusive. We welcome the
upcoming debate within the Afghan Parliament to
finalize the electoral and IEC structure laws, and we
remain committed to working with the Government
of Afghanistan’s executive and legislative branches to
ensure that the voices of all Afghan citizens, including
women, will be heard and honoured.

people, and upholding the trust of donor countries
throughout the transition period.
Canada also views positively the efforts of the Heart
of Asia countries to move forward a regional process
comprising specific and cooperative measures to
overcome the current challenges with regard to security
and the economy. The constructive participation of
Afghanistan’s neighbours in the country’s long-term
stability and development is absolutely essential to
realizing that region’s significant potential during the
transformation decade.
(spoke in English)
Canada welcomes the progress made in recent
months in the peace and reconciliation process. We
reiterate our insistence that women’s rights not be
forsaken for the sake of stability, as well as our support
for an Afghan-led and -owned process. More can and
should be done to ensure that the opponents of peace
do not derail the reconciliation process through acts of
terrorism.

However, elections alone do not make a vibrant,
inclusive and democratic society; the Government of
Afghanistan must also deliver on its rule of law and
human rights commitments. UNAMA’s most recent
report on the elimination of violence against women
noted that there remained a disturbing under-reporting
of incidents of violence against women, and a lack of
serious investigation into credible allegations. More
needs to be done to implement the important provisions
of that law. More must be done to uphold the integrity
of the relationship between Afghan women and their
laws. The Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission is essential for the defence of these rights,
among others, and the Government of Afghanistan must
move forward with the appointment of commissioners.
We caution and stress that those appointments should
be merit-based, transparent and inclusive, lest the
Government be seen to actively subvert the Afghan
people and their emerging democracy.

All countries of the region should implement
substantial and agreed commitments in order to improve
security in Afghanistan. In particular, they should
firmly deal with the threat posed by the extremist
insurgent groups operating on both sides of the border
that undermine the stability of South-East Asia. The
people of Pakistan and of other countries of the region
who wish to see peace with their Afghan neighbour in
the context of shared prosperity in Central and South
Asia should see those wishes respected.

(spoke in French)

(spoke in English)

On the occasion of the Security Council meeting on
Afghanistan held in September 2012 (see S/PV.6840),
Canada emphasized the importance of improving
Government transparency and accountability to ensure
that the funds pledged by the international community
at the Tokyo Conference are used effectively and
appropriately. Since then, Canada has worked with
the Government of Afghanistan, UNAMA and other
members of the Accountability Framework technical
and steering committees to ensure that Afghanistan
and the international community respect their mutual
agreements undertaken in Tokyo. The Accountability
Framework is essential to empowering the Afghan
people, promoting lasting trust among the Afghan

Canada fully supports firm action against terrorists
who seek to undermine peace through indiscriminate
attacks on Afghan civilians. For that reason, we
welcome the United Nations listing of the Haqqani
Network as an entity that constitutes a threat to the
stability and security of Afghanistan. We will ensure
that, in Canada, the full legal weight of that listing
is brought to bear on members and supporters of the
Haqqani Network. We encourage all United Nations
Members to do the same in their national jurisdictions.

13-26331

(spoke in French)

Security will remain a key challenge for
Afghanistan during the transition phase. Canada
finds the obfuscations of truth or statements lacking
hard facts during the security transition to be deeply

29

S/PV.6935

troubling. It is never appropriate to politically posture
over the fallen or under the tragic circumstances of
innocent lives lost. As the transfer of lead security
responsibility to the Afghan forces is under way, it is
equally essential that the Afghan people be aware of
where accountability rests. We look forward to the final
stage of the transition, where Afghans will assume
full security responsibility for the entire country by
the end of 2014. Canada has worked closely with the
Government of Afghanistan and our international
partners to train and prepare the Afghan National
Security Forces to take over security responsibility.
We remain committed to ensuring that the people of
Afghanistan can access the security and democracy
that they have been promised by their leaders.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): Italy endorses the statement
made by the observer of the European Union and would
like to add a few remarks in its national capacity.
We welcome the extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and we fully support the Mission’s
fundamental role in contributing to the stabilization
and development of Afghanistan. We praise the
generous efforts of the women and men of UNAMA,
who work to assist the Afghan people, often in trying
circumstances, under the commendable leadership of
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative
for Afghanistan. UNAMA is a fundamental pillar of
the international civilian presence in the country and
contributes substantially to helping Afghanistan to
achieve meaningful results in fields such as economic
and social development, enhancing respect for human
rights and strengthening institutions.
Afghanistan is entering a period of critical
importance to its long-term stabilization. The last
two phases of the transition are starting and should
be completed in less than two years. Presidential
and political elections are approaching, and the
recent developments are fuelling optimism for the
reconciliation process. All those processes focus
on a single purpose: the gradual assumption of full
responsibility by the Afghan people and Government
for their country.
The international community has given assurances
that it will stand by Afghanistan through the transition
process and beyond, in the transformation decade.

30

The Conference held in Tokyo last July defined the
framework of mutual commitments that should shape
the long-term relationship between Afghanistan and its
partners. Now is the time to make the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework operational and to take full
advantage of its potential as a driving force for the
sustainable development of Afghanistan. For donor
countries such as Italy to fully honour their pledges, it
is particularly important that Afghanistan make further
tangible progress in areas such as democratic reforms,
electoral processes, good governance, anti-corruption
measures and the protection and promotion of human
rights. In particular, the Italian Government, in
accordance with our public opinion, will continue to
monitor the situation of women, which we consider to
be of paramount importance.
The upcoming presidential elections are a major
opportunity for the Afghan authorities to translate
their commitments into concrete achievements. In
order for Afghanistan to pursue stability and infuse
new optimism into the prospects for the post-2014
scenario, there must be a credible, transparent and
inclusive electoral process. We encourage the Afghan
Government, in partnership with the international
community and UNAMA, to lay a solid foundation
for elections and to spare no effort to achieve the
broadest possible consensus on the rules of the game by
reaching out to opposition groups, civil society and all
the relevant stakeholders. That is the only way to foster
voter participation, make the process more inclusive
and ensure the legitimacy of its outcome.
The elections are closely connected to the political
process to promote national reconciliation under
Afghan leadership and ownership. We welcome the
recent encouraging developments, including the more
constructive attitude in the relationship between
Afghanistan and Pakistan. Successful national
reconciliation, based on the shared principles of the
Afghan Government and the international community,
could be a milestone towards ensuring peace and
prosperity as long as it is not accompanied by reversals
in civil liberties, human rights and the democratic
achievements. To avoid such a development, due
consideration must be given to the concerns of women
and civil society.
The destiny of Afghanistan is in the hands of its
people and its institutions. However, strengthened
regional cooperation is crucial to fostering economic
development and to tackling common threats.

13-26331

S/PV.6935

Many initiatives are under way, but there is still
room for greater engagement. We appreciate the
dynamism of the Istanbul Process and encourage the
participating countries to remain fully committed to
it. Italy is ready to contribute to a genuine regional
ownership of the process by participating actively in
confidence-building measures on counter-narcotics
and regional infrastructure.
Progress in the transition process and the gradual
downsizing of the international military coalition
will test the governance and development capacity of
Afghanistan at the national and subnational levels. At
this delicate juncture, we are convinced that UNAMA
has a crucial role to play by leading and coordinating
the international community’s civilian efforts. That will
contribute to the smooth completion of the transition
and, looking beyond 2014, to the strengthening of
Afghan institutions and the economy. We therefore
reiterate Italy’s support for the extension of UNAMA’s
mandate, with the recommendation that the Mission be
provided with the resources needed to fulfil it.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to acknowledge the hard work and dedication of the
entire staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), under the leadership of Special
Representative Ján Kubiš. Japan welcomes the adoption
of resolution 2096 (2013), which renews UNAMA’s
mandate and reconfirms the long-term commitment of
the United Nations to durable peace in Afghanistan. I
would like to take this opportunity to emphasize the
importance of ensuring adequate resourcing in order
for UNAMA to fulfil its mandate, as described in
resolution 2096 (2013).
With more than 11 years behind us, Afghanistan,
with the unwavering support of the international
community, has gone down a long and uneven path
towards sustainable peace. I am confident that
Afghanistan now finds itself on the right track. In
addition to the long-term commitment of the United
Nations, intensive regional efforts for the security and
stability of Afghanistan, such as the Istanbul Process,
have constantly been put forward at various levels.
On this occasion, I would like to reaffirm that
Japan remains steadfastly committed to the longterm stability of Afghanistan beyond the completion
of the security transition in 2014. Our new, recently

13-26331

announced contributions since the beginning of the
year include assistance for security, with support
for the Afghan National Police; governance support
through the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund;
infrastructure building, including contributions to the
Afghanistan infrastructure trust fund; and humanitarian
assistance. In total, the assistance amounts to more than
$570 million and demonstrates Japan’s determination
to fulfil the mutual commitments made at the Tokyo
Conference on Afghanistan.
The year 2013 is of critical importance for
Afghanistan in achieving its considerable goals
in 2014. Therefore, with these international and
regional accompaniments, it is now incumbent upon
Afghanistan, with its strong political will, to make
steady and concrete strides forward, especially in the
following three areas, where Japan believes tangible
outcomes are indispensable.
First, as stated in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2013/133), the timely development of a credible
electoral framework for the presidential election is
a key Government commitment under the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework. Japan once again
reiterates the importance of attaining deliverables such
as the passage of electoral laws and the appointment
of qualified Independent Election Commission
senior appointees before the senior officials’ meeting
scheduled for 3 July. Now we must focus more on
substance rather than mere process.
Secondly, further building the capacity of the
Afghan National Security Forces is the foremost priority
in ensuring that the dividends of the security transition
are irreversible. Japan welcomes the announcement
of the fourth tranche, made in December 2012, under
which 87 per cent of the population will soon live in
areas controlled by Afghan security. The increasing
number of ex-combatants enrolled in the Afghanistan
Peace and Reintegration Programme is also very
encouraging.
Nevertheless, we must not turn away from the fact
that the number of serious security incidents remains
deplorably high and includes an increase in internal
attacks. In order to control the security situation, the
Afghan Security Forces needs to enhance its operational
capacity, in terms of both quantity and quality. In
addition to quantitative reinforcement, a wide range
of qualitative reforms are desperately needed in order
to overcome challenges such as the low literacy rate,

31

S/PV.6935

the high turnover and the lack of capable leaders and
trainers. This past month, Japan decided to contribute an
additional $122 million for the Afghan National Police
through the United Nations Development Programme’s
Law and Order Trust Fund for Afghanistan. We once
again stress the need for that police support to be used
in a transparent and effective manner and be followed
by achieving concrete enhanced capability for the
Afghan National Police.

Afghan Taliban detainees are welcome developments.
The new procedure to facilitate requests for travel-ban
exemptions based on resolution 2082 (2012) is also
expected to provide support for other initiatives with
the same goal. I would also like to recall that the whole
peace process is supported by the relationship of mutual
trust among all the stakeholders, including the trust
between the Afghan Government and the international
community.

Lastly, lasting stability in Afghanistan can
be achieved only when all the other efforts are
accompanied by the advancement of an Afghanled peace and reconciliation process. The increased
dialogue between Afghanistan and Pakistan and their
closer cooperation on issues such as the release of

The President (spoke in Russian): There are
still several speakers inscribed on my list. Given the
lateness of the hour, with the consent of the Council, I
shall suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.

32

The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.

13-26331
