S/2014/945

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 December 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the
United Nations Office for West Africa
I. Introduction
1.
In a letter dated 23 December 2013 (S/2013/759), the President of the Security
Council informed the Secretary-General of the Council’s concurrence with my
recommendation to extend the mandate of the United Nations Office for West Africa
(UNOWA) until 31 December 2016, and requested that I report to the Council every
six months on the implementation of the mandate.
2.
The present report covers the period from 1 July to 31 December 2014. It
provides an overview of developments and trends in West Africa and outlines the
activities undertaken by UNOWA in the areas of good offices, enhancing
subregional capacities to address cross-border and cross-cutting threats to peace and
security, and promoting good governance, respect for the rule of law, human rights
and gender mainstreaming. It also outlines the efforts of UNOWA in engaging
regional and subregional organizations, in particular the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the Mano River
Union, in order to promote peace and stability in West Africa.

II. Developments and trends in West Africa
3.
On 12 September, I announced the appointment of Mohammed Ibn Chambas
(Ghana) as my new Special Representative for West Africa and Head of UNOWA to
succeed Said Djinnit (Algeria), whose mandate ended on 30 September. My new
Special Representative assumed responsibilities on 9 October.
4.
Since the issuance of my last report (S/2014/442), there have been several key
political and security developments in West Africa, particularly in countries
preparing for general elections in 2015 and 2016, including Burkina Faso, the Niger,
Nigeria and Togo. In Burkina Faso, political tensions resulted in a popular uprising
leading to the resignation of President Blaise Compaoré. In Nigeria, a rapidly
deteriorating security situation in the north-east of the country is heightening
political debate ahead of the general elections to be held in February 2015. In Togo,
demonstrations calling for electoral reforms continued, while in the Niger, political
divisions and criminal action initiated against key political figures escalated
tensions.

14-66992 (E)

311214

*1466992*

S/2014/945

5.
A number of persisting challenges continued to affect West Africa, notably
transnational organized crime, including illicit drug trafficking, piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea and cross-border security challenges in the Sahel. Among the more serious
challenges were violent extremism in Mali, as well as the activities of Boko Haram
in and outside of Nigeria, which had a significant impact on security in the Lake
Chad Basin area.
6.
The spread and scale of the Ebola virus disease outbreak in West Africa, which
was first reported in March 2014, intensified drastically and plunged the region into
an unparalleled public health crisis, with implications for peace and security. The
outbreak led to the near isolation of the three most-affected countries — Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone — with severe economic, social and political
consequences for the entire region. Ebola has exposed weaknesses in national health
infrastructures and services, as well as gaps in regio nal mechanisms.

A.

Political and governance trends
7.
In Burkina Faso, tensions had been brewing for some time over former
President Compaoré’s intention to amend the Constitution to allow him to run in the
2015 presidential elections. On 23 September, the former President initiated a
political dialogue with the opposition in an attempt to defuse the political crisis.
However, he announced on 6 October that the dialogue had been inconclusive after
four preliminary meetings. The dialogue followed several attempts by national and
regional actors to mediate between the presidential majority and the opposition,
including efforts led by former Burkinabé President Jean-Baptiste Ouédraogo as
well as initiatives taken by President Alassane Ouattara of Côte d ’Ivoire. On
21 October, the Council of Ministers adopted a draft bill on proposed amendments
to the Constitution, which was scheduled to be voted on by the National Assembly
on 30 October. The draft bill proposed amending article 37 by changing the two term limit on the presidency to three, thus allowing President Compaoré to stand for
re-election.
8.
In reaction, on 28 October, Burkinabés came out in massive numbers to attend
a rally planned by opposition parties and civil society organizations. Apart from
sporadic confrontations between demonstrators and the police, no violence was
reported. The rally ended with the opposition launching a civil disobedience
campaign to prevent the adoption of the draft bill. On 30 October, demonstrators
broke through police lines and ransacked the National Assembly building. They also
set ablaze City Hall, which was the headquarters of the ruling party, Congress for
Democracy and Progress (CDP), and other private and public buildings. Despite
former President Compaoré’s radio announcement, later in the day, withdrawing the
bill and establishing a state of emergency, violent protests intensified in
Ouagadougou and spread beyond the capital. According to the report of an ad hoc
commission set up to assess the losses incurred and damage caused during the
popular uprising, some 29 people were killed and 625 injured in the protests.
9.
On 31 October, President Compaoré resigned and left the country. On
1 November, shortly after a similar announcement by the Chief of Defence Staff,
General Nabéré Honoré Traoré, Lieutenant Colonel Isaac Yacouba Zida, the Deputy
Chief Commander of the presidential guard, announced the suspension of the
Constitution, and each declared himself Head of State. While the Chief of Defence

2/17

14-66992

S/2014/945

Staff held discussions with Burkinabé stakeholders, some opposition parties and
civil society leaders accused the military of trying to highjack the “people’s
revolution” and repeatedly demanded that they hand over power to a civilian -led
transition. On 13 November, following an intensive national dialogue process,
which was supported by regional and international stakeholders, including my
Special Representative, Burkinabé stakeholders agreed on a Charter of the
Transition, which was signed on 16 November. On 18 November, M ichel Kafando
was sworn in as the Transitional President and was officially inaugurated on
21 November. On 19 November, Lieutenant Colonel Zida was appointed
Transitional Prime Minister. On 23 November, he announced the composition of a
26-member Transitional Government, which held its first meeting on 24 November.
The composition of the final transitional organ, the Transitional National Council,
was announced on 27 November. According to the Charter of the Transition, the
transitional period will end with the conduct of general elections in November 2015.
10. In Nigeria, on 11 November, President Goodluck Jonathan announced his
intention to run for a second presidential term. He pledged his commitment to
continue to fight against terrorism and to secure the liberation of the schoolgirls
abducted in Chibok Town, in the north-east of the country, in April. Muhammadu
Buhari, former Head of State and three-time presidential contender, was selected as
the candidate for the leading opposition party, the All Progressives Congress (APC),
at the party’s presidential primaries on 10 December.
11. Symptomatic of the continuing political manoeuvring among political parties
in the lead-up to the election, on 28 October, the Speaker of the House of
Representatives, Aminu Tambuwal, defected from the ruling People’s Democratic
Party (PDP) to APC. On 20 November, security personnel prevented Mr. Tambuwal
from entering the National Assembly, which was expected to discuss President
Jonathan’s request for an extension of the state of emergency in the three northeastern States of Borno, Yobe and Adamawa. A scuffle ensued, leading to police
being called to the scene and tear gas being sprayed. Due to the incident, the Senate
President adjourned meetings in both houses until 7 Dec ember.
12. In the Niger, political tensions increased owing to the rift between President
Mahamadou Issoufou and Hama Amadou, Speaker of the National Assembly. On
26 August, the National Assembly lifted the immunity of Mr. Amadou to enable a
criminal investigation against him for his alleged role in a child -trafficking network.
While a national warrant for his arrest was issued on the same day, it could not be
served since he had fled the country. During the reporting period, several members
of opposition parties in the Niger were arrested and subsequently released on bail.
These events took place against a background of increased cross -border security
threats from Boko Haram in the south of the country.
13. In Benin, Côte d’Ivoire and Togo, the political environment was also marked
by preparations for upcoming elections. In Togo, eight opposition parties formed a
coalition and nominated a joint presidential candidate ahead of the elections
scheduled for March 2015. Meanwhile, calls for free and inclusive d ialogue and
reforms intensified, culminating in mass demonstrations on 21 November.
Protestors demanded that constitutional reforms be instituted to prevent President
Faure Essozimna Gnassingbé from running for a third term. In Benin, the political
climate was also tense owing to technical difficulties related to the electronic voter
registration list, as well as the perceived intention of incumbent President Boni Yayi

14-66992

3/17

S/2014/945

to initiate a constitutional amendment to enable him to run for a third term of office.
In Côte d’Ivoire, the members of the Independent Electoral Commission were sworn
in on 11 August following negotiations between the Government and opposition
parties on its composition.
14. Formal peace negotiations between the Government of Mali and the a rmed
groups were launched in Algiers on 14 July, with the facilitation of an international
mediation team comprised of the United Nations, regional organizations and
neighbouring countries and led by Algeria. The negotiations were aimed at
preserving the ceasefire and finding a political solution to the conflict, while
safeguarding Mali’s territorial integrity. On 24 July, the Government of Mali and the
armed groups signed a preliminary accord laying out a road map for further
negotiations. In mid-November, the parties resumed negotiations on a draft peace
agreement provided by the mediation team in the third round of negotiations in
October. These negotiations ended on 27 November and will resume in January
2015.
15. During the period under review, the Ebola outbreak exacerbated political and
social tensions in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. Measures adopted by national
authorities to contain the outbreak were criticized by civil society and humanitarian
actors as being too coercive or promoting stigmatization. In some instances,
national officials involved in containment efforts were accused of embezzlement
and corruption. Confrontations between police forces and demonstrators turned
deadly in Monrovia on 22 August, and in Koidu, in the eastern part of Sierra Leone,
on 21 October. States of emergency were declared in Sierra Leone on 31 July, in
Liberia on 6 August and in Guinea on 13 August. In Guinea, local elections were
postponed indefinitely, and in Liberia senatorial midterm elections were postponed
from 14 October to 16 December. Both the House of Representatives and the Senate
denied President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf’s request for additional emergency powers to
assist in stemming the spread of Ebola. On 13 November, the state of emergency in
Liberia was lifted, although the night time curfew continues.
16. In an effort to contain Ebola, some West African countries closed their borders
and suspended commercial flights to the three most-affected states, namely Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone. Côte d’Ivoire imposed flight restrictions to and from the
three States on 10 August, followed by a land border closure on 22 August. Guinea Bissau closed its land border with Guinea on 13 August, and Senegal followed suit
on 22 August. These unilateral actions were indicative of the absence of an
integrated regional response to the crisis and were taken outside of existing
frameworks of cooperation provided by ECOWAS and the Mano River Union. On
1 September, the Government of Côte d’Ivoire announced the opening of
humanitarian corridors and, on 26 September, the resumption of air traffic with the
affected countries. Acting on agreements reached at an extraordinary ECOWAS
summit in Accra on 6 November, Senegal also announced the reopening of its
borders on 14 November.
17. The Ebola outbreak was quickly contained in Senegal (one case) and Nigeria
(20 cases). Effective information campaigns, as well as rapid and well -coordinated
actions by the respective Governments and international partners, ensured the
containment of Ebola transmission. Both countries were declared free of Ebola
transmission on 17 and 20 October, respectively. In Mali, eight Ebola cases,
including six fatalities, were confirmed in October and November. The Government

4/17

14-66992

S/2014/945

met the outbreak with a rapid and robust response, putting in place an emergency
operations centre and appointing an Ebola response coordinator with a direct
reporting line to President Keita. At the request of the President, the United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER) established a small office in
Bamako, which became operational on 26 November, under the leadership of an
Ebola crisis manager to support the Government in containing the Ebola outbreak
and bolstering its preparedness. On 13 December, the last known Ebola patient was
released from the hospital. Three days later, Mali released from quarantine the last
13 people being monitored for Ebola in the country. The World Health Organization
(WHO) has said that the country could be declared free of the virus in Janua ry 2015
if no further cases are recorded.

B.

Security trends
18. During the reporting period, attacks by extremist groups in northern Mali and
the escalation of violence in north-eastern Nigeria had an adverse impact on security
and stability in the region. Of particular concern has been the impact of Boko
Haram-related violence in the southern part of the Niger and in the extreme north of
Cameroon.
19. In northern Mali, the number of violent attacks against national and
international security forces in the north of the country rose sharply. These included
ambushes, as well as asymmetric and rocket attacks targeting the assets and
personnel of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA). Confrontations between armed groups affiliated with the
Government of Mali and armed groups represented in the Algiers talks also
occurred, despite the various parties’ ceasefire commitments. On 9 October, a
convoy carrying arms, mortars and anti-aircraft weaponry moving through northern
Niger towards Mali was intercepted and destroyed by French and Nigerian forces.
The weapons were reportedly being delivered to Ansar Dine. On 12 October,
Mauritanian security forces arrested four people suspected of establishing contact
with jihadists and recruiting for the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIS) in
the mining city of Zouérat, in the north of the country.
20. Nigeria also witnessed an escalation in attacks and bombings, particularly in
the north-eastern States of Borno, Yobe and Adamawa. During the reporting period,
Boko Haram carried out several attacks on military and security installations, as
well as over 40 deadly raids on civilian settlements, which included torching of
churches and mosques. On 1 July, a vehicle-borne explosive device detonated and
killed at least 56 civilians in a crowded marketplace in Maiduguri, Borno State. On
23 July in Kaduna, Kaduna State, two successive bombings targeted the convoys of
Sheik Dahiru Bauchi, a prominent Islamic scholar, and Muhamma du Buhari, a
presidential contender for APC, leaving 82 people dead. On 7 November, a bomb
killed 10 people in Azare, Bauchi State. On 10 November, a suicide bomber in
Potiskum, Yobe State, killed at least 46 students and wounded 79 others at the
Public Science Technical College. The Yobe State government subsequently closed
all schools until further notice. On 12 November, another suicide bombing took
place at a school in Kontagora, Niger State, injuring scores of people. On
25 November, two teenage female suicide bombers killed over 45 people in the
marketplace of Maiduguri. On 27 November, a bomb explosion in the Maraba -Mubi
area in Adamawa State killed at least 40 people. The Kano Central Mosque was

14-66992

5/17

S/2014/945

attacked on 28 November, killing at least 120 people and injuring over 270 others.
On 11 December, twin bombs killed at least 40 people at a market in Jos. On the
same day, in Kano, a 13-year-old girl was arrested for allegedly wearing a suicide
vest.
21. The territorial expansion of the Boko Haram insurgency was quite rapid. The
group took over the towns of Buni Yadi, Yobe State, on 20 August; Gambaru -Ngala,
Borno State, on 26 August; Dikwa, Borno State on 28 August, and Bama, the
second-largest city in Borno State, on 2 October. On 5 and 11 November, Boko
Haram captured the town of Malam Fatori in Borno State and the city of Maiha in
Adamawa State, respectively. The group is now believed to be in control of
significant swaths of land in Borno and Adamawa States, raising questions about the
Government’s ability to conduct elections in these areas. Boko Haram has also
reportedly established governance architecture and imposed Sharia law in the areas
under its control.
22. Despite national and international reaction to the kidnapping of schoolgirls in
Chibok, Borno State, in April 2014, Boko Haram has continued its spate of
kidnappings of adults and children. On 10 August, Boko Haram militants overran
local militias in a remote fishing village near Lake Chad and kidnapped 97 persons.
On 14 September, over 50 women were reported to have been abducted in Gulak,
Adamawa State; on 30 September an unknown number of persons were abducted in
Gwoza, Borno State; and on 18 October, 40 women were reportedly abducted in
Wagga, Adamawa State.
23. On 17 October, the Nigerian Chief of Defence Staff announced that a cessation
of hostilities had been reached with Boko Haram, following talks facilitated by the
Government of Chad in N’Djamena. On 19 October, the Government of Chad stated
that negotiations were ongoing on a ceasefire agreement and the release of the
schoolgirls kidnapped in Chibok. On 4 November, the Federal Government of
Nigeria announced that no agreement had been reached, although talks would
continue.
24. At the regional level, Boko Haram intensified its activitie s in Cameroon. Since
August, at least 20 cross-border attacks, including raids on refugee camps and
attacks on Cameroonian security forces, have been reported. In particular, the
border cities of Gamboru-Ngala and Fotokol in northern Cameroon witnessed
frequent attacks carried out by insurgents based in Nigeria. On 28 July, Boko
Haram-suspected militants raided the Cameroonian town of Kolofata, killing dozens
of people and abducting the wife of Vice-Prime Minister Amadou Ali. She was
released on 9 October, along with 16 other hostages.
25. With regard to transnational drug trafficking and organized crime, the region
has seen a rise in seizures of illicit drugs. Couriers carrying methamphetamine were
arrested in Benin, Ghana, Nigeria and Togo during the reporting period. On
15 October, customs agents in Johannesburg, South Africa, seized approximately
200 kg of methamphetamine originating from Benin. Interceptions of couriers at
West African airports using commercial flights and carrying cocaine have also bee n
on the increase. At the Port of Cotonou, in Benin, 56 kg of cocaine were seized from
a container originating from Suriname in August, providing further evidence that the
transatlantic drug trafficking route is active.

6/17

14-66992

S/2014/945

26. In the Ebola-affected countries, Government and other officials
communicating information about the Ebola virus were attacked in some
communities owing to the lack of trust and knowledge about the disease. On
16 September, an eight-member Government delegation on a sensitization visit
about Ebola was brutally killed by villagers in Wome, in the Forest Region of
Guinea.

C.

Socioeconomic trends
27. While the overall macroeconomic projections for West Africa in 2014
remained generally positive, the Ebola outbreak had a negative impact o n local
economies, cross-border trade, farming activities and productive industries in the
affected countries. Unemployment also rose in mining and extractive industries. On
11 September, the Minister of Finance of Liberia stated that the country was
technically in a recession and suffering from a 20 per cent drop in Government
revenues. In a report issued on 2 December, the World Bank noted that the outbreak
would cost Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone more than US$ 2 billion in lost income
over the 2014-2015 period. The World Bank added that projections for 2015 were
negative for Guinea and Sierra Leone, while in Liberia, growth projections were
positive but still lower than the pre-crisis estimate.
28. On 10 July, the ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State and Government
adopted the Community Development Programme to update its “Vision 2020” and
promote balanced and people-centred development. Consultations on the policy
were held in Banjul, from 25 to 28 July, with the participation of West African civil
society organizations. On 31 July, Burkina Faso and Côte d’Ivoire signed a treaty
fostering economic and social cooperation, while Senegal ’s “Plan Sénégal
Emergent” attracted international support.

D.

Humanitarian trends
29. The humanitarian situation in the region continued to be a source of increased
concern, particularly in northern Mali, north-eastern Nigeria and the three countries
most affected by the Ebola outbreak. In the Sahel region, there was also an increase
in humanitarian needs, owing to a combination of acute and chronic factors,
including food insecurity, malnutrition and population displacement. A prolonged
lean season owing to diminished rainfall had an adverse impact on countries along
the Atlantic Coast, such as the Gambia, Mauritania and Senegal, as well as on stockraising in Mali, the Niger and Senegal. Some 25 million people are estimated to be
food insecure, of which 6.5 million have crossed the emergency threshold, as
opposed to about 2.5 million reported at the beginning of the yea r. Regrettably, the
humanitarian response to these developments has been limited owing to severe
underfunding. Only US$ 1 billion has been contributed to humanitarian operations
in the Sahel out of an estimated requirement of US$ 1.9 billion.
30. Persistent insecurity in northern Mali prevented the return of 143,000 Malian
refugees from Algeria, Burkina Faso, Mauritania and the Niger. Moreover, in north eastern Nigeria, increased attacks on civilian settlements resulted in the forced
displacement of an estimated 700,000 people in Borno, Yobe and Adamawa States.
During the reporting period, nearly 4.8 million people were estimated to be food

14-66992

7/17

S/2014/945

insecure and 628,000 children under the age of 5 suffered from severe malnutrition
in the West Africa subregion. An estimated 160,000 refugees have fled the violence
in Nigeria to Cameroon, Chad and the Niger.
31. During the reporting period, the number of registered cholera cases increased.
About 57,000 cholera cases were reported in 10 West African countries, namely,
Benin, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, the Niger,
Nigeria and Togo. In Borno State, in northern Nigeria, 4,500 cases of cholera and
70 deaths were reported in October alone. Cholera cases have also risen in the Diffa
region, in southern Niger.
32. The humanitarian situation in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone deteriorated
owing to the Ebola outbreak, which has been declared a Public Health Emergency
of International Concern by WHO. Overwhelmed by the epidemic, health systems i n
the three aforementioned countries were not able to effectively respond to other
health service requirements, including childbirth and malaria, which resulted in
avoidable deaths and triggered an under-reported secondary emergency. Since June,
Ebola transmission rates remain intense in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.
33. The Ebola outbreak has adversely affected harvests, causing steep price
increases on staple goods. The isolation of quarantined communities and a slow
humanitarian response have stretched the coping mechanisms of affected
communities. During the period under review, the World Food Programme (WFP)
launched an emergency regional relief operation to provide food assistance to
1.3 million people. In July, ECOWAS established the Ebola Emerge ncy Fund, to
which several Member States and regional organizations have provided
contributions.

E.

Trends on human rights
34. Since July 2014, the Ebola outbreak has negatively affected the human rights
situation in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. In some cases, the national response
to contain the virus involved excessive use of force or quarantining of communities
that fell below recognized standards of human dignity. Misinformation compounded
identity-based discrimination and stigmatization, and triggered violence among and
within communities. Freedom of expression was also impacted in some countries. In
November, under the emergency laws, a well-known Sierra Leonean radio journalist
was detained in the maximum-security Pademba Road prison for allegedly
criticizing the country’s efforts to fight Ebola. The journalist was released on bail
after 11 days in prison.
35. In Nigeria, abductions and indiscriminate killings of civilians by Boko Haram
continued. Concerns were also raised over the human rig hts implications of the
counter-terrorism measures put in place by the Government of Nigeria and
implemented by its security forces.
36. In Gambia, opposition groups protested against State authorities over the lack
of accountability for alleged human rights abuses. On 4 November, the former Chief
of Defence Staff, General Lang Tamba, and six co-accused individuals filed an
appeal in the Supreme Court against their death sentence for conspiracy and treason,
which had been handed down by the High Court in July 2010 and upheld by the
Appeal Court in October 2012. The United Nations Special Rapporteur on torture

8/17

14-66992

S/2014/945

and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, and the Special
Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions visited th e country
from 3 to 7 November. During their visit, the Special Rapporteurs were denied
access to inmates on death row in Mile Two Prison in Banjul.
37. In relation to the fight against impunity in West Africa, the trial of the former
first lady of Côte d’Ivoire, Simone Gbagbo, and 82 others for crimes allegedly
committed during the 2011 post-elections violence in the country, originally
scheduled for 22 October, was postponed. On 11 December, the International
Criminal Court requested Côte d’Ivoire to hand over Mrs. Gbagbo to stand trial on
charges of crimes against humanity. On the same day, a Pre-Trial Chamber of the
Court confirmed four charges of crimes against humanity against Charles Blé
Goudé, the former leader of the Young Patriots militia.

F.

Trends on gender issues
38. Some progress was made in the political participation of women in West
Africa. In Mali, steps were taken towards the adoption of a bill to ensure that the list
of candidates presented by political parties contained at least 30 per cent women.
Several countries also increased the number of women appointees to senior
government positions. In Côte d’Ivoire, on 27 October, 33 women were appointed to
the 115-member Economic and Social Council, as opposed to 9 in the Council ’s
previous configuration. In Mauritania, on 11 September, three women were
appointed as Secretary-General in key ministries, including Economic Affairs and
Development. In Cabo Verde, where gender parity has been achieved since 2006,
four new women were appointed to ministerial positions, bringing their number to
11 in an 18-member Cabinet.

III. Activities of the United Nations Office for West Africa
A.

Good offices and special assignments by my Special Representative
Burkina Faso
39. Following the popular uprising in Burkina Faso, my Special Representative
travelled to Ouagadougou on 31 October with the President of the ECOWAS
Commission, Kadré Desire Ouédraogo, and the Commissioner of the Africa Union
for Political Affairs, Aisha Abdullahi, as part of a joint United Nations-African
Union-ECOWAS mission. The joint mission met with national and international
stakeholders, including representatives of civil society, traditional and religious
leaders, opposition parties and the military. In his meetings with national
stakeholders, my Special Representative reiterated my call to refrain from violence
and engage in an inclusive political dialogue. On 3 November, my Special
Representative travelled to Accra to meet with President John Dramani Mahama of
Ghana, in his capacity as Chairman of the ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State
and Government, to galvanize regional support for a solution to the crisis.
40. On 5 November, my Special Representative provided support to the Presidents
of Ghana, Nigeria and Senegal during their visit to Ouagadougou to encourage
Burkinabé stakeholders to rapidly agree on a civilian transition. On 6 November, my

14-66992

9/17

S/2014/945

Special Representative attended the extraordinary session of the ECOWAS
Authority of Heads of State and Government on the Ebola virus disease and the
situation in Burkina Faso. He subsequently returned to Ouagadougou to continue his
good offices. On 10 and 11 November, he also provided support for the visits to
Burkina Faso of the Chairman of the African Union, President Mohamed Ould
Abdel Aziz of Mauritania, and of Presidents Macky Sall of Senegal and Faure
Essozimna Gnassingbé of Togo, who encouraged national stakeholders to remain
engaged in dialogue to reach agreement on transitional arrangements. On 16 and
21 November, my Special Representative attended the signing ceremony of the
Charter of the Transition and the inauguration of the Transitional President Michel
Kafando. He continues to remain actively engaged, together with regional and
international stakeholders, in accompanying the transition in Burkina Faso.
Nigeria
41. During the reporting period, my Special Representative for West Africa and
High-Level Representative for Nigeria continued his efforts for the safe release of
the schoolgirls abducted in Chibok Town, Borno State, on 14 April, and for wider
support to address the threat of Boko Haram. From 11 to 15 July, he conducted a
third visit to the country to discuss political and security developments, and met
with former Nigerian Heads of State, Muhammadu Buhari, Yakubu Gowon and
Ibrahim Badamasi Babangida. He also conducted broad -based consultations with
the heads of federal security agencies, the National Security Adviser, the Minister of
Special Duties and the Speaker of the House of Representatives. My Special
Representative discussed the security situation in the three north -eastern States
under emergency rule and possible ways for the United Nations to support national
efforts to tackle the Boko Haram insurgency. He also liaised with members of the
diplomatic community, the organizers of the “Bring Back Our Girls” campaign and
the Pakistani education activist and Nobel laureate Malala Yousafzai to review
international efforts for the release of the Chibok schoolgirls. Moreover, in
consultation with the United Nations country team in Nigeria, he assessed the
implementation of the United Nations Integrated Support Package to provide
support for the Chibok girls, their families and their communities.
42. On 3 September, in Abuja, my Special Representative represe nted the United
Nations at a ministerial conference on security. Three ministerial meetings were
previously held in Paris, London and Washington, D.C. on 17 May, 12 June and
5 August, respectively. My Special Representative highlighted my deep concern
about the continuing violence in the north-east of Nigeria and stressed the need to
preserve national unity. He noted the progress made in the provision of technical
support and assistance by bilateral partners to fight terrorism in the north -east of
Nigeria, and pledged the continued support of the United Nations. He also
underscored the importance of ensuring that counter-terrorism activities are carried
out in accordance with international human rights standards.
43. From 19 to 21 November, my Special Representative met with key national
stakeholders, including political parties, the Independent National Electoral
Commission, cabinet members and international partners. Among the issues
discussed were the security challenges and the humanitarian situation in t he northeastern States.

10/17

14-66992

S/2014/945

Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission
44. The work of the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission was negatively
affected by the activities of Boko Haram. The Commission was unable to conduct
field visits along the border owing to a series of attacks on Cameroonian towns in
the provinces bordering Nigeria. Against this background, my Special
Representative, in his capacity as Chairman of the Mixed Commission, adapted the
scope of its work to the evolving security situation. In this regard , on 11 October,
both parties expressed confidence that the remaining tasks could be completed
without dispatching new field missions to the border. The Commission agreed to
adopt innovative measures to complete the demarcation exercise, including by
utilizing in-office cartographic methodologies to assess the remaining areas of the
land boundary to be demarcated. The United Nations Support Team to the Mixed
Commission provided the delegations of Cameroon and Nigeria with relevant
cartographic documentation to assist them with the in-office assessment of the
boundary. The Joint Technical Team met for two weeks in November. Its working
session was followed by a meeting of the Sub-commission on Demarcation, which
contributed to resolve several outstanding demarcation issues.
45. Approximately 1,947 km of the estimated 2,100 km land boundary has so far
been assessed and agreed on by the parties, and 667 boundary pillars have been
constructed. Another 767 pillars remain to be constructed to complete the
demarcation plan. In October, the parties officially expressed willingness to further
contribute to the pillar emplacement project under the Trust Fund, and also agreed
to call upon international donors for renewed assistance.
Other activities in West Africa
46. On 10 July, my Special Representative participated in the forty-fifth ordinary
session of the ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State and Government in Accra. As
part of his regular consultations with regional leaders, he also travelled to Burkina
Faso on 11 and 12 August, where he met with former President Compaoré to discuss
his intention to call for a referendum on the revision of the Constitution. My Special
Representative also conducted a visit to Liberia, on 12 and 13 August, to meet with
President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf and Government officials to discuss the response to
the Ebola outbreak.
47. On 18 and 19 November, my Special Representative and the President of the
ECOWAS Commission conducted a joint visit to Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.
They met with Prime Minister Mohamed Said Fofana of Guinea, President Ellen
Johnson-Sirleaf of Liberia and President Ernest Bai Koroma of Sierra Leone.
During the visit, the delegation assured their interlocutors of the full support of the
United Nations and ECOWAS in addressing the Ebola outbreak in the three
countries.

B.

Enhancing subregional capacities to address cross-border and
cross-cutting threats to peace and security
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel
48. During the reporting period, UNOWA provided support to the Lake Chad
Basin Commission in the design of its counter-terrorism strategy.

14-66992

11/17

S/2014/945

49. UNOWA played an active role as convenor of the meeting of Working Group 2
(on security) of the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. Progress
achieved in the implementation of the Strategy will be described in my forthcoming
report on this issue.
Strategy for cross-border security in the Mano River Union
50. The crisis caused by the Ebola outbreak diverted attention and negatively
affected resource mobilization efforts for three of the four member States of the
Mano River Union, namely, Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. As a result, very
little progress was made in the implementation of the strategy for cross -border
security in the Union during the reporting period.
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
51. UNOWA, together with the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), participated in high-level meetings on the Gulf of Guinea from 9 to
12 September in Yaoundé, during which the Inter-regional Coordination Centre for
Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea, responsible for the coordination
and implementation of the Gulf of Guinea Joint Maritime Strategy, was inaugurated
on 11 September. The inauguration was followed by the appointment of a Centre
interim management team comprised of staff seconded from the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS), ECOWAS, the Gulf of Guinea
Commission and Member States. The European Union and the International
Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) also pledged to deploy liaison officers.
The inauguration and operationalization of the Centre mark a milestone in the
implementation of the decisions of the Yaoundé summit held on 24 and 25 June
2013. Regional efforts are also expected to expedite the operationalization of the
Regional Maritime Surveillance Centre of West Africa and the Regional Centre for
Maritime Security in Central Africa. This will build on ongoing cooperation
between countries of the Gulf of Guinea, including through joint naval operations
and patrols. UNOWA, in collaboration with UNOCA, will continue to advocate for
international support to facilitate the work of the Inter-regional Coordination Centre
for Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea.
Security sector reform
52. In Guinea, efforts to reform the security sector advanced with the adoption in
July of the 2014-2017 National Strategy for Priority Actions. The United Nations
security sector reform advisory team assisted the Technica l Monitoring Commission
in the preparation of a draft operational manual, as well as a monitoring and
evaluation guide for the strategy. The team also provided support to the budgeting
process for security sector reform sectorial ministries. As a result of the Ebola
outbreak, Guinean security institutions shifted efforts towards containment of the
outbreak. In consultation with UNOWA, the team facilitated and supported the
establishment of an UNMEER office in Conakry.
Drug trafficking and transnational organized crime
53. During the reporting period, the ECOWAS Commission conducted a review of
the ECOWAS regional action plan to address the growing problem of illicit drug
trafficking, organized crime and drug abuse in West Africa (2008 -2015). On 3 July,

12/17

14-66992

S/2014/945

United Nations experts participated in an ECOWAS working-level meeting in
Abuja, to review the action plan. The meeting produced a draft logical framework
for the 2015-2020 regional action plan.
54. The Ebola outbreak slowed down the activities of the Transnational Crime
Units established under the West Africa Coast Initiative in Sierra Leone and Liberia.
Although international Initiative Coordinators for Sierra Leone and Liberia have
been recruited, they have not been able to assume their functions.
55. In Guinea-Bissau, a more conducive environment has emerged in the post electoral dispensation, which will help the Transitional Crime Units to become fully
operational. In a meeting with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) on 5 August, the new Minister of Justice outlined the new Government’s
efforts to revamp the Unit to align it with the objectives of the West Africa Coast
Initiative. On 27 October, over 100 Members of Parliament and Government
representatives adopted a political declaration reiterating Guinea-Bissau’s
commitment to support initiatives to combat transnational organized crime,
including drug trafficking, corruption, money-laundering and terrorism. They called
for continued support from the United Nations to strengthen nationa l institutions in
this area. The declaration followed a three-day meeting jointly organized by
UNODC and the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea -Bissau,
at the invitation of the President of the Parliament and the Prime Minister of
Guinea-Bissau. In the meantime, on 5 November, the Council of Ministers of Côte
d’Ivoire issued a decree establishing a Transitional Crimes Unit in the country. The
UNODC Law Enforcement Coordinator, who will oversee West Africa Coast
Initiatives activities in the country, is expected to start his work in early 2015.
Counter-terrorism
56. The Heads of State of the Lake Chad Basin Commission and of Benin held a
summit in Niamey on 7 October to address the growing threat of terrorism in the
region and the issue of a multinational joint task force. They committed themselves
to unifying efforts in the fight against Boko Haram and pledged to finalize the
establishment of the headquarters of the multinational joint task force by
20 November in Nigeria and to deploy, within national borders, a contingent of
700 troops each. From 14 to 18 October, UNOWA and UNOCA participated in a
workshop organized by the Lake Chad Basin in Yaoundé to develop a regional
counter-terrorism strategy, as well as to hold discussions on the multinational joint
task force. During the meeting, they noted that the two major challenges to the
operationalization of the task force were funding and the interoperability of
equipment.

C.

Promotion of good governance, respect for the rule of law, human
rights and gender mainstreaming
57. During the reporting period, UNOWA convened a series of consultative
meetings with human rights stakeholders on good governance and human rights, as
well as on gender mainstreaming. On the margins of the fifty-sixth ordinary session
of the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights held in Banjul, UNOWA
convened a panel to discuss the human rights dimension of Ebola, elections,
constitutional changes and terrorism. A series of recommendations were adopted to

14-66992

13/17

S/2014/945

enhance the engagement of civil society actors in mitigating election -related
violence, and in promoting a human rights-based approach to collective security. In
addition, from 11 to 13 December, UNOWA, in partnership with the Gorée Institute,
organized a seminar that brought together experts and trainers from ECOWAS
police academies. Participants reviewed and adopted generic curricula for capacity
development of civil society and security forces in the promotion of peace, security
and governance in West Africa.
58. In November, UNOWA worked with the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), ECOWAS, United Nations
peacekeeping missions in the region and the Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security in West Africa to finalize the evaluation of the implementation of the
regional plan of action on Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
resolutions on women, peace and security.
59. On 4 and 5 November, UNOWA participated in a retreat organized by
UN-Women in Bamako, which was aimed at enhancing women’s participation in
peace and security processes at the national and local levels. The national plan of
action on Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions were
reviewed. From 25 November to 10 December, my Special Representative joined
my annual campaign “Unite to End Violence against Women”, with a specific
emphasis on countries in conflict.

D.

Inter-institutional cooperation
United Nations inter-institutional cooperation
60. During the reporting period, UNOWA and the heads of United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes based in Dakar held regular consultative meetings
to share information and strengthen cooperation. On 1 September, my Special
Representative briefed regional directors on political developments in the region.
He also briefed on his role as my High-Level Representative for Nigeria and on the
multisectoral response of the United Nations to the crisis in the country. Other
issues discussed included the political and socioeconomic repercussions of the
Ebola epidemic and proposed constitutional amendments to extend presidential term
limits being considered in some countries in the region.
61. From 20 to 30 October, UNOWA participated in a United Nations electoral
needs assessment mission to Togo, where presidential elections are scheduled for
the first quarter of 2015. The mission assessed institutional, technical, security, legal
and political preparedness for the elections. It identified areas of support and cal led
for enhanced participation of women and youth, improved institutional transparency
and mechanisms for the prevention of political and electoral conflicts.
Cooperation with regional and subregional partners
62. Throughout the reporting period, UNOWA provided a regular flow of
information on the impact of the Ebola outbreak to the Mano River Union
secretariat, regional institutions and peace missions, as well as United Nations
representatives in the region, highlighting the consequences of the outbre ak on
peace, security, stability and regional integration.

14/17

14-66992

S/2014/945

63. In close cooperation with UNOCA and ECOWAS, UNOWA has engaged with
the Lake Chad Basin Commission to assess the latter ’s capacity to engage in
regional efforts to curb the spread of terrorism and violent extremism by Boko
Haram. This included, from 20 October to 1 November, a joint UNOWA -UNOCAECOWAS mission in the Lake Chad area.

IV. Observations and recommendations
64. I am deeply concerned by the violence linked to Boko Haram and its i mpact
on the region, in particular in northern Nigeria, northern Cameroon and southern
Niger. I welcome efforts being taken to strengthen regional security mechanisms
and to accelerate the planned deployment of a multinational force to secure border
areas. I also welcome the initiatives being undertaken by the Lake Chad Basin
Commission to find lasting solutions to curb terrorism, violent insurgency and
extremism through a common strategy. In particular, I welcome the development by
the member States of the Commission and Benin of a regional counter-terrorism
strategy, and urge that the joint efforts to address the threat of Boko Haram be
pursued in a manner consistent with international human rights standards. I
encourage UNOWA, UNOCA, ECOWAS, ECCAS and the Lake Chad Basin
Commission to continue to strengthen cooperation to address cross -border security
threats. I also remain concerned about the simmering political and security tensions
in some West African countries in the lead-up to presidential and legislative
elections scheduled for 2015 and 2016. I urge political stakeholders to engage in
dialogue to address, through consensus, all contentious issues. I also call on national
actors to create conducive conditions for the holding of inclusive, free and cre dible
elections.
65. With particular regard to Nigeria, I am profoundly concerned by reports of
thousands of killings over the past year, and hundreds of thousands of internally
displaced persons and refugees. These are linked to Boko Haram’s barbarous
attacks, but there are also worrying allegations of human rights violations by
security forces. I call upon the Nigerian authorities to scrupulously enforce respect
for human rights regarding both combat operations and the conditions of detention,
and also to address the humanitarian impact of the conflict, and I offer full United
Nations support for their endeavours in this regard. I also take this opportunity to
underline my concerns regarding challenges in the context of Federal and
gubernatorial elections to be held in Nigeria in February 2015, and the serious risks
of violence that might occur either because of Boko Haram attacks or because of
contestation of the election results. I want to stress the vital importance of free and
fair elections and the full respect of human rights, while any dispute must be dealt
with by peaceful means and by the appropriate independent national procedures . I
also underline the crucial leadership role that Nigerian stakeholders will play in
ensuring that the elections and their aftermath meet the highest standards,
commensurate with Nigeria’s leadership role in the international community, and I
urge them to repeatedly and publicly restate commitments to peace and democracy.
Finally, I call upon the Security Council to stand by Nigeria during this critical
period and to provide whatever support is required to prevent further destabilization
and violence, especially in the badly-hit North-Eastern States.
66. I commend the prompt action taken by my Special Representative, in c lose
coordination with the African Union and ECOWAS, to support national efforts to

14-66992

15/17

S/2014/945

find a solution to the crisis in Burkina Faso. I also commend the people of Burkina
Faso for the responsible manner in which they reached consensus on transitional
arrangements. I call on all appointed transitional leaders to work in a collaborative
and harmonious manner to uphold the aspirations of the people of Burkina Faso, to
ensure that the physical security and human rights of all citizens are respected and
to address any contentious issues through dialogue to ensure a smooth transitional
period leading to the holding of elections in November 2015. I also urge the
international community to continue to accompany the efforts of Burkina Faso
during this critical period.
67. I commend efforts by subregional organizations and Governments to address
the threat of organized crime, terrorism, violent extremism, piracy and armed
robbery at sea. In particular, I welcome the inauguration and operationalization of
the Inter-regional Coordination Centre on Maritime Security in the Gulf of Guinea,
which will coordinate and implement the Gulf of Guinea Regional Joint Maritime
Strategy. I call on regional and international partners to continue to provide
assistance to the Centre and to intensify efforts to establish the two planned
maritime operation centres, in West Africa and in Central Africa, in order to
complete the information-sharing architecture. I urge Governments and subregional
organizations of the Gulf of Guinea to strengthe n their efforts to implement the
decisions taken at the summit held on 25 June 2013 in Yaoundé. UNOWA, in
collaboration with UNOCA, will continue to provide assistance in the region and
mobilize support to achieve these objectives. I call on member States of the West
Africa Coast Initiative to accelerate the operationalization of the Transnational
Crime Units, and urge the international community to support the joint efforts of
ECOWAS, INTERPOL and the United Nations in this regard.
68. Ebola has negatively affected the hard-won peace and stability in the three
most affected countries, Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. National authorities in
the affected countries will continue to require the assistance of the international
community, not only in halting the spread of the disease, but also in addressing the
resulting political and socioeconomic challenges. It will also be critical for regional
and international partners to support efforts to accelerate the implementation of the
Mano River Union cross-border security strategy as a comprehensive approach to
address the root causes of insecurity in the Union countries.
69. As the inter-Malian peace talks continue in Algiers under the facilitation of the
Algeria-led mediation team, I call on all parties to nego tiate in good faith to reach a
comprehensive, implementable and sustainable peace agreement that addresses the
root causes of the conflict. I also call on all parties to respect their ceasefire
commitments and to refrain from any actions that could jeopard ize the successful
conduct of the peace talks.
70. I commend the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission for its continued efforts
to implement the judgment of the International Court of Justice of 10 October 2002,
including its innovative measures to complete the demarcation exercise. I encourage
the Governments of Cameroon and Nigeria to continue to create conducive
conditions for completion of the border demarcation.
71. I urge West African Governments and national stakeholders to take active
steps to promote the participation of women at all levels of Government, as well as
in electoral and political processes. I welcome the ongoing legislative processes
aimed at empowering women in some countries, and call on Governments to

16/17

14-66992

S/2014/945

accelerate efforts to honour their commitments with regard to Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions on women, peace and security as
a prerequisite for equitable development.
72. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to the Governments of West
Africa, the ECOWAS Commission, the African Union and the Mano River Union
for their continued cooperation with UNOWA in efforts to address challenges to
peace and security in the region. I would also like to extend my gratitude to civil
society organizations and other partners for their continued collaboration with
UNOWA in the implementation of its mandate.
73. I pay tribute to my former Special Representative, Said Djinnit, for his
leadership and efforts in the implementation of the mandate of UNOWA. I wish to
express my appreciation to my new Special Representative, Mr. Chambas, the staff
of UNOWA and of the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission and all United
Nations entities in West Africa for their efforts to advance peace and security in
West Africa.

14-66992

17/17
