UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

2506”

YEAR

MEETING:

19

NEW YORK

.,

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2506). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda.................................................

1

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 14 December 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Angola
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16216). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

‘.
,I
..”

.j.

i-;,.?;,
_.

>

NQTE

.

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfJiclal Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in whidh
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Sceurity Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly, volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Courtcll, The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2506th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,
President:

19 December

Mr. Max VAN DER STOEL
(Netherlands).

Mr. Anyaoku (Nigeria),
Mr. Medina
(Portugal),
Mr. Adan (Somalia),
Mr. von Schirnding
(South
Africa), Mr. Rupia (United Republic of Tanzania),
Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) and Mr. Lusaka (Zambia) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Benin and Ethiopia in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose with the consent of the
Council to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in’accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

agenda (S/Agenda/2506)

of the agenda

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 14 December 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16216)
The meeting

At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Ogouma
(Benin) and Mr. Seifu (Ethiopia) took the places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

was called to order at 4 p’.m.
Adoption

1983, at 3.30 p.m.

3. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received a letter dated
19 December from the Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, which reads as
follows:

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 14 December 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola ta the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16216)

“On behalf of the Special Committee, I have the
honour to request, under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure, to be invited to participate in the
Council’s consideration of the complaint by Angola
against South Africa. ”

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
taken at the previous meetings on this item [2504th and
2505th meetings], I invite the representative of Angola
to take a place at the Council table; I invite the representatives of Argentina, Botswana, Brazil, Canada,
Egypt, the German Democratic Republic, India, the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mauritania,
Moiambique,
Nigeria, Portugal, Somalia, South Africa, the United
Republic of Tanzania, Yugoslavia and Zambia to take
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

4. On previous occasions, the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In accordance with past practice
in this matter, I propose that the Council extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to the Chairman of the Special Committee on the
Situation withregard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and. Peoples.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola) took a place at the Council table; Mr. Mt.&z
(Argentina),
Mr. Legwaila (Botswana), Mr. Maciel
(Brazil), Mr. Pelletier (Canada), Mr. Khalil (Egypt),
Mr. Ott (German Democratic Republic), Mr. Krishnan
(India), Mr. Treiki(Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Ould
Hamody (Mauritania),
Mr. DOS Santos (Mozambique),

It was so decided.
5. Mr. de La BARRE
de NANTEUIL
(France)
(interpretation from French): Once again the Council
has met to consider the complaint of an African State
1

against the South African Republic, but today’s debate
differs from previous ones because of the seriousness of
the accusations which have been levelled against Pretoria. It is not only a question of selective attacks and of
more or less brief incursions. To quote the actual terms
of the letter of the representative of Angola, above all it
is a question of “the occupation since 1981 of parts” of
the southern part of that country by the South African
armed forces.

happy, too, that your very rich past experience and
well-known diplomatic skills, as well as your profound
knowledge of the unhappy situation prevailing in the
whole ‘southern African region, will be brought to bear
upon our deliberations.
I wish to assure you of my
delegation’s full co-operation with you in your efforts to
find correct andjust solutions to the question before the
Council now, and any other questions arising during the
rest of your presidency.

6. My delegation listened with extreme attention
to the statement
made by Mr. de Figueiredo
[250&h meeting]. We should like to assure him of the
profound sympathy of the French Government for the
Angolan people, who have not known a day of peace
since their independence and who regularly have to
cope with murderous raids and serious devastation.

13. Through you, Mr. President, I also wish to
express my delegation’s admiration for the most exemplary manner in which your predecessor, our dear colleague and friend Mr. Gauci, representative of Malta,
performed the duties of President last month.
14. The Council is meeting now because parts of
southern Angoian territory have been continuously
occupied by the armed forces of the racist Pretoria
regime since August 1981, gravely violating Angola’s
territorial integrity and also threatening its security,
peace and national sovereignty. Moreover, apartheid
South Africa’s military occupation of Angolan territory
during these past 28 months represents a very serious
violation of the sacred purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, which, inter a&z, enjoin
any. Members of the United Nations that find themselves involved in disputes to settle such disputes
peacefully, in such a manner that international
peace
and security and justice are not endangered, and to
-refrain in their international relations from the threat or
use of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State.

7. France is .resolutely on the side of Angola in this
test. The relationship of friendship and co-operation
which unites our two countries has been considerably
strengthened. Our political dialogue has never been so
intense, as is indicated by the visit which has just been
made to Luanda by President Mitterrand’s Adviser on
African affairs.
8. The position of my country is without ambiguity.
France condemns any occupation, wherever it occurs
in the world. Hence, we condemn the two-year-old
occupation of the southern part of Angola by South
African armed forces. Today we once again condemn
this typical attack against Angolan sovereignty. We
demand the withdrawal of South African troops and
respect by that country for the territorial integrity of
Angola.

15. It has been observed, and correctly too, that since
their independence in 1975 the main and most pressing
preoccupation or concern of the Angolan people has
been a desperate quest for security, peace and the
consolidation
of its very hard-won freedom and sovereignty. This has been so because Angola, under its
Revolutionary
Government, the Popular Movement for
the Liberation of Angola (MPLA), has been and continues to be the target of Pretoria’s unprovoked aggression. The massive invasion of 1981, which led to the
continuous military occupation of parts of southern
Angola, must therefore be correctly seen as a dramatic
escalation of South Africa’s long-declared policy of
brutal aggression against and destabilization of Angola.

9. In this connection, my delegation has taken note of
the letter which the South African Minister of Foreign
Affairs and Information addressed on 15 December to
the Secretary-General
[S/16219, annex I]. This letter is
deserving of close scrutiny, and we await the opinion of
the Secretary-General
on it.
10. Nevertheless,
my delegation can already state
that it deeply deplores the fact that the South African
Minister in that letter reiterates the position of his country, asserting a “linkage”
between the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978) and a matter which is exclusively germane to the sovereignty of Angola.

.’
:~
:.
::.
::.
:_ . .
::.
:.-.
._-:.
..I.
:::_-

16. Equally true is the observation that Pretoria’s
continuous campaigns of naked aggression and intimidation against Angola in violation of the Charter and of
international law have only been matched by the MPLA
leadership’s deep faith and trust in the United Nations
and especially in the Council, the only body primarily
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security. Angola’s deep -respect for international
law and its faith in the purposes and principles of the
Organization are a matter of public record, as the Council was reminded by the representative of Angola in his
statement on 16 December [2.5Wh meeting]. The
Angoian Government, its representative reminded us,

11. -On 27 May of this year [2447rh meeting], my del-’
egation made a solemn appeal to South Africa in this
very chamber, warning it against the risks of violence
breaking out throughout the region. Today I reiterate
that appeal. The mechanism of peace must now be set in
motion. It depends above all on the South African
Government whether or not this comes to pass.
12. Mr. MASHINGAIDZE
(Zimbabwe): Mr. President, we of the Zimbabwe delegation are exceedingly
happy that,the Council is considering the situation in
Angola under your wise and careful guidance. We are
2

has appealed to the Council in March 1976, May 1978,
March and November
1979, June 1980 and August
1981.
17. Why should the apartheid Pretoria regime be
allowed to undermine and threaten the bedrock principles of international law with such impunity? When will
the Council take appropriate measures to restrain that
rkgime’s persistent campaigns of terror and murder
against Angola? Or does the Council accept the South
African Government representative’s
justification
of
his Government’s
criminal behaviour-that
is, as he
told the Council on 16 December [ibid.], that South
Africa’s military occupation of southern Angola is for
the protection of Namibians against the South West
Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO)?
18. Such an assertion is totally unacceptable to the
oppressed masses of Namibia and is extremely offensive to the peoples of our region and the African continent. How arrogant of a regime which has been militarily occupying Namibia in defiance of United Nations
decisions and resolutions for decades. The Council
must reject any attempt to justify apartheid aggression
against Angola, for there are no circumstances, either
in the Charter or in international
law governing interState relations, in which the invasion and occupation
of one State by another can be justified. Moreover,
Angola, which shares no common border with South
Africa, poses no threat to that country. It must also be
borne in mind that while South Africa has been carrying
out numerous air and ground attacks in Angola, killing
and maiming defenceless civilians and committing acts
of sabotage against vital economic installations
and
infrastructure,
not a single Angolan soldier has been
seen on South African soil.
19. If South Africa is really seriously looking for
SWAP0 freedom fighters, as we have been told, then
it shduld direct its murderous forces where SWAP0
fighters are to be found-in
Namibia itself. The South
African Government knows as well as, if not even
better than, any of us here that SWAP0 freedom fighters are not in Angola or, for that matter, in any independent State in the region, but inside Namibia itself.
Indeed, an examination of the list of SWAP0 attacks
against the South African forces, as furnished by the
South African representative here on 16 December, will
show that the Namibian liberation war is being fought
inside Namibia and not in Angola.
20. We must make it very clear that we of the frontline States and Nigeria are very gravely concerned
about racist South Africa’s continued military occupation of parts of southern Angola. We are also convinced
that this concern is shared by all justice-loving
and
peace-loving peoples. Accordingly, we join Angola in
demanding that r6gime’s denunciation and condemnation by the Council. We also support Angola’s demand
that the rCgime be required to cease its hostile acts and
to withdraw its occupation forces forthwith and unconditionally. Moreover, as South Africa’s aggression and

military occupation of southern Angola have caused
massive losses of human lives and in material terms, the
Pretoria Government should pay full compensation to
Angola.
21. South Africa’s bogus announcement on 15 December [S/162Z9, annex I] that it was considering
a disengagement of its murderous forces from Angola
on 31 January 1984 should not deceive anyone here.
If South Africa is really serious about disengaging
from Angola, it should demonstrate its seriousness by
action, that is, by pulling its forces from that country
forthwith and unconditionally.
The fact that this socalled intention to disengage has been qualified -with
conditions simply reduces the announcement to a mere
restating of the linkage issue, which has been soundly
condemned and totally rejected by the Security Council, by the General Assembly, by the Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries and by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity (OAU).
South Africa must be told in no uncertain terms that the
Council has no intention of buying this old and threadbare hat, now or in future. The Council and the entire
international community are now quite familiar with the
racist rdgime’s doubletrack strategy of talking about
peace while its troops are advancing deep into Angolan
territory.
22. Nothing but the immediate
and unconditional
calling off of hostilities against Angola, followed by
the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of South
Africa’s forces, will convince us of South Africa’s seriousness about disengagement.
Consequently, therefore, we sincerely request the Council to adopt the draft
resolution to be put before it [S/26226], as we are convinced that such a move by the Council will be a modest
contribution towards peace and security for Angola.
23. Mr. ICAZA GALLARD
(Nicaragua) (interpretatimfrom
Spanish): Before turning to the subject before
us, I should like to express the satisfaction of my delegation at seeing you, Sir, presiding over the Council.
Your country and mine have splendid relations based
on mutual respect and understanding.
24. South Africa’s policy of aggression and intervention in the internal affairs bf Angola goes back to a time
prior to the independence of that fraternal country,
when South Africa .tried in vain to halt the progress
of the national liberation movements and struggles in
Angola and Mozambique
and to perpetuate colonial
domination and exploitation in southern Africa.
25. The-people’s victories in Mozambique and Angola
under the leadership of the Mozambique
Liberation
Front (FRELIMO)
and the MPLA constitute a risk, in
the estimation of the imperialists, to their neocolonial
strategy in that part of Africa and a threat -to South
African colonial domination in Namibia. To thwart the
MPLA victory, the Pretoria Government gave massive
support to other pro-imperialist
movements. Against

.
:_

continuing to perpetrate against the peoples of Angola
and Namibia as if they were epic feats.

the determination
of the Angolan people, however, all
these manoeuvres were useless, and the %IPLA was-the
victor, the indisputable repository of the power of the
fraternal people of Angola.

29. During the same year 1981which
for Angola and
Nicaragua marked an aggravation of aggression for
identical reasons-the
United States Administration,
going against all common sense and logic, in order to
abort talks which were under way, invented the socalled “linkage”
or “parallelism”
which would tie the
independence of Namibia to the withdrawal of Cuban
troops from Angola. This pretext has been firmly rejected by the international
community,
and only the
United States and South Africa still cling desperately to
it. Why is South Africa demanding the withdrawal of
Cuban troops from Angola? Why does it feel threatened? In any case, Angola is not a neighbouring country
to South Africa, since vast territories separate the two
countries: Namibia and Botswana are between them.
Only the guilty criminal conscience of South Africa
could feel threatened. Angola, for its part, has demonstrated a consistent policy of honesty and decency.
The Angolans are peace-loving people who have never
attacked, nor do they wish to attack, anyone. They
wish to live in peace and fight only against underdevelopment and for a future of well-being and progress. It is a right which must be allowed all peoples
-the people of Nicaragua and the people of Angolawhose dignity and freedom have been historically taken
away, and, today when they are recovered, are trying
to maintain that dignity and freedom at the cost of pain,
heroism and sacrifice.

26. Recent history shows us that from 1975 on, South
Africa’s policy of aggression against Angola was
stepped up alarmingly.
South African armed forces
have been widely used, particularly
the South African Defence Force (SADF). The struggle of the AngoIan people has not ceased. It is an incomparable struggle which takes many forms. It is an anti-colonialist,
anti-imperialist
struggle; it is a struggle for independence, sovereignty and dignity. All these years, starting
with the proclamation .of Angola’s independence by
that outstanding patriot Agostinho Neto on 11 Novem-’
ber 1975, have been difficult years during which there
has been a strong determination to win, and the courage
of the Angolan people and international solidarity have
inflicted defeat after defeat on colonialist and imperialist forces. Between March 1976 and June 1979, regular forces of the South African army have caused the
deaths of at least 570 Angolans, 612 Namibians and
198 Zimbabwians, the latter who had been made refugees by conditions in their places of origin at the
time of the events involved. South African aggression
during that period also caused financial losses of
$293.3 million.
27. During all that time and still to this day, South
Africa has maintained
an undeclared war against
Angola involving thousands of soldiers equipped with
the most modem weapons. This state of affairs became
particularly serious from 1981 on. Inspired, stimulated
and encouraged by aggressive and bellicose statements
by the Reagan Administration,
which had recently
come to power, the South African Government carried
out its sinister plans of aggression on a major scale,
which concluded
with the infamous
“Operation
Protea” in August that year. That criminal military
operation involved 11,000 South African soldiers, more
than 100 tanks, missiles, almost 100 military aircraft
and, in sum, all the machinery of extermination.
No
change of policy has taken place since then. Vast
expanses of Angolan territory are still occupied by
thousands of South African soldiers, and the Angolan
people continues to be victim of South Africa’s policy
of aggression and occupation.

30. The only “linkage”
or “parallelism”
that can be
established in this situation of Angola is the similarity
between it and other situations of aggression that other
peoples are suffering under, like the Nicaraguan people. In each of those cases a major Power, through its
policeman in the area, is making threats and carrying
out acts of aggression and destabilization,
using mercenary troops. Our vehemence in denouncing the situation in Angola is legitimate, since we have had personal
experience with the consequences of the actions of a
Power which believes it has the right to act lawlessly
whenever it wishes, and feels it can dictate to other
countries what democracy means and how they should
organize their economic, political and social systems.
Our vehemence is due also to the shared pain of our
peoples, our solidarity and our fraternal spirit, our
awareness that Angola and Nicaragua are waging a
similar struggle against a common enemy, for independence, national sovereignty, social justice, freedom
and dignity.

28. At this stage, no,one can ignore the fact that
Angola has been constantly subjected to an unequal
war which, because of the support or indifference of the
“champions of freedom and democracy” in our hemisphere, has legitimized whatever means have been used
by that fraternal country for its defence. Given this
undeniable situation, Angola, in exercise of its sovereign will, has appealed to international
solidarity in
order to reinforce its lines of defence and to cope with a
numerically
superior enemy filled with mercenaries,
the same kind of mercenaries as those who fill the pages
of the magazine Soldier of Fortune, which month after
month narrates the deeds that these mercenaries are
::..::_. .

::.
::- .
:_-

31. Today the Council has a responsibility
to fulfil
with regard to the people of Angola. The injustice
with which we must deal is not and cannot be a subject
for debate. Is there any kind of “international
law”
that declares South Africa’s unlawful occupation of
Angola to ,be legal? It seems to us that only in the
philosophical
and political
schemes of the United
States Administration
would such conduct be permissible. After “Operation
Protea” in 1981, the represen4

tative of the United States vetoed the draft resolution
[S/14664/Rev.2] which condemned South Africa and
demanded the withdrawal of its troops. Because of that
veto the unlawful occupation of part of the territory of
Angola continues, and once again we have before us
this same problem to consider.

found conviction of mv delegation that under your able
guidance, which stems from your diplomaticVskill
and
experience, the Council will successfully discharge its
responsibilities.
36. May I also take this opportunity to express our
high appreciation to Mr. Gauci, of Malta, who conducted our proceedings in the month of November in
the most exemplary and efficient manner.

32. Let us not deceive ourselves. South Africa has
engaged in a new manoeuvre, outlined in the letter of
15 December of this year from the Foreign Minister of
the racist regime to the Secretary-General
[S/26219,
annex I], in which the Government of South Africa
talks about the “disengagement”
of the forces of
occupation and persists in its determination
to link the
implementation
of resolution 435 (1978) to the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola. That letter is one
more insult to the fraternal Republic of Angola and to
the international community, for it tries to present as a
concession what is no more than an unfulfilled obligation that has been ignored for many years. This recent
manoeuvre must also be rejected by the international
community,
for it brings nothing new or positive but
merely reiterates unlawful and unacceptable conditions
that have already been universally repudiated.

37. My delegation wishes to state its position on the
Angolan request that the Council consider again the
continued aggression being perpetrated against that
country by the racist regime of South Africa. The
military aggression of the Pretoria regime should be a
subject of most serious concern for every Member of
the United Nations, and of the Security Council in
particular.
38. This is not the first time that Angola has presented
its case before the Council. In its resolution 387 (1976),
the Council demanded respect for Angola’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity; in its resolution 428 (1978),
it demanded an unconditional
withdrawal of all South
African forces from Angola, and repeated these calls
in resolutions 447 (1979), 454 (1979), 475 (1980) and
others. The facts about the South African aggression
against Angola cannot be denied by anyone; they are
beyond a shadow of a doubt. The brutality of South
African military actions has been confirmed by numerous United Nations fact-finding missions, and have
been reported in the press and by other witnesses. The
massive and prolonged presence of the racist troops
on a part of Angolan soil, as well as the-n terrorist
acts in the period 1975 to mid-1982, have been amply
presented in a White Paper which the Angolan Government has had circulated [S/26298, annex]. The
representative of Angola furnished us with new evidence confirming
the seriousness of the situation
[2504th meeting].

33. We would reiterate that Angola must not be asked
to make any kind of concession, nor must any conditions be imposed on it. It is South Africa which must
unconditionally
withdraw its occupation forces. It is
South Africa which must compensate Angola for the
tremendous damages caused its people during these
years of occupation and aggression. It is South Africa
on which, for the good of mankind, codes of conduct
must be imposed. It is that regime which has traditionally violated international law and the resolutions of the
United Nations and will continue to do so as long as it
has the support of its powerful allies and the protection
of the “constructive engagement’* it maintains with one
of the permanent members of the Security Council.

I

34. To conclude, we wish to indicate how impressed
we were with the questions raised by the representative
of Angola in his statement before the Council on 16 December-questions
which cause us to reflect, because
of their validity in respect to all the occasions on which
the Council has not faced up to its obligations. We join
in the cry of anguish of the Angolan people and repeat
here those key questions:

39. It is clear and beyond any doubt that Angola is a
victim of continued aggression, with all the dramatic
consequences and implications that has for that country
and for the international
situation as well. The territorial integrity of Angola has been violated. South
African forces and mercenaries have penetrated as
deep as 100 miles inside Angolan territory, inflicting
destruction, sowing terror, bringing death and causing
suffering among the civilian Angolan population and
Namibian refugees. On-the-ground military operations
and aircraft attacks are frequent. The damage to the
Angolan economy is serious. The reports on brutalities
of South African forces multiply.

“In the face of the Council’s impotence and inability to help Angola, the victim of racist aggression, in
the face of its paralysis because of the veto exercised
by a super-Power, to what court of justice should the
people of Angola turn? In which international forum
should we seek redress? Which international organization will deliver Angola-and,
indeed, all of southern Africa-from
the criminal madness of this monster in our midst?” [2504rh meeting, paru. 18.1

40. These actions have been the subject of condemnation not only by the United Nations. In this respect the
representative of India reminded us of the position of
his country, of the movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, and of the Commonwealth Heads of Government
at their meeting at New Delhi. The Political Declaration
of the State Parties to the Warsaw Treaty adopted at

35. Mr. NATORF (Poland): At the very outset, Sir,
I wish to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency for the month of December. It is the pro5

,‘_’
:

_;

.-;
‘.

Prague on 5 January 1983 also condemned South Africa
for its ‘unlawful occupation of Namibia and for converting that occupied African Territory into ‘a base for
aggression against neighbouring
African States [see
S/15556, annex].
41. We heard the claim by the representative of South
Africa that steps had been taken “with a view to facilitating the process of achieving a peaceful settlement”
[see S/16219, annex I]. Those claims were designed as
a smoke-screen to hide the real intentions of his Government.
42. As was emphasized by the representative of India
in his statement on 16 December, it is clear that “this is
yet another diversionary tactic which is part of the
overall strategy of South Africa” [250&h meeting,
para. 671.
43. Those South African claims were accompanied by
unfounded charges and allegations kept in the tone of
impudence and audacious warnings. Carefully selected
words from the ideological vocabulary of anti-communism were used, some to intimidate South Africa’s
neighbours, others to please certain listeners with the
colourful vision.of South African commando troops and
notorious mercenaries in the defense of African rampart’ from communism.
44. The ideological smoke-screen thrown up by South
Africa is not thick enough, however, to cover the real
racist face of the Pretoria regime. The people of Poland
know well what racism means. In the not-so-distant
past they themselves were the victims of this dreadful
theory and practice which, combined with militarism,
led to Nazi aggression against Poland and the outbreak
of the Second World War. They will never forget it.
This is one of the reasons why my country renders
its unswerving support to Angola and other African
States, victims of the policy of, aggression of South
Africa.
45. The statement by the representative of the South
African regime proves that his Government continues
to neglect the clearly expressed will of the international
community. Its implications are extremely serious, as it
implies an alleged South African right to continue military actions against Angola and to keep a South African
military presence there. The Council cannot remain
indifferent in the face of these threats.
46. We would also expect that those Western countries which continue to collaborate, politically and militarily, with the Pretoria regime will stop doing so and
will strictly implement the 11 Security Council resolutions, including resolution 418 (1977) concerning the
arms embargo against South Africa.
47. The situation created on the Angolan border constitutes a serious violation of the Charter of the United
Nations and should be treated as such. At the same
time, we are faced with the persistence of South African

intransigence and belligerence. It is time now to step
beyond mere condemnations of South African aggression and calls to withdraw its forces from Angola. If the
Council is to carry out its primary responsibility
for
restoring international peace and stability in the south
of Africa, we must be prepared to adopt appropriate
measures under Chapter VII of the Charter.
48. Mr. Shah NAWAZ
(Pakistan): The Security
Council has been considering complaints of aggression
by South Africa against the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Angola ever since Angola’s
independence in 1975. The first such complaint was
brought to the Council in 1976 by the Chairman of the
Group of African States at the United Nations [S/Z20071
on the recommendation
of the Council of Ministers of
the OAU. The present complaint is the sixth in a series
of complaints brought before the Security Council by
Angola itself.
49. On five previous occasions, the Council responded positively to these complaints by adopting
resolutions strongly condemning South Africa for its
premeditated,
persistent and sustained invasion of
Angola through the international Territory of Namibia,
which it occupies illegally. At the same time, the Council demanded the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of South African military forces from Angolan
territory and called upon the Government of South
Africa to pay compensation to the people of Angola for
the resulting damage and destruction. In its resolution 428 (1978), the Council decided to meet again
“in the event of further acts of violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola . . . in order to consider the adoption of more effective measures, in accordance with
the appropriate provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations, including Chapter VII thereof ‘.
50. It is a matter of regret, however, that when, in
August 1981, South Africa once again invaded and
occupied a part of Angolan territory, the Council was
not able to take the required action to secure the withdrawal of the South African troops. The lack of effective response by the Council to South Africa’s aggressive action against Angola at the time has encouraged
South Africa to continue its aggressive activities with
impunity and emboldened it to remain in occupation of
parts of Angola’s territory.
51. In his statement before the Council on 16 December [250&h meeting], the representative of Angola reminded the Council of the aggression to which his country has been subjected since its independence on
11 November 1975 and what he called the full-scale war
unleashed by South Africa against his country since
1981: He gave detailed information
about the places
where five South African battalions are at present deployed in Angola.
‘_
52. The reasons for South Africa’s sustained aggressive activities against Angola and its continued occu-

pation of Angolan territory are well known. It is no
secret that South Africa’s actions against Angola are
calculated to preserve its inhuman system of apartheid,
perpetuate its control and domination of Namibia and
intimidate the front-line States into not extending support to SWAP0 and the liberation movements in South
Africa.

suffered extensive loss of life and property, it is incumbent on the Council to reaffii
Angola’s right to full
compensation for those losses.
58. Pakistan will lend its unreserved support to any
firm action by the Council aimed at ensuring South
Africa’s unconditional
and speedy withdrawal from
Angola which, in our view, would facilitate the early
independence of Namibia and contribute.towards
the
promotion of peace and security in the region.

53. In a vain attempt to justify its aggression against
Angola, South Africa has claimed the right of hot pursuit of SWAP0 freedom fighters inside Angolan territory. The United Nations has categorically rejected
this claim. The United Nations has repeatedly called for
early independence for Namibia and has accorded recognition to SWAP0 as the true representative of the
Namibian people. South Africa has no legitimate status
or authority over Namibia. Its control of the Territory has been declared illegal by the United Nations.
Accordingly, its actions undertaken from Namibian soil
in the name of protecting Namibian interests are devoid
of legality. They are aimed solely at consolidating
South Africa’s stranglehold over Namibia and its continued exploitation of the riches of that Territory.

59. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Nigeria, Mr. Emmeka
Anyaoku. I welcome him and invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
60. Mr. ANYAOKU
(Nigeria): Mr. President, as this
is the first time that I have spoken here since my
appointment as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Nigeria, I should like to begin by expressing my gratitude
to you and to all the other representatives in the Council
for this opportunity to make a statement here. I should
also like to congratulate you warmly on your recent
assumption of the presidency for the month of December.

54. The timing of the offer of disengagement made by
the Minister of Foreign Affairs of South Africa in his
letter addressed. to the Secretary-General
[S/16219,
~annex ZJ raises the legitimate suspicion that it is tactical
in nature and limited in objective. Its aim appears to be
to avoid condemnation by the Council of South Africa’s
continued occupation of Angolan territory. It skirts the
central issue of the withdrawal of South African troops
from Angola’s territory and instead holds out a promise
of disengagement under conditions which, if accepted,
would amount to the United Nations endorsing South
Africa’s purported justification
of its lawless actions
against Angola. If the offer had any credibility what‘soever, that has been destroyed by South Africa’s dispatch of four columns of its armoured corps on an
offensive in the Angolan province of Huila, immediately after announcing its disengagement proposal.

61. The complaint that the Government of Angola has
brought to the Council against the racist regime of
South Africa is a serious and legitimate one. Since its
attainment of independence in 1975, Angola has been
the victim of persistent and blatant military aggression
by the forces of the racist regime of South Africa. These
attacks, which are clearly unprovoked,
have culminated in the open invasion and occupation by South
African forces of a substantial part of Angolan territory.
Both the military attacks and the occupation of Angolan
territory represent a violation of international
law as
well as of the Charter of the United Nations. They are
also a clear threat to the peace and stability of the whole
region of southern Africa, a vital part of the continent.
62. The racist regime of South Africa has sought to
justify its irresponsible military attacks on Angola on
several grounds, First, that its military operations were
being undertaken in hot pursuit of freedom fighters of
SWAP0 near Angola’s southern border, If that is the
case, ,why did the racist regime not accept the offer
made by the late President Agostinho Neto of Angola
for the establishment
of a demilitarized
zone on the
border between Namibia and Angola? South Africa
does not share a border with Angola, and its use of
Namibia-over
which its Mandate was revoked by the
United Nations-as
a spring-board for military attacks
against Angola is a gross violation of the international
status of Namibia.

55. Non-interference
in the internal affairs of States
and non-acquisition
of territory by force are quintessential principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
These principles do not admit of any exception and
must be applied with equal authority and force whenever and wherever foreign invasion or occupation takes
place. In addressing itself to such violations of the
Charter, the Council can fulfi1 its special responsibility
under the Charter only by taking firm action in support
of those principles.
56. Accordingly, the Council has the inescapable obligation to reiterate its strong condemnation
of South
Africa’s aggression and continued occupation of part of
Angola. Consistent with its .previous decisions, the
Council is required once again to demand the unconditional and immediate withdrawal of South Africa’s
occupation forces from the territory of Angola.

63. The racist regime has also sought to justify these
reprehensible military attacks on the grounds that there
are Cuban forces in Angola. But those forces went to
Angola at the invitation of the Angolan Government,
in its legitimate right of the exercise of self-defence.
Even while the MPLA ,Govemment
was assuming

57. Having determined in the past that Angola has
been a victim of aggression by South Africa and has
7

_ _
,*,,‘,’
_‘_.

;.
,‘_
_‘,’
_‘,

_

power upon Angola’s independence, the racist regime
of South Africa, in collaboration with internal dissident
forces and certain external interests,’ was already preparing the ground for the military subversion of the
newly independent State.

69.

Mr. TREIKI

(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpreAt the outset I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for this month. I am confident that you will lead
the Council’s deliberations to the best results, due to
your long experience in the diplomatic and political
field.
futionfimn

64. Over the years, successive Governments of the
Federal Republic of Nigeria have expressed profound
concern and dismay over South Africa’s invasion and
occupation of Angola. We fully support the Govemment of Angola in the measures it has taken to seek
protection and security for itself. We cannot accept the
right which South Africa and its allies arrogate to themselves to intervene at will in the internal and external
affairs of Angola. They have no right whatever to dictate to Angola on matters concerning its own national
security and survival.

Arabic):

70. I should also like to take’ this opportunity
to
express my appreciation to my ,friend, Mr. Gauci of
Malta, for the exemplary manner in which he conducted the work of the Council last month.
71. This is not the first time the Council has met to
consider South Africa’s acts of aggression against
Angola and occupation of part of its territory. I do not
think that it will be the last, given South Africa’s intransigent policy and the Council’s failure to impose deterrent measures against it.

65. The recent decision of the Council to reject the socalled linkage between Namibia’s’ independence and
Cuban forces in Angola [resolution 539 (1983)] is not
only timely but fully consistent with the basic principles
of international law and the Charter of the United Nations. As the President of Nigeria, Shehu Shagari, said
in a recent major statement on the southern Africa
situation, Angola cannot legitimately be held hostage
to a settlement in Namibia. There is a vital principle
involved here for which, collectively, the international
community has a moral responsibility.
Military might
by one State does not confer on it the right to dictate to
others. There are other norms of international behaviour to which all States, big or small, powerful or weak,
rich or poor, are bound. A breach of this basic principle is surely a prescription for international chaos and
anarchy.

72. The people of Angola, which for many years
fought and sacrificed thousands of lives to rid themselves of Portuguese colonialism,
on the eve of independence found themselves threatened by a new colonialism, this time, by the apartheid regime of South
Africa which, as soon as it heard of the independence of
Angola, sent its forces over Angola’s borders to terrorize the Angolan people and put them under racist
colonialist sway, as it did with the people of Namibia.
Despite the failure of its first attempt, it persisted in
its repeated acts of aggression and violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola, even
occupying part of its territory permanently through the
use of gangs of UNITA [Nurional Unionfor the Total
Independence
of Angola] and mercenaries to undertake acts of subversion inside Angola in order to undermine the’country’s
infrastructure and prevent it from
achieving social and economic progress.

66. For far too long, the racist regime of South Africa,
with the open connivance and support of some of its
Western allies, has with impunity been on a military
rampage in southern Africa. Thousands of innocent
lives have been lost and billions of dollars’ worth of
property has been damaged. The national economy of
Angola has been under constant siege by the persistent
military attacks from South Africa. Restitution
to
Angola for this severe dislocation of its national economy is certainly due from South Africa.

73. The facts relating to this question have been the
subject of much correspondence addressed to the President of the Council by the representative of Angola,
as well as of statements by the representative
of
Angola before this Council, the latest on 16 December
(2504th meeting]. I need not dwell at length on the acts
of aggression perpetrated by South Africa; however, it
may be useful to mention that the Council has repeatedly met to discuss the attacks by South Africa on
Angola and other African States. Yet it has so far failed
to take any measures to stop a repetition of those acts.

67. In conclusion, let me say that Africa expects some
action by the Council in calling South Africa to order. It
expects that this draft resolution on Angola’s complaints against South Africa [S/16226] will receive the
careful and sympathetic consideration of the Council.
Angola has for far too long been denied justice by those
whose sinister motives have become only too apparent.
I ask all the representatives on the Council to support
this draft resolution, which is the result of very wideranging consultations.

74. The racist regime continues its defiance of United
Nations resolutions, its attacks on neighbouring countries, the violation of their sovereignty and its continued occupation of Namibia and parts of Angola. It
has continuously attempted to fabricate threadbare pretexts to justify its acts of aggression and, through its
friends, to prevent the Council from adopting any measures which might compel it to comply with the will of
the international community, put an end to its occupation of Namibia and stop its aggression against neighbouringcountries.
The latest of these manoeuvres is the

68. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
8

message sent by the representative of the racist regime
to the Secretary-General
[S/Z62191 following Angola’s
request that a meeting of the Council be convened. This
manoeuvre aims only at deceiving the Council and
preventing it from fulfilling its responsibilities.
The
message says nothing new; it makes no mention of the
withdrawal of the racist forces from Angolan territory,
but rather confirms the insistence of the apartheid
regime on the linkage of the withdrawal of the Cuban
forces from Angola and the independence of Namibia, a
linkage which the international community has rejected
as interference in Angola’s internal affairs.
75. South African forces should be withdrawn from
Angola forthwith and unconditionally.
South Africa
must also cease its attacks on neighbouring countries
and declare its willingness to implement
the United
Nations plan for the independence
of Namibia,
approved by the Council in resolution 435 (1978). The
attempt to introduce matters which are extraneous to
that resolution, such as the withdrawal of the Cuban
forces from Angola, can be regarded only as an attempt
to delay Namibia’s independence and to perpetuate the
exploitation of its resources. Those who help the South
African regime to persist in its policy must realize that
they are helping the enemy of Africa. They must end
their political hypocrisy and declare frankly whether
they are on the side of Africa and its peoples and the
right of the African peoples to live as human beings and
to enjoy freedom and their fundamental rights, or are on
the side of the apartheid regime and against the majority of the members of the international community.
76. Peace and security and Africa are threatened by
the presence of the apartheid regime of South Africa,
its illegal occupation of Namibia and part of Angolan
territory and its continuous attacks on the front-line
States. The Council must fulfil its responsibility
by
taking the following measures toguarantee the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola
and all the other front-line States. First, the Security
Council must condemn South Africa’s acts of aggression against Angola and its occupation of part of
Angolan territory, as well as its violation of Angola’s
sovereignty, independence
and territorial
integrity.
Secondly, it must ensure the prompt withdrawal of
South African forces from Angolan territory. Thirdly,
it must impose comprehensive,
mandatory sanctions
against the apartheid regime under Chapter VII of the
Charter.
77. Finally, I affirm Libya’s solidarity with Angola
and the other front-line States against the repeated
attacks by the apartheid regime and its continuous
violations of their sovereignty. I appeal to the members
of the Council to take the necessary measures to stop
this aggression and to ensure the withdrawal of the
racist forces from all Angolan territory.
78. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Mauritania. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

79. Mr. OULD HAMODY
(Mauritania) (interpretation from French): The delegation of the Islamic
Republic of Mauritania wishes to express its satisfaction at seeing such a skilled diplomat as yourself, Sir,
presiding over the Council for the month of December.
Our country enjoys fruitful bilateral co-operation with
your country, the Netherlands, within the European
Community~Africa-Caribbean-Pacific
framework,
co-operation symbolic of what can and should be the
relationship of equality and mutual interest between
Africa and Europe.
80. I also congratulate my friend Victor Gauci, of
Malta, who presided over the Council during the month
of November with the discretion and skill for which he
is known. I am particularly pleased to say this, since the
personal actions of Mr. Gauci and the policies of Malta
have always been distinguished by sympathy for the
just causes of Africa and the Arab world, sympathy that
we very much appreciate.
81. Finally, I thank all the members of the Council for
having allowed us to take part in its important debates.
82. The international community must surely recognize that the Government and the brother people of
Angola have for two years shown great patience when
faced with the irresponsible and dangerous actions of
South Africa, which threaten peace, security and international law.
83. We all know that since 1981, after a series of
repeated raids into Angola, the racist South African
regime has permanently occupied part of the national
territory of that country, attempting to destabilize the
regime, carrying out massive destruction of industrial
and agricultural installations and committing
intolerable atrocities.
84. The lame excuses used are too well known for me
to need to go through them.
85. We are all familiar with the perverse theory that a
solution to the Namibian crisis is to be found by aggression in Angola. I am sure that the Council has not been
taken in by this. The only solution to that problem is the
ending of the illegal usurpation of the Territory and the
exercise by the Namibian people of its right to selfdetermination
on the basis of resolution 435 (1978).
86. Painstaking attempts have been to find a reason
for this violation of Angola’s sovereignty and attack on
its territorial integrity in the East-West confrontation.
87. In sum, through an amazing and inadmissible act
of blackmail, Angola, the victim of an open attempt at
destabilization,
has been denied its sovereign right to
ensure the security of its territory and the protection of
its people in the way which the legitimate Government
deems fit.
88. It goes without saying that the Council cannot
accept such specious arguments or these hints at su-

pervision of Angola. The Council cannot be an accomplice in the creation of this vicious and astonishing
confusion, especially as it knows the reality.

:

and its confidence in the toughness of this heroic fraternal people and of the other front-line States and all of
Africa, in the face of the general efforts being made by
the South African regime to destabilize and dominate
the region.

89. The reality is indeed quite different. As in the
Middle East, where Israel uses a similar strategy to
prevent the development of the countries of that region,
South Africa bases its entire policy, and particularly its
so-called security, on keeping the brother countries of
southern Africa in a state of collective inferiority. This
explains the attacks carried out from time to time on
other front-line States-notably,
Mozambique,
Zambia, Botswana and Lesotho.

96. Mauritania requests that the Council clearly and
pointedly enjoin upon South Africa its compliance with
international
law and the repeated decisions of the
United Nations for the unconditional,
complete and
immediate evacuation of its forces from Angolan territory, in .accordance with Council resolutions 387
(1976), 428 (1978), 447 (1979) and 475 (1980).

90. The ferocity and the persistence of the aggression
against Angola are, moreover, a test of the capacity of
the Organization and, primarily, of the Council to react
and to deter.

97. Mauritania
furthermore
would like to see the
Council emphasize the imperative ‘need for all to
observe strict respect for the sovereignty of Angola, its
territorial integrity and the unity of its people.

91. What we are witnessing today in Angola and
southern Africa is what we have already seen in
Lebanon and the Middle East. The theatre of operations changes, but the pretexts for aggression remain
the.same, just as the claims of the aggressors are identical.

98. Our country believes that the Council should
firmly condemn South Africa’s policy of State terrorism in southern Africa, and most particularly its overall efforts to destabilize Angola by aerial bombardment, armed incursions and the recruitment, financing,
arming, training, conscription and political indoctrination of mercenaries of all nationalities who ,have been
drawn together under the UNITA banner.

92. The racist, bellicose, intolerant ideology, which
respects no rule of law and disregards the rights of
others, their sovereignty and their security, insulting
their past, trampling on their present and mortgaging
their future, is the same. The indulgence with which it is
viewed by the West and the encouragement of aggression it receives in the form of a flow of arms, money and
men have the same sources. The only difference is that
this ideology is called Zionism in the Middle East and
apartheid in the case that we are discussing today.

99. The Council should call on South Africa’s allies to
withhold all technological,
financial and political support -for South Africa’s unconscionable occupation of
part of Angolan territory.
100. On another level, because of the incalculable
damage suffered by the Angolan economy as a result of
the aforementioned aggression, the Council should request South Africa to furnish fair compensation for the
consequences of its acts.

93. It is the duty of the international community, and
primarily,
the Council, to save Angola from .the
unhappy fate of brother Lebanon, a fate that the South
African regime would like to mete out to it as part of its
general undertaking of imposing and maintaining
its
hegemony in the region. Angola,.which
has only just
emerged from the long night of colonialism through a
difficult, devastating and exhausting war of liberation,
now faces a new trial, which it is the last to desire. This
is described with realism, but with great restraint, in the
White Paper circulated by the Angolan Government
JSl16198, annex].

101. In so doing, our community of nations will have
demonstrated to those who do not cherish peace and do
not respect the Charter that crime does not pay, and
thus will have provided concrete and effective evidence
of its sympathy for the victims-in
this case Angolaof flagrant aggression.
102. The Islamic Republic of Mauritania would like to
place particular stress on the responsibility
borne by
the Western Powers to restrain the unbridled ambitions
of South Africa and to help in the reconstruction
of
Angola. The Western countries, whose contact group is
working so closely here with our brothers in the frontline States and Nigeria to find a peaceful solution in
Namibia, play a decisive role in creating an atmosphere
of calm conducive to an overall reconciliation
of the
enormous contradictions
in the region which, for the
most part, are rooted in South Africa’s aberrant policy
of institutionalized
racism and aggression.

94. Angola, which justifiably has great ambitions for
economic and social development,
has thus been diverted from this mission of peace and national construction by subversion inspired and maintained by
South Africa, and by South Africa’s usurpation of
Angolan sovereignty over a large part of Angolan territory.
..
95. In accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, the Charter of the Organization of African Unity
and all universal understandings, the Islamic Republic
of Mauritania reaffirms its active solidarity with Angola

103. There are many strong links and a great community of interests between Africa and the countries of the
Western contact group. Yet for historic, strategic and
10

economic reasons, those countries have close relations
with South Africa as well,

great concern to the international community. This illegal act, which is a serious violation of international law
and of the Charter of the United Nations, endangering
regional and international peace and security, is
another manifestation of the destabilizing foreign poiicy that Pretoria has been carrying out against its neighbours. Moreover, it coincides with South Africa’s refusal to allow the genuine independence of Namibia and
is part of the broader objective of perpetuating the
apartheid regime,’ which the General Assembly has
rightly described as “a crime against humanity”.

104. We continue to believe that in the relations between the Western countries and Africa, reason, interest, justice and friendship will prevail over the facile
tendency-tempting, but precarious-to seek a privileged and exclusive alliance with the South African
regime, thus condoning its adventurist exploits, particularly in Angola.
105. We prefer to lay a wager on the wisdom of the
Western Powers, particularly the United States, and on
their genuine desire to bring about and to consolidate in
southern Africa an atmosphere of peace and concord
through justice, good-neighbourliness and the triumph
of human rights and the rights of peoples.

113. One of the fundamental aspects of the foreign
policy of Argentina is scrupulous respect for the principles of the Charter. The Charter expressly prohibits the
use of force in international relations and enshrines the
fundamental right of States to independence and territorial integrity. Absolute condemnation of racial discrimination is implicit in the Charter.

106. Today, in the Council, in the case of the illegal
occupation of part of Angola, an opportunity has been
afforded to this group of Powers and to all the other
members to lay emphasis on the importance of the
Council’s essential role: to maintain peace and security
in southern Africa, in all of Africa and throughout the
world.

114. South Africa has constantly violated these
guiding principles. Argentina vigorously condemns this
conduct, and we join those who demand the immediate
and unconditional withdrawal of South Africa from
Angolan territory. Together with the overwhelming
majority of the international community, we believe
that aggression against Angola, the policy of destabilizing other African countries, the unlawful occupation of Namibia and the maintenance of the system of
apartheid fully justify the Council’s adopting measures such as those set forth in Chapter VII of the Charter. Such action by the Council would merely be compliance with its fundamental responsibility to maintain
international peace and security.

107. While calm should prevail here ‘over partisan
passionsand ideological splits which have nothing to do
with South Africa’s outrageous attacks against human
rights and the rights of peoples, it must not numb your
sense of justice and your formidable collective responsibility.
108. By acting in this. way, the Council will provide
proof that it can and will shoulder the full measure of
responsibility conferred upon it by the Charter, which
was drawn up as a sound and universal reaction to the
Fascist practices of a regime of which South Africa iS
one of the last heirs.

115. Indeed, Pretoria’s stubborn clinging to its
aggressive racist policies leaves the Organization without any choice. South Africa cannot expect that countries committed to respect for human dignity and
equality among nations will forever remain indifferent
to the continuing tragedy in southern Africa. Angola
and the other countries subject to Pretoria’s frequent
acts of aggression, as well as the oppressed people of
Namibia and South Africa, may rest assured of the
responsible, effective support of Argentina in their just
struggle to achieve the implementation of the purposes
and principles of the Charter in their region of the
world.

109. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Argentina. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement,
110. Mr. MUfiIZ (Argentina) (interpreration from
I thank the Council for this opportunity to
participate in this debate. At the same time, I should
like to express to you, Mr. President, our pleasure at
seeing you presiding over the deliberations of the Council. To your many personal qualities must be added the
fact that you represent the Netherlands, a State with
which Argentina has traditional and growing bonds of
friendship. We are sure that under your leadership the
work of the Council in December will be successful and
will make a real contribution to the maintenance ,of
international peace and security.
Spanish):

116. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the United Republic of Tanzania. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
117. Mr. RUPIA (United Republic of Tanzania):
I should like to begin my statement by thanking you,
Mr. President, and through you all the members of the
Council, for having allowed my delegation to take part
in this important and urgent debate. At the same time
I wish to congratulate you personally on your assumption of the presidency for the month of December.

111. Our salutations also go to your predecessor,
Mr. Gauci, who so efficiently conducted the proceedings of the Council in the month of November.
112. The continuing occupation of part of the sovereign territory of Angola by South Africa is a source of
11

118. Allow me also to extend our sincere congratuiations to Mr. Victor Gauci, of Malta, for having so ably
presided over the work of the Council during the month
of November.

.‘_
‘.
‘_
‘.
:-.
:.
:.
‘.
:-.
:_
:_
:.
.-.
-.
_-_

:-.
._
-_

119. It is more than two years since the South African
military began a massive invasion that involved more
than 45,000 troops. The Council was convened in
August 1981 (S/1#647J to address itself to the then
rapidly deteriorating situation and to take stepsto avoid
a confrontation of greater magnitude by calling for
the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of the
invading forces. That was certainly not the first meeting
called specifically to discuss South Africa’s aggression against Angola. In March 1976, the Council
adopted resolution 387 (1976); in May 1978, it adopted
resolution 428 (1978); in 1979, the Council adopted
resolutions 447 (1979) and 454 (1979), in March and
November, respectively. Resolution 475 (1980) was
subsequently adopted, in June 1980. In all those resolutions the Council condemned the acts of aggression
committed against Angola. The Council called upon
South Africa to cease those acts of aggression and
scrupulously to respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of that country.

123. The Council has been informed by the representative of Angola in his statement here last Friday [2504th meeting], as well as by the White Paper on
Acts of Aggression by the Racist South African Regime
[S/26298,annex], about the full impact of the continued
occupation. The extent of material infrastrnctural
damage and dislocation of various sectors of the Angolan economy, as well as the loss of life and human
torment, can certainly not be fully assessed. Even
more, their short-term and long-term effects will certainly have devastatingly negative impacts on the
Angolan people and economy.
124. The Council is called upon to consider an illegal
act which contravenes international law and principles
and violates the Charter of the United Nations. Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter requires all Member
States to refrain from the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity and political independence of
any State and from acting in any manner inconsistent
with the purposes of the United Nations.
125. The Council is only too familiar with the regard
regime has for the Charter. Apartheid
South Africa is the embodiment of aggression. The
elaborate system of the apartheid laws and the brutal
force needed to enforce them are a standing aggression
against the black population inside South Africa.
Through the colonial occupation maintained over the
people of Namibia, that people have become perpetual
victims of apartheid aggression. The countless acts of
sabotage, armed incursions, assassinations and other
acts of destabilization against the independent African
States in the region all epitomize aggression.
the apartheid

:

120. However, the meetings of the Council in August
1981on the same question [2296th to 2300th meetings]
were different,from the previous ones at which those
resolutions were adopted. In magnitude and purpose,
the August 1981invasion signified a new dimension in
the hostility of the apartheid regime against Angola.
Indeed, the continuing occupation of parts of Angolan
territory consequent upon that invasion testifies to this
new dimension. South Africa, having failed in June
1975 to prevent the coming to power of the MPLA
Government, had regrouped its regular army and mercenary forces to invade and to occupy Angola and to
create so-called new facts on the Angolan political and
security scene.

126. South Africa’s occupation of Angola constitutes
a continuing act of aggression. It has, as a result of that
occupation, imposed a reign of terror against the innocent civilian inhabitants of that territory. The Kassinga
massacreof May 1978, carried out by the South African
military against a helpless refugee population, and the
full-scale invasion of August 1981,for example, demonstrate the sustained and prolonged violation of the provisions of the Charter, the logical consequence of which
should be the application of the provisions of Chapter VII, which deals with the actions to be taken with
respect to threats to the peace, breaches of the peace,
and acts of aggression.

121. In 1981, the meeting was also different in that this
time a resolution which could have upheld not only the
rights of Angola but also the principles and purposes of
the Charter was vetoed by the United States [S/14664/
Rev.21. The implications of that position are all too
clear today. For South Africa, politically reinforced by
the veto cast in the face of a clear-cut case of aggression, escalated its military operations and today is still
illegally occupying the southern parts of Angola. Evidently further political concessionsto and engagements
with the apartheid regime have also reinvigorated its
opposition to the independence of Namibia;

127. The Council has the duty to see to it that aggression is not allowed to go unpunished. The legal position
of the international community has been adequately set
forth in the various principles of international law,
in the Charter and in the resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council. In particular, the
duty of every State to refrain from the use of force to
prevent the exercise by a people of their right to selfdetermination and independence has been underlined.
Accordingly, the right of Angola, or any other country
for that matter, to use every available means to ensure
the exercise of that right is inalienable. Even if it is in
the use of force in seeking help to ensure the exercise of

122. The fact that more than two years have elapsed
since August 1981and the Council has not taken action
is itself regrettable, for while the passage of time
has meant the suffering of innocent Angolan civilians,
women and children, permitting aggression against an
independent sovereign State Member of the United
Nations to continue for so long without any attempt to
redress the situation speaks of the sad story of the
efficacy of the Council.
12

that right, there is justification.
The Declaration on the
Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, contained
in the annex to General Assembly resolution 2625
(XXV) of October 1970, reinforces that right as provided under Article 51 of the Charter.

munity. The claim of the representative of the apartheid regime-a regime which enslaves millions of black
people in South Africa and Namibia and is committing
acts of aggression and occupying parts of Angolan territory, annihilating village populations and committing
untold atrocities in the process-that
these hideous acts
are perpetrated for the purpose of safeguarding the
freedom of Africa is both contemptuous and cynical.
This kind of perversion of logic and justification
of
aggression could come only from the apartheid regime.

128. The fundamental question that needs to be asked
is why Angola is occupied today. South Africa’s hostility to Angola dates back to the battle by the Angolan
people, under the leadership of MPLA, for genuine
independence. Its failure to impose upon the Angolan
people a puppet leadership was obviously a resounding
defeat of the apartheid ambitions. Beginning in 1975,
when the apartheid regime launched the first major
attack in a series of other major military campaigns
that were to follow, until today, South Africa has not
accepted the independence of Angola.

132. The Council. as well as the overwhelmine maiority of Members of the Organization, maintain that‘ihe
policies of apartheid, the occupation of Namibia and
that of Angola are all illegal. Indeed, the very regime
itself has been declared illegal. The various resolutions.
condemning the acts of aggression against the People’s
Republic of Angola adopted by the Council between
1976 and 1980 leave no doubt whatsoever about the
illegal presence of the apartheid regime on Angolan
soil. The General Assembly’s withdrawal, in resolution
2145 (XXI) of 27 September 1966, of the South African
Mandate over Namibia and the numerous resolutions
and decisions condemning
the continued apartheid
occupation of that Territory, as well as the advisory
opinion of the International
Court of Justice of 21 June
1971,’ also provide clear proof of the position of
the international community.
Equally, the correct decision taken by the General Assembly in 1974, and
subsequently reaffirmed at its every session, to reject
the credentials of the representatives of the apartheid
regime underlines the conviction of the international
community that the Pretoria regime is totally illegal.
Indeed the Council itself in 1974 took up consideration
of the question of the relationship between the United
Nations and South Africa [1796th to 1798th and 1800th
to 1804th meetings]. Obviously, had it not been for the
same friends of South Africa who continue to underwrite apartheid, the Council was on the correct track in
reconsidering its continued association with that regime.

129. It saw in it the removal of another protective
buffer of apartheid which, while cushioned by Portuguese colonialism, had nurtured the dreams of invincibility. Hence, be it in the continuing occupation of
Angola or in any acts of aggression and destabilization
against the independent States in the region, the aim is
clear. It is nothing more than a desperate attempt to
reverse history through acts of sabotage, destabilization and aggression.
130. South Africa’s continued illegal occupation of
the international
territory of Namibia is certainly a
major factor in the occupation of Angolan territory. The
occupation itself, characterized by indiscriminate
destruction of the civilian infrastructure and other vital
sectors of the economy, is aimed at the total destruction of Angola’s economy and weakening its ability
and resolve to support the Namibian people for the
achievement of their independence. In the process, the
apartheid regime hopes to achieve the capitulation of
Angola and proceed with the bantustanization
of Namibia. The use of SWAP0 combatants as an excuse for
the military occupation should, therefore, be seen in
that context. Obviously, for political expediency, the
apartheid regime does not and will not address itself to
the real issues of apartheid and its illegal occupation of
Namibia or Angola. Instead it opts to dwell on irrelevant issues. It is not Angola or any other country that
is responsible for the resistance of the Namibian people
against colonial occupation and racism. Rather, it is the
brutality, savagery and unacceptability of the apartheid
system itselfwhich makes struggle against it inevitable,
and South Africa and its friends now know that very
well. They also know that no matter the frequency or
magnitude of invasions or occupations, in the final
analysis they will not create safety for apartheid. Like
any dehumanizing system, it is bound to be dismantled
-whether the diehard white racists in South Africa like
it or not.

133. Perhaps it is also pertinent to point out at this
juncture that it does not surprise us that we are told that
the empty pronouncements
of the apartheid regime
about the so-called disengagement of the occupation
troops in Angola constitute a so-called positive development. We heard the same concerning the intemationally condemned so-called constitutional dispensations
only a few weeks ago. Yet the international community
is aware of the purpose of those pronouncements.
They
are aimed at confusing the current debate, since,
through sending such diversionary signals, they will
have provided ground to be used as a pretext by those
who in any case seem to acquiesce in South Africa’s
occupation of parts of Angola, to divert the focus of the
Council from the demand for South Africa’s immediate
and unconditional withdrawal from Angolan territory.
What needs to be dwelt on is not any so-called disengagement of troops or any related activity. Rather, it is
why the South African forces are in Angola in the first
place. The question before the Council is the invasion

131. Apartheid
arrogance and contempt for the
United Nations is nothing new to the international com13

and continued occupation of Angolan territory by the
apartheid regime, and no attempt should be made to
obscure that fact.
134. Angola has come before the Council to seek justice. Hence the Council cannot afford the luxury of
indifference to what is, according to the Charter, an
‘illegal use of force in obvious and contemptuous disregard of the legal norms of conduct. Hesitation to take
effective action against the continuing South African
aggression will have serious consequences both for the
people of Angola and southern Africa and for the prestige and authority of the Council. To remain silent or
not to act concerning aggression would be a tragic omission with far-reaching consequences for the Charter.
We seek from the Council nothing more than observance of the Charter by the racist regime. Accordingly,
we call upon the Council, at the minimum, to condemn,
in the strongest manner possible, the continued occupation of Angolan territory and demand the immediate
and unconditional withdrawal by South Africa of all its
occupation forces and scrupulous respect by that regime for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of the People’s Republic of Angola.

and justice. I am happy to put on record the special
relationships that have obtained between your generous, hard-working people and Government and the
people of Mozambique since the inception of our struggle for national liberation. We shall never forget the
diplomatic, material, financial and moral support that
your Government and people have willingly rendered
not only to the people of Mozambique,
but also to
the peoples of Angola, Guinea-Bissau and other such
countries.
140. I wish to seize this opportunity
to praise the
work done bv the Angola Committee and the Eduardo
Mondlane Foundation, both of the Netherlands. Your
country’s constructive attitude on the question of the
establishment of the new international economic order
is praiseworthy. The aversion of your people and Government to the inhuman doctrines and practices of
apartheid is well known and appreciated by Africa and
the whole world. 1 hope, and am convinced, that in the
future we shall be afforded the opportunity to continue
our relations of trust.
141. I take this opportunity to thank your predecessor
in the presidency for the able manner in which he conducted the proceedings of the Council last month.
Malta and Mozambique,
belonging as they do to the
Movement
of Non-Aligned
Countries, share many
common anxieties and aspirations.

135. At the same time, the Council must call upon all
States to desist from any action that undermines the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of
Angola. It should also demand full and prompt compensation by South Africa for the destruction of property
and loss of life brought about by that country’s continued occupation.

_-.

142. Once again the belligerent South African racists
are in thedock, not because the world community takes
special pleasure in. putting them there, but because
racist South Africans seem especially to enjoy being in
the dock. They are hardened, perpetual offenders.
Their behaviour can be likened to that of a hardened,
callous criminal who does not feel comfortable outside
the prison walls. He feels so uncomfortable that as his
prison term approaches its end he becomes very restless and begins plotting and designing the next crime.
No sooner is he released than he commits another
crime, and he is back in prison.

136. Angola has suffered the more than two years of
occupation which has been allowed to continue, partly
by the vacillation of the Council in taking effective
action. Other African States in the region continue to
fall victim to South African aggression for the same
reasons. The Council has an obligation to see to it that
effective action is taken, since the decision it will take
at this series of meetings will have a significant effect
both on the future behaviour of South Africa and on
the security of the independent African States neighbouring the apartheid regime. Consequently, the Council must commit itself to the adoption of effective measures under Chapter VII of the Charter in the event that
South Africa persists in its aggression.

143. Let us face the facts, however hard, unpalatable
and ,ugly they may be. The racist clique in Pretoria
is composed of hardened, unrepentant criminals who
are no different -from other well-known international
organized crime groups, except perhaps that they
have organized something resembling and having the
appearance of Government-when
taken at face value,
that is. Inreality South Africais run by a Masonic house
known as the broederbond. The racist South Africans
are Nazi-Fascist in look, outlook, ideology, practice
and behaviour.

137. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Mozambique,
whom I invite to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
138. Mr. DOS SANTOS (Mozambique):
Mr. President, I thank you and the other members of the Council
for affording me the opportunity to address the Council.

144. Just look at the self-styled spokesman of the
South African racists. Does he not remind members of
those faceless, ugly Hitlerite Germans? I am sorry he is
not here. Just imagine him as he sat here and bragged
about the terrorist act of planting bombs in an apartment building in Maputo, set to explode in the still of
the night. To make it savoury, he called it a commando

139. May I, at the outset, tell you how happy I am to
see you presiding over the affairs of the Council for the
month of December. Despite its alliances, your country, the Netherlands, and your generous people have
been able to understand the struggle and aspiration of
peoples for liberty, .independence, freedom, equality
14

raid and proudly pro&aimed that the act was to be
repeated. What is the difference between the broederbond on the one hand and the death squads and la mano
blanca on the other? What is the difference between
planting a bomb in an apartment building in Maseru,
Mbabane, Lusaka, Gaborone, Harare, on the one hand,
and planting a bomb in a parliament building, on the
other?
145., Despite the world outcry and condemnation
of
the continued occupation,
colonization
and brutal
treatment of Namibia by the racist Boers, the same selfstyled spokesman had the temerity to assert in this
chamber not long ago that the Boers’ policy enjoyed the
support of the world community.
Does the Council
remember that? I am sure it does. Only a hardened
criminal or a Nazi-which
boils down to the same
thing-would
unashamedly, blatantly and brazenly tell
such a lie to such a distinguished, enlightened, learned,
knowledgeable
and respected body as the Council.
If racist South Africans can tell the Council lies in the
full knowledge that they are nothing but lies, and are
fully aware that the Security Council is as fully aware,
or even more fully aware, that it is being fed blatant lies,
what happens if and when they sense that people may
not be in possession of all the facts? The fabrication and
spreading of lies is one of the major characteristics of
Nazis.
146. Only last Friday [2504rh meeting], the same selfstyled spokesman had the stomach, nay the courage,
to throw stones at a neighbour’s
concrete house,
inhabiting as he does a glass house-nay, a house made
of soap bubbles-and
to try to show, by innuendo and
insinuation,
that the neighbour was not democratic.
When I heard this I was at first tempted to say that those
people were completely out of their minds, but later
I kept wondering whether those people had minds at all.
They may have lost the little mind they may have had in
the past. If their mind is completely gone, it would be
interesting to know at what point in time the loss was
effected and completed.

:.

147. Last Friday we were also told by the same selfstyled Boer spokesman, but this time carrying aloft
the banner of the whole of the African continent, that
the African peoples reject a certain ideology which the
racist South Africans love so much. For fear of a digression that may take us too far from our main target, I am
going to refrain from discussing the matter now. Suffice
it to say that the spokesman very conveniently
and
comfortably forgot to mention the fact that we Africans
love apartheid to the point of unlimited hatred of it.
And, by design or by mere chance, he also forgot to
remind the Council-r
thought there was no need to
remind it-of the fact that we Africans are not alone in
this intense hatred of apartheid. Indeed, the whole
world, including outer space and the moon-at
least
during the time there are astronauts there-has
an
intense aversion to and horror of the apartheid policy.
148. The Boers are now posing as defenders of Africa.
Ask the people of South Africa what that means; ask the

people of Sharpeville, ask the people of so many Mangopes, ask the schoolchildren
of Soweto, ask Steve
Biko and Niel Agget, ask the thousands of prisoners in
the Boers’ jails, ask the people of Lesotho, ask the
people of Zambia, ask the people of Zimbabwe,. ask
Bishop Desmond Tutu and millions of others who are
without determined citizenship in the country of their
own birth; ask the peoples of Botswana, of Swaziland,
of Namibia, of Angola, of Seychelles, of Zaire, of
Nigeria, of Mozambique,
ask the people of the whole
world.
149. Hitlerite Germans and racist South Africans are
kith and kin in ideology and share many things in cornmon. The Nazis considered themselves to be from a
superior race and to be the chosen and to have had
bestowed upon them a divine mission by God. The
whole world had to be conquered, and all inferior races
gassed to death and destroyed. Gruesome experiments
were carried out upon human skin, flesh and mind. The
Jews were the first victims, but others were to follow
suit. A world war was unleashed, and more than 50 million souls were lost before the Nazis could be vanquished and tamed.
150. The Boers are, without any shadow of doubt,
Hitler’s admirers and disciples. They actively supported and fought alongside the Nazis. Just as the Nazis
did in their time, the Boers consider themselves as
belonging to a superior race, chosen by God to defend
his kingdom. ,The blacks, Asians and so-called Coloureds are from inferior races, albeit races of differing
degrees of inferiority. This ideology finds its highest
expression in the policy and practice of aphrtheid.
151. Witness the humiliation,
brutalization and mass
murder of Jews by Hitler and the humiliation, brutalization and mass murder of the so-called non-whites by
South African racists in Sharpeville, Soweto, Kassinga
and so on, and tell me the difference between Hitler and
Botha.
152. Witness the mass removal of Africans from their
ancestral lands, from the Inyangas, from the Mangopes, from other whites-only areas to barren and overcrowded land. Should it be mentioned that almost the
entire black population of more than 24 million souls, or
more than 70 per cent of the South African population,
is to be affected by this inhuman, heartless exercise of
mass removal? Should we be reminded that only 13 per
cent of the most barren land has been reserved for these
more than 70 per cent? Do we know that over 2 million
men, women and children have already gone through
this experience? Do we understand that the so-called
bantustans are for Africans what ghettos were for
Jews?
153. In those ghettos Africans can hardly make a
living. There, malnutrition
and disease are the order of
the day. Death visits 50 per cent of the children under
the age of rive. In other words, the gas chamber has
been superseded, and in its stead malnutrition,
hunger

and disease are being used to wipe out the African
population. In the ghettos a campaign of sterilization of
the population is in the testing stage. Ways and means
of spreading deadly diseases among the Africans are
being developed, tested and experimented with.
&A‘-..,.__”
154. In the so-called white areas not less than
200,000 people are arrested every year for violating
pass laws.

ces of aggression retreat, but their dreams of putting
their stooges in power in Luanda did not die with their
retreat.
158. Tired of being colonized, the Mozambican
people took uparms in 1964, and.immediately
the Beep
came to the aid of the Portuguese colonialists. Bemg
hard-core racists, and sure of their racial superiority,
the young South African soldiers at first took no cover
when fired upon and marched qn, shouting, “Come on,
boy. Come ‘on, boy.” Of course the boys did come, in
the form of bullets, and as a result many were killed.
The contingent was immediately
withdrawn.

155. Their race-classification
laws would be nothing 1
but a laughing-stock were it not for the extreme and
acute sufferings they entail for Africans. Besides the
well-known races-white,
black, Asian and so-called
Coloured-there
are honorary whites, the best known
of them being the Japanese. But there are also honorary
black whites, these being foreign blacks who; for one
reason or another, the racists want to shield from some
of their rawest and crudest racial laws. As the General
Assembly session draws to a close, Some of our colleagues may be travelling through racist South Africa to
their respective countries, and during the few hours
that they will be in racist South Africa all of them, as if
by a hidden magic, will turn white, including the blackest of the black among them. They will be declared to be
honorary whites; the title will be conferred upon them.
As soon as they cross the border, their blackness will
immediately
return to them.

159. During the sad and tragic events that took place
in Nigeria with the attempt at secession in Biafra, the
Boers lost no opportunity and were there, feverishly
trying to weaken the country.
160. As the people and Governments
of southern
Africa, individually
or severally, are engaged in a
heroic struggle to rid themselves of the scourge and
residue of colonialism,
as they prepare to take off
towards a future of wider horizons and better standards
of life, as they strive to overcome backwardness and
misery, they find themselves subjected to naked and
unprovoked acts of aggression, economic pressure,
sabotage, occupation. Botswana, Zambia, Zimbabwe
and Mozambique
are the victims of constant direct
aggression or of bandits, armed, trained, equipped,
financed and supplied by racist South Africa: Even
defenceless, tiny but proud Lesotho was not able to
escape the ire of the bloodthirsty racist South Africans.
Recently the Boers resorted to brutal aggression
against and blockading of that peaceful country.

156. Taking a cue from their Nazi brethren, although
less ambitious than the latter, the Boers have arrogated
to themselves the right to intervene militarily in any
country south of the Sahara if their interests are
threatened. An array of ghosts is always invented to
justify their military aggression: an African National
Congress of South Africa @NC) office here, an ANC
base there, a bomb placed in Pretoria or in Windhoek,
the presence of hostile forces there. Racist South Africa
has always viewed with grave concern the attainment
and consolidation
of independence by African countries as a threat to its apartheid policies and to its very
survival. In the 196Os, it was actively engaged in
the tragic events that took place in the Congo, today
Zaire. The secessionist Katangese had the racist Boers’
blessing. As a staunch supporter of the former Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland, racist South Africa
strenuously opposed the attainment of independence
by Zambia and Malawi.

161. Even countries as far afield as Kenya and Seychelles had an unwanted taste of the bitter pill that
racist South Africaconstitutes,,as
the tragi.c happenings
that have taken place in those two countries in the last
two years have vividly demonstrated.
There was no
conceivable threat to the racists coming from Seychelles. What prompted the invasion? Could the racist
South Africans have suspected the existence of tigers in
Seychelles that could one day swim. the Indian Ocean
and land at the Cape of Good Hope and devour their
little children and cattle?

157. When Ian Smith illegally and unilaterally
declared the independence of Southern Rhodesia in 1965,
the South African racists sent their regular armed forces to prop him up. When, in. the 196Os, things became
really unbearable for the Portuguese in Angola, the
Boers, together with the Portuguese colonial troops,
created the bands of Angolan traitors they support to
this very day. And when those traitors failed to take
over power in Luanda in 1975, they sent their armies
and European mercenaries to invade that country, and
this prompted the Angolans to seek military assistance
from friendly countries. Ignominiously
defeated, the
racist South Africans had hurriedly to make their for-

162. A few days ago I was told an Arab fable. One day
a cat and a mouse were travelling on a ship without each
knowing of the presence of the other. After several
weeks of voyaging through high seas where no land was
discernible, the cat noticed the mouse. As we all know,
cats are very fond of eating mice. So the cat devised a
provocation strategy, accusing the mouse of throwing
sand at it. The mouse tried in vain to convince the
cat that that was not possible, for they had been surrounded by sea water, and only sea water, for several
weeks. The cat was not there for that kind of reasoning
and jumped upon the poor mouse. I leave it to each one
of the members of the Council to conclude the story.
16

_

163. No other country has borne the brunt of the
South African racists’ instinctive aggressiveness as
Angola has. Althovgh they retreated from Angolan soil
after their defeat in 1976, they continued to support
Angolan traitors until 1981, when, after the failure of
their stooges, they decided to return to Angola; and
they have been there constantly for the last two years,
bringing untold suffering, death and destruction. Ecopomic infrastructures such as roads and bridges are
being destroyed. @en factories producing food and
textiles dould not escape the fury of the South African
racists. Whole towns have been wiped out. It is estimated that so far Angola has lost $10 billion.

and Government of the Organization of African Unity
at its sixth ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from
6 to 9 September 1969and numerous other pronouncements, has offered a blueprint for a peaceful solution to the problems afflicting southern Africa. Racist
South Africa has chosen to bite the peaceful hand we
extended to it. The disengagement offer, coming as it
did on the eve of the present debate in the Security
Council, is adisingenuous ploy and should be dismissed
outright with all the contempt it rightly deserves.
167. The Council, I am sure, will not fail to register the
fact that racist South Africa has at long last admitted
that it is waging a war of aggression against Angola.

164. Last Friday [2504th meeting], we were offered disengagement [S/162/9, anne.+whatever that
means-in exchange for something that would guarantee racist South Africa’s colonization of Namibia, Of
the three forces, two never intended in the past nor
do they intend in the future to set foot in Namibia.
Only SWAP0 is waging a struggle for national liberation in that country. There can be no disengagement,
for there was no eqgagement in the first place. The
racist South Africans seem to have forgotten whom
they are engaged to, Or do they want to be engaged to
several men at the same time with a view ta practising
polyandry?

168. Under your wise guidance, Mr. President, I am
convinced that the Council will not fail to condemn the
Boers for their aggression against and occupation of
parts of southern Angola nor to call for the unconditional and immediate withdrawal of racist South Africa
troops from that country.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

165. The naked and unprovoked aggression against
Angola is illegal and unlawful in international law and
international practice. Tt is a violation of the Charter of
the United Nations.

NOTES
’ Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of
South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Cot&l Resolution 2% (19701, Advisory bpinion, I.C.J. Reports
1971, p. 16.
’ Official Records of the Genera) Assembly, Twenty-fourth Session, Annexes, agenda item 106, document Ai7754.

166, Africa, through the Manifesto on Southern
Africa,* adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State

17

>

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore
or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LJiS PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences dipositaires
du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupr6s de votre libraire ou adressez-vous 1: Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Get&e.

Hananna

Opranasaqrrw
O~~~AWH~HHI,~S
Haywk
k~o)f(~o xynri~b
B KHHXWLIX MaraH arenrcraax
ao acex pakouax
stapa. Haaonwre
cnpaexu
06 H3AaHUflX
B
aautem xnnmno~
Mara3nue
HRU rntnnf~e
no anpecy : Opraxuaaswa
06-be~uneHHbrx
HaqHk,CexqHRnonpoAaHte
~3~a~~k,fIb~-RoptcunuKeHeea.
3siHax

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estin en venta en librerlas y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o ditijase a: Naciones Unidas, Section de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

cQ400

90-6020CMarch

1!992-2,050
