S/2014/142

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 March 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the Central African
Republic submitted pursuant to paragraph 48 of
Security Council resolution 2127 (2013)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 48 of Security Council
resolution 2127 (2013), by which the Council requested me, in consultations with
the African Union, to report to it with recommendations on the possible
transformation of the African-led International Support Mission in the Central
African Republic (MISCA) to a United Nations peacekeeping operation, including
an assessment of progress made towards meeting the appropriate conditions on the
ground referred to in paragraph 45 of my report of 15 November 2013 (S/2013/677).
2.
In preparation of the present report, I dispatched a multidisciplinary team to
the Central African Republic from 4 to 15 February 2014. A representative of the
African Union Commission was part of the team. My Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Edmond Mulet, visited the Central African Republic
on 11 and 12 February together with a senior official of the African Union
Commission for consultations in Bangui with national and international stakeholders,
including the Head of State of the Transition in the Central African Republic,
ministers of her Government and representatives of civil society, regional
organizations and the international community.

II. Major developments
A.

Security, human rights and humanitarian developments
3.
Since the assessment conducted in November, there have been dramatic
changes in the situation on the ground. The attacks by anti-balaka elements against
ex-Séléka forces on 5 December in Bangui and Bossangoa, which involved heavy
weapons, led to a reversal in the conflict dynamic and a significant deterioration in
the security situation and sparked a cycle of reprisals among civilians and clashes
between anti-balaka and ex-Séléka forces throughout the country. These
developments have led to a grave deterioration in the human rights situation,
resulting in a serious protection crisis, with civilians being targeted by all armed
groups and by civilians on the basis of their religious affiliation.

14-24762 (E)

040314

*1424762*

S/2014/142

4.
Violations that may amount to international crimes have become widespread
not only in Bangui but throughout the country. These include serious violations of
the rights to life, physical integrity and property, arbitrary detention, the summary
execution of civilians, indiscriminate firing on civilians, sexual violence and rape
and grave violations against children, including their recruitment and use, killing
and maiming and sexual violence. In addition, civilians have increasingly become
involved in violence, including killing and looting, in an environment marked by
fear, hatred and total impunity, as well as socioeconomic deprivation. Deliberate and
targeted violence forcing Muslim populations to flee may amount to the crimes
against humanity of forced displacement and/or persecution.
5.
The anti-balaka groups, which comprise local defence groups, rogue elements
of the armed forces of the Central African Republic and criminal elements, are
reportedly becoming increasingly organized in Bangui and other parts of the country
and have access to firearms and heavy weapons. While their structure remains
unclear, threats emanating from anti-balaka elements go well beyond law and order
issues. According to both the French forces of Operation Sangaris and MISCA,
anti-balaka groups now represent the main threat to civilians.
6.
For much of 2013, many Central Africans suffered under the control of
ex-Séléka forces, which were perceived by much of the population as being made up
entirely of and as being supported by Muslims. Although this is not the case, the
current wave of revenge and reprisal attacks being carried out in the name of
Christians are the result of resentment stemming from months of serious human
rights abuses. While the violence was not borne of religious or ethnic hatred,
manipulation and exploitation by some in positions of power has injected this
dimension into the conflict. The longer it is allowed to continue, the more difficult it
becomes to address. There is an increasing risk that ethnic groups perceived to have
supported ex-Séléka forces could become targets of anti-balaka militias.
7.
Killings are reported daily in Bangui. Violence in the capital has reached
gruesome levels of cruelty: corpses are mutilated in public and dismemberments and
beheadings take place with total impunity. Targeted attacks by anti-balaka groups
prevent Muslims from moving out of the few neighbourhoods where they have
regrouped. The vast majority of the Muslim population of Bangui has fled and those
Muslims who remain live under international protection.
8.
The resignation on 10 January of the former Head of State of the Transition,
Michel Djotodia, prompted most of the 7,000 ex-Séléka elements to leave the
sites where they had regrouped in Bangui since December 2013. Approximately
1,500 armed elements remain regrouped in two sites under MISCA protection, while
other elements reportedly continue to operate in civilian clothes in several
neighbourhoods of Bangui. The retreat of ex-Séléka elements from Bangui and the
western parts of the country has sparked renewed attacks on the remaining members,
associates, perceived supporters and members of Muslim civilian communities, who
are now deliberately and systematically targeted by anti-balaka elements. These
attacks involve killings, targeted assassinations, sexual violence, public lynching,
looting and the destruction of property. Mob violence has reached unprecedented
levels. Attacks have been publicly referred to by individuals claiming to represent
anti-balaka elements as “cleansing operations”. There have also been incidents of
anti-balaka elements using hate speech on the television and the radio.

2/24

14-24762

S/2014/142

9.
Ex-Séléka elements are said to be regrouping in locations in the northern and
north-eastern parts of the country, including in Kaga Bandoro, Ndélé, Bambari and
Bangassou. On 30 January, ex-Séléka elements temporarily took control of the town
of Sibut and reportedly announced that this marked a step towards establishing a
line of demarcation between Muslim and Christian areas, raising fears of a de facto
partition of the country. MISCA subsequently reinforced its deployment in the area.
The movement of ex-Séléka elements was marked by significant surges in violence
and human rights violations, as those forces destroyed villages, tools and seeds,
conscripted forced labour and killed civilians along the way. In-fighting between
rival ex-Séléka groups was also reported in a number of areas.
10. Logistical constraints and capability gaps notwithstanding, MISCA has made a
significant difference in its areas of deployment in and outside Bangui, including
with regard to the protection of civilians. In Bangui, MISCA operations carried out
in coordination with Operation Sangaris forces were essential to restore basic
security, enable the Transitional Government to resume its work while ensuring
freedom of movement for international actors, secure key installations and sites of
internally displaced persons and protect national and international stakeholders,
including members of the transitional institutions. MISCA has also disarmed and
cantoned some ex-Séléka elements. MISCA and Operation Sangaris efforts led to an
increase in returns of internally displaced persons in the first weeks of February.
MISCA has also collected arms, improved security on the main axis to Cameroon
and provided escorts to humanitarian convoys. It has responded to situations on the
basis of alerts from local populations and humanitarian actors in places such as
Carnot, Berberati, Mbaiki, Bambari and Baoro. Although some interlocutors have
identified the perceived partiality of some MISCA contingents as a challenge in
some of these areas, MISCA has prevented near massacres and gross human rights
violations and contributed to the safe delivery of humanitarian assistance.
11. However, over the past weeks, the ethnic and religious demography of the
country has changed radically. Given the intensity of the violence, many Muslims
have fled the country, mostly to Cameroon and Chad or to the north-eastern part of
the Central African Republic. Many towns that used to have multiconfessional
populations, such as Yaloke, Bossemptele, Bozoum and Mbaiki, have been emptied
of their Muslim communities.
12. In the light of the dire situation and limited protection, a number of countries
have organized the evacuation of their nationals. A transit site has been established
in Bangui, where the national army of Chad provides security separate from MISCA.
Several thousands of Muslims, including Central Africans, have been evacuated
every week by plane, taxi and truck. Many of those evacuated have never lived
outside the Central African Republic and have no place to settle. Heavily armed
units of the national army of Chad are escorting convoys from Bangui and locations
in the west to the northern part of the country and to Chad. In some cases,
disproportionate use of force resulting in the death of civilians was reported.
13. At present, more than 15,000 Muslims seeking to flee to safety are taking
shelter in 18 locations throughout the country, risking grievous violence if they
leave. In numerous places in the north-western, western and central parts of the
country, people depend for their lives on MISCA and Operation Sangaris protection.
Humanitarian actors face the dilemma of whether to encourage people to stay in
their communities, thereby endangering their lives, or to assist them in fleeing for

14-24762

3/24

S/2014/142

their own safety, thereby indirectly contributing to the sectarian division of the
country.
14. Vulnerable groups, notably women, children and the elderly, continue to be
affected disproportionately. Since November 2013, cases of sexual violence
perpetrated by armed men, most of whom are believed to be ex-Séléka elements,
have been reported in Bangui, Boali, Bossemptele, Damara, Mbaiki and Sibut, as
well as in the prefecture of Ouham Pende. During the events of 5 and 6 December in
Bangui, numerous rapes, including gang rapes, were reportedly carried out by
anti-balaka and ex-Séléka elements, notably during house-to-house searches and
retaliatory attacks. Forced marriages involving children have also been reported;
most are believed to have been perpetrated by ex-Séléka elements. Cases of sexual
violence, including rapes, have been reported at sites where internally displaced
persons are located. Incidents involving the abduction of women and sexual slavery
have also been reported in the countryside.
15. The grave human rights violations committed against children, particularly
reports of their recruitment into armed groups, is alarming. Although precise
numbers are difficult to establish, there is evidence that the March 2013 estimate
according to which some 3,500 children formed part of Séléka ranks may have
increased: as many as 6,000 children could be associated with armed groups.
Anti-balaka elements are also reportedly recruiting children. Health centres and
schools have been looted across the country and often remain closed, disrupting
children’s access to education and health care.
16. These developments have resulted in a humanitarian crisis of unprecedented
proportions. As at 21 February, 2.5 million people (over half the country’s
population) were in need of humanitarian assistance. Almost 700,000 Central
Africans had been displaced within the country. More than 288,000 were refugees in
neighbouring countries and more than 65,000 third-country nationals had been
evacuated.
17. Humanitarian needs are immense in all sectors and are likely to increase
further, while insecurity impedes aid workers from reaching all those in need. In
addition, humanitarian entities are being targeted for their resources. Insecurity
along the road from Cameroon, the commercial and humanitarian lifeline to Bangui,
affects the delivery of supplies, including relief supplies. MISCA has started to
deploy convoy escorts along the road three times a week, which has improved the
situation, but demand is great and the route remains insecure. On 12 February, the
World Food Programme was forced to open an air bridge from Douala, Cameroon,
to Bangui, resulting in an almost eightfold increase in the cost of getting assistance
to those in need.

B.

Political developments
18. The resignations on 10 January of Mr. Djotodia (see para. 8 above) and the
Prime Minister, Nicolas Tiangaye, during a summit of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS) in N’Djamena has led to a shift in the political
landscape. International concerns about the effectiveness of the transitional
leadership and its failure to respond to the escalation of violence have increased.

4/24

14-24762

S/2014/142

19. On 20 January, the National Transitional Council elected Catherine SambaPanza, then Mayor of Bangui, as the new Head of State of the Transition of the
Central African Republic. Since taking office, Ms. Samba-Panza has taken a number
of decisive steps, including the appointment of André Nzapayeké as Prime Minister
on 23 January and the formation of a new Transitional Government on 27 January.
The new Government comprises 20 members, including three ex-Séléka
representatives and one anti-balaka representative. The appointment of over
20 advisers has raised some concern that the office of Ms. Samba-Panza may serve
as a shadow cabinet.
20. While not fully in line with the provisions of the Libreville agreements, the
N’Djamena Declaration and the transition charter, the formation of the new
Government was a positive development that provided new impetus to the transition.
Nonetheless, it provoked dissatisfaction among ex-Séléka and anti-balaka leaders
and led to a subsequent spike in violence in Bangui. The former political opposition
rejected an offer to participate in the Government.
21. The transitional authorities have made additional efforts to establish the
required institutional framework to organize the elections, which should conclude
the transition period. On 24 December, the seven-member national elections
authority was formally established but has yet to become operational. The electoral
needs assessment mission that I dispatched to the Central African Republic from
28 January to 11 February concluded that the Transitional Government had declared
its intention to organize elections as soon as possible. However, the capacity of
national stakeholders to organize the polls within the transitional time frame will
depend on their ability to establish local branches of the national elections authority
throughout the country and other institutions, such as the High Council for
Communication, to complete the legal framework, to restore some security and State
authority across the country and disarm, at least in part, armed elements, to address
the absence of civil registries and to assess the availability of resources, from both
the Transitional Government and international partners, to organize the elections.
22. Determining the appropriate timing for holding elections in the Central African
Republic will not only be a matter of putting into place the necessary technical
capacities and legal arrangements and of providing a secure environment. It will
also depend on establishing the right political environment, one in which elections
will help to strengthen society and advance stability rather than be a source of
conflict and social instability.
23. The violence in December has further decimated the already scarce national
capacities and led to the collapse of the already weak administration. Civil servants
have not been paid for five months and the State continues to have no money to pay
their salaries. The capacity of the new transitional authorities to effect change will
in part depend, in the immediate future, on support from the international
community.
24. The situation outside Bangui is marked by the near-total absence of State
administration and services. Ex-Séléka elements continue to consider themselves the
legitimate representatives of the State in areas where they maintain a presence and
seek to exercise State responsibilities, such as law and order and tax collection,
although in many cases their actions amount to arbitrary rule and extortion. In some
areas in the north-west, anti-balaka groups too are reportedly operating as de facto
authorities.

14-24762

5/24

S/2014/142

25. The crisis in the Central African Republic is extremely complex. The country
has experienced three internal conflicts in 10 years and its third Transitional
Government in one year. The current situation is the continuation of a decades-long
cycle of political and security crises. At its roots, it stems from long-standing
socioeconomic, political, structural and governance deficiencies, from fragile social
cohesion and from deep-seated feelings of marginalization among some
communities, in particular populations in the northern part of the country, which
have felt discriminated against by the central Government. These conditions have
been exacerbated by corruption, nepotism, the abuse of power, internal strife,
outside interference and the deteriorating capacity of the national army. This context,
coupled with extremely weak State institutions, has left consecutive central
governments vulnerable. The State is overwhelmed and has virtually no capacity to
manage the massive array of threats it is facing and will need to be rebuilt from its
foundations. There is no national army and what remains of the police and the
gendarmerie lacks the basic equipment and means to exercise its duties. The State
administration is absent in many places and the international community is having
to substitute for the State in the delivery of basic services where possible.

C.

Rule of law
Justice and corrections
26. The events in December have caused a total breakdown of law and order.
Courts have been systematically destroyed and attacks have been launched on
prisons, resulting in the freeing of some detainees and the killing of others and in
constant threats against judges. Courts and prisons have ceased to function, although
the main prison in Bangui was reopened on 14 February, following an intervention
by the Head of State of the Transition. Civil servants and magistrates have
abandoned their positions and it has become impossible to bring suspects to justice,
detain them or even carry out arrests. Only a few representatives of law and order
institutions have resumed their duties in Bangui. The penal chain has been disrupted,
paralysing the proper administration of justice and contributing to large-scale
impunity. The situation considerably complicates the work of the international
forces.
National police and gendarmerie
27. What remained of the national police was further weakened during the
December events. Stations were looted and police and gendarmerie personnel
abandoned their positions. Some officers joined the ranks of ex-Séléka and
anti-balaka groups. The Compagnie nationale de sécurité, one of the two operational
units still in possession of firearms, was first attacked by anti-balaka elements, then
disarmed by ex-Séléka forces. Most of the infrastructure has been destroyed. Police
officers and gendarmes lack equipment, including radios and protection gear, and
have only six vehicles.
28. Police elements have started returning to their duties and three out of eight
police stations have reopened in Bangui. To date, 700 police officers (of the 1,675
said to have been working prior to December) have registered in Bangui. A
Peacebuilding Fund project worth $2.5 million has been approved to support the
rehabilitation of eight police commissariats and three gendarmerie brigades in

6/24

14-24762

S/2014/142

Bangui and provide some vehicles and communications equipment. On 15 January,
police and gendarmerie started joint patrols with MISCA in Bangui.
29. According to the gendarmerie, 1,200 officers out of 3,500 gendarmerie
personnel present before December have registered. Although the bulk of those
officers are in Bangui, 226 police personnel are operating outside the capital,
including in Boali, Bossemptele, Yaloke, Mbaiki, Nola, Berberati, Bouar, Bangassou,
Mobaye, Obo and Bambari.
Disarmament
30. The retreat of the majority of the previously regrouped ex-Séléka elements is a
setback for the planning of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration activities.
At the same time, the threat posed by anti-balaka and other, already existing or
newly emerging, armed groups means that new approaches for managing them are
required. There are worrying reports that the prospect of taking part in a
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme in the future is becoming
an incentive for some to take up arms.
31. While it remains challenging to plan a formal disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme for ex-Séléka elements, these elements are indicating a
willingness to regroup and enter into such a process. Those currently regrouped lack
sufficient food, shelter and access to medical facilities.
32. Under the new Transitional Government, responsibility for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration has shifted to the Ministry of Defence. While a
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration strategy was adopted on
15 November 2013, it needs to be revised to reflect the new realities on the ground.
The need to address the security challenges unique to the Central African Republic,
including the presence of anti-balaka and other community-based militias or groups,
will require the design and implementation of a creative, tailored programme that
could include some combination of community violence reduction, emergency
employment, social cohesion and reconciliation activities. Such a tailored
programme would need to be designed through a close collaboration between the
Government and the United Nations. There should be an immediate focus on
measures that can have a quick impact on the security situation, including measures
aimed at disarming and cantoning armed elements, while longer-term and more
comprehensive and sustainable disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes are developed. Contributions of partners to early recovery and social
cohesion programmes aimed at restoring livelihoods will be critical for breaking the
cycle of insecurity and violence at the community level.
Reconstitution of the national defence and security forces
33. Efforts have been made to identify and regroup former elements of the armed
forces of the Central African Republic. On 5 February, 6,500 of the 8,434 elements
that used to make up the armed forces responded to a call by the Head of State of
the Transition to gather at the École Nationale d’Administration et de Magistrature.
Aside from the lack of financial and logistical resources, the public lynching of a
member of the armed forces who had been an ex-Séléka element minutes after the
public ceremony at which the Head of State of the Transition officially assumed
control over the army illustrates the deep divisions that exist within the armed
forces and the need to restructure them from their foundations. The new Minister of

14-24762

7/24

S/2014/142

Defence has indicated a desire to create an army that is representative of the whole
population and, in doing so, to include ex-Séléka members. However, any
integration into the army should take place within the parameters of a political
framework that lays out the basic preconditions for integration, including vetting for
human rights or other abuses.
Mine action
34. In December 2012, the United Nations recorded stockpiles that included
11,654 items of obsolete ammunition, explosive remnants of war and 165,934 items
of small arms ammunition. During the inspection of those stockpiles in November
2013, it was established that 83 per cent of the obsolete ammunition and explosive
remnants and 99 per cent of the ammunition holdings had disappeared. There are
concerns that much of these items are currently in the hands of the armed groups
and civilians.

D.

Socioeconomic situation
35. Before the most recent crisis, the Central African Republic ranked 180th of
186 countries on the Human Development Index of the United Nations Development
Programme. Since then, the socioeconomic situation in the country has deteriorated
markedly. The crisis has negatively affected the economy and is expected to have
long-term consequences for the people despite the country’s wealth of natural
resources. The massive movement of Muslim populations, traditionally at the centre
of the small-scale trade and commerce sectors, has resulted in a shortage of goods,
including medicines, and has also caused a significant increase in market prices.
Most of the goods are imported through the principal road linking the Central
African Republic to Cameroon but insecurity has blocked free passage.
36. Public finances have collapsed. According to projections of the International
Monetary Fund, the gross domestic product contracted by 14.5 per cent in 2013 and
the inflation rate stood at 12 per cent. The account deficit totalled 5.6 per cent of the
gross domestic product in 2013. The most pronounced poverty is found in rural
areas. A total of 75 per cent of the population relies on small-scale agriculture for
food and income. A lack of seeds and tools, combined with continued insecurity, is
likely to have a significant negative impact on agriculture production and
commodity prices, and heighten the real risk of a food and nutrition crisis.
37. The World Bank, through a restructuring of its current operations and
additional financing, has committed some $100 million in support of emergency
response efforts, including rapid support to the public sector. The World Bank, the
European Union and the International Monetary Fund intend to re-engage with
authorities to discuss direct budget support. However, the ability to re-engage with
national authorities will depend on the prevailing security situation in the country.
38. The combination of widespread poverty, disruptions to commerce and
agriculture, continued insecurity in many parts of the country, large-scale population
displacements and the total absence of public services by the Government leaves the
population and country extremely vulnerable to a looming and even deeper
socioeconomic and humanitarian crisis.

8/24

14-24762

S/2014/142

E.

Subregional aspects
39. The subregion, under ECCAS leadership, has remained actively engaged in
fostering a solution to the current crisis, including through efforts led by the
President of Chad and Chair of ECCAS, Idriss Deby Itno, and the President of
Congo and Chair of the Follow-up Committee on the Inclusive Political Dialogue in
the Central African Republic, Denis Sassou Nguesso, as well as through the
provision of temporary financial support to pay the salaries of civil servants. A joint
ECCAS-African Union delegation comprising the Foreign Ministers of Chad and
Congo, the Minister of Defence of Congo and the African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security visited Bangui on 28 December 2013 to stress the need for
cohesion and effective unity of action among all stakeholders.
40. ECCAS, working in close coordination with the African Union, responded to
the deteriorating situation by convening the Sixth Extraordinary Summit of the
Heads of State and Government of ECCAS, held in N’Djamena on 9 and 10 January.
During that meeting, the former Head of State of the Transition, Mr. Djotodia,
announced his resignation. In a subsequent communiqué, ECCAS Heads of State
and Government regretted the passivity of the political class in the Central African
Republic and the lack of unity within the Transitional Government and called for the
swift election of a new Head of State of the Transition. They also asked the ECCAS
secretariat and the African Union Commission to examine the modalities of the
organization of the National Reconciliation Conference, under the auspices of the
mediator. On 29 January, the African Union Peace and Security Council took note of
the decisions taken by ECCAS at the Sixth Extraordinary Summit and urged the
international community, including the United Nations, to provide all necessary
support to the efforts of the leaders of the region to facilitate an effective
international action in support of the Central African Republic.
41. The crisis has affected neighbouring countries, where more than 288,000
Central Africans have sought refuge, almost 54,600 of them since December 2013.
There are continuing reports of the presence of foreign fighters in the Central
African Republic, including Boko Haram elements and others who crossed the
border from Darfur and other regions. The dissolution of State authority and the
commission of crimes against the Muslim minority have created conditions that
extremist groups from inside and outside the subregion could seek to exploit. In
order to promote the long-term stability and economic development of the Central
African Republic, it is critical that such groups not be allowed to take advantage of
the current chaotic conditions and establish a foothold in the country.

III. International security response
A.

African-led International Support Mission in the Central
African Republic
42. On 13 December, following consultations on the margins of the Elysée Summit
for Peace and Security in Africa, held in Paris on 6 and 7 December, the African
Union Peace and Security Council authorized an increase in MISCA strength from
4,500 to 6,000 uniformed personnel. Pursuant to the agreement reached by the
African Union and ECCAS, authority was transferred from the Mission of ECCAS

14-24762

9/24

S/2014/142

for the Consolidation of Peace in the Central African Republic to MISCA on
19 December 2013. MISCA expedited its force generation process and managed to
reach its full strength by early February, although some critical capabilities have yet
to be deployed.
43. As at 21 February, MISCA strength stood at 6,032 uniformed personnel,
including 5,404 military personnel and 628 police personnel forming four formed
police units. The latter started foot patrols in Bangui, as their vehicles have yet to be
deployed. The MISCA civilian component comprises 35 personnel (compared with
the 152 envisaged in the concept of operations) specialized in political affairs,
humanitarian liaison, human rights and mission support. Liaison mechanisms have
been established to promote coordination between MISCA and Operation Sangaris
forces, as well as with the Regional Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the
Lord’s Resistance Army, deployed in Obo Province, south-eastern Central African
Republic. Since his appointment as Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission and Head of MISCA, Jean-Marie Michel Mokoko has
worked closely with my Special Representative and Head of the Integrated United
Nations Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic (BINUCA), Babacar
Gaye, and other stakeholders to address the unfolding crisis. MISCA achievements
have been made at the cost of great sacrifices, including 17 fatalities and
118 wounded.
44. Its swift deployment notwithstanding, MISCA faces significant challenges in
terms of air mobility, information and communications systems, intelligence
capacity, medical facilities and logistics supply and sustainment. Given the poor
state of the road infrastructure, the absence of enablers and multipliers such as
signal units, engineering capacity, heavy transport equipment and utility helicopters
hampers the mission’s operations. There is an urgent need for enablers and force
multipliers to enable MISCA to conduct operations more effectively.
45. The United Nations, together with France and the United States of America, is
deploying military and civilian experts to work with MISCA to strengthen its
command and control and administrative structures, improve its information and
communications technology infrastructure and provide training. During a donors
conference held by the African Union on 1 February, donors pledged approximately
$316 million in support of the Central African Republic, including MISCA. The
MISCA budget for 2014 amounts to $409 million. Using the trust fund, the United
Nations is upgrading MISCA information and communications capabilities. On
20 and 26 February, the United Nations sent two aircraft to Bangui carrying 1,200
very high frequency hand-held radios, 25 repeaters and other assorted items of
information and communications technology and power-generation equipment. The
United Nations has also deployed experts to install the equipment and train MISCA
personnel to use it.

B.

Operation Sangaris and the deployment of the European Union force
46. Operation Sangaris of France deployed to the Central African Republic on
6 December with the aim of restoring minimum security conditions in Bangui and
supporting the build-up of the MISCA force. A total of 2,000 Operation Sangaris
military personnel are deployed in Bangui and in hotspots in the western and

10/24

14-24762

S/2014/142

northern parts of the country, including in the towns of Berberati, Yaloke, Boda and
Bambari and in Vakaga prefecture.
47. On 10 February, the Council of the European Union established a European
Union military operation in the Central African Republic, which is to contribute to a
safe and secure environment in the Bangui area for up to six months, with a view to
handing over to partners. The force is expected to commence deployment early in
March and begin operations soon thereafter.

C.

Immediate measures
48. The continued deterioration in the security situation, in particular the
widespread killings and pervasive threats to civilians described above, demands the
focused attention of and urgent action by the international community. On
20 February, I proposed to the Security Council a new six-point initiative designed
to stop the violence and killings, protect civilians, prevent the de facto partition of
the country, facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance and provide the
Government with some urgently needed support. The initiative calls for the rapid
reinforcement of the African Union and French forces on the ground and the
deployment of additional troops and police personnel; the provision of logistical and
financial support to African forces; the coordinated command of the international
forces, with a narrowly focused mission to prevent killings and protect civilians; a
rapid infusion of tangible support to the Government of the Central African
Republic; the acceleration of a political and reconciliation process for the country;
and urgent and full funding for humanitarian operations.
49. Even as we lay the groundwork for a future United Nations peacekeeping
operation, it is critical that all actors focus on the most urgent, high-priority
objectives, namely halting the violence against innocent civilians, protecting
civilians and providing relief to those in need. Achieving these objectives will
require the contribution of many actors. I urge Member States, regional
organizations and other key partners to make tangible contributions to ensure the
success of this initiative through the provision of military and police personnel,
funding for humanitarian operations, financial and material support to MISCA and
the Government of the Central African Republic, as well as political support to the
peace and reconciliation process.

IV. Conditions for the United Nations peacekeeping operation
to operate successfully
50. In my report on the Central African Republic dated 15 November 2013
(S/2013/677), I outlined a number of conditions that need to be present on the
ground in order for a United Nations peacekeeping operation to operate successfully.
They include the need for the transition to remain in place and for the Transitional
Government to demonstrate its commitment to the process and take concrete steps to
implement the agreed framework. The new Head of State of the Transition and her
Government have taken encouraging steps to demonstrate their commitment to
moving the process forward and addressing immediate challenges, including the
reopening of the prison in Bangui and negotiations on the payment of salaries of
civil servants. There is hope that the new leadership will put the transition process

14-24762

11/24

S/2014/142

back on track and create conditions conducive to the holding of elections. However,
the fragility of the current political framework, which has not been fully adhered to
and is overtaken by events, has been identified as a major risk for any future
peacekeeping operation.
51. With regard to the reconstitution of the national security institutions,
distinguishing between forces officially representing the State security apparatus
and forces acting outside of any legal framework requires, first and foremost, a
national vision with regard to security and rule of law institutions throughout the
country and the future composition of the armed forces, including criteria for the
integration of its members and the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former armed elements. Although some progress has been made at the technical
level, building consensus around such a vision is fundamentally a political process
that has yet to take place.
52. The situation in the Central African Republic has changed drastically, as
described above. While the current and future political contexts in the country are
important long-term success factors for the mission, the most important and urgent
consideration is the protection of civilians and the creation of a secure environment
throughout the country. Consequently, I am proposing the rapid deployment of a
United Nations peacekeeping operation to address the key security challenges in the
country.

V. Recommendations for the possible transformation of
the African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic into a United Nations
peacekeeping operation
53. In a letter dated 27 January 2014, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the
Central African Republic requested that a United Nations peacekeeping operation be
deployed to stabilize the country and address the civilian aspects of the crisis. The
Head of State of the Transition reiterated the request in the meeting with my
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations held in Bangui on
12 February.
54. In a letter dated 17 February 2014, the Chairperson of the African Union noted
that the deployment of MISCA was aimed at facilitating a broader and more
sustainable international engagement in the Central African Republic, which would
include the deployment of a United Nations operation in due course, once the
required conditions had been created on the ground. Expressing the hope that,
within 6-9 months, the initial stabilization phase would be completed, the African
Union expressed the view that the precise time frame should be determined on the
basis of regular joint assessments of the situation.

A.

Deployment of the proposed peacekeeping mission
55. The challenges that confront the Central African Republic run deep and are not
given to easy solutions. In spite of the progressive effectiveness of MISCA and
Operation Sangaris, the current deployment of international security forces is not
sufficient and lacks the civilian component to adequately protect civilians under

12/24

14-24762

S/2014/142

imminent threat or to tackle the root causes of the conflict. Addressing the crisis in
the Central African Republic requires a unified and integrated approach through the
deployment of a multidimensional peacekeeping operation, with the protection of
civilians as its utmost priority. An important factor that has influenced my decision
to recommend the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping operation is that
the Organization is uniquely positioned to deploy and sustain a multidimensional
peacekeeping operation with the full range of capacities that are required to address
the deep-rooted nature of the complex crisis now unfolding in the Central African
Republic.
56. In the early stages of its deployment, a United Nations peacekeeping operation
will need to focus its efforts on the most urgent priorities and to provide some
immediate dividends to the population in the areas of security, protection of
civilians, human rights and justice, building on the progress made by MISCA and
Operation Sangaris. In the long term, in order for the United Nations to make a
lasting difference in the Central African Republic, it will need to support national
efforts to break the cycle of recurring political and security crises and to contribute
to establishing the conditions for long-term stability and social and economic
development.
57. The objectives and priorities of a United Nations operation, and hence its
configuration and activities, should be adjusted over time to the particular
conditions and needs of the country and its people. Thus, the objectives of the
United Nations peacekeeping operation during the early phase of its deployment
will focus on providing a secure environment, a sine qua non for progress in other
areas, supporting the Transitional Government to exercise basic State functions,
supporting peace and reconciliation efforts, protecting basic human rights and
facilitating the delivery of humanitarian assistance. As conditions evolve in the
country and, in particular, as the security situation improves and national security
capabilities develop, the objectives of the United Nations mission will shift to focus
increasingly on supporting the extension of State authority and the State’s ability to
deliver public services, the consolidation of a stable political environment, the
reconciliation of communities and the return of people to their homes, the
development of rule of law institutions and the promotion of respect for human
rights. An exit strategy, which will have to be based on progress made in building
national capacities, will need to be determined from the outset.
58. The work of the United Nations in the Central African Republic must be based
on a clear understanding of the current situation and be tailored to the future needs
of its people. A “fit-for-purpose” approach is required, focusing on a strong, flexible
and mobile countrywide deployment of uniformed personnel and civilians that will
allow the mission to prevent and respond to security threats as they evolve, while
giving the necessary attention to priorities in its civilian activities. Critical
benchmarks will be built into the mandate at every stage of the mission so as to
enable it to move as rapidly as possible from entry to stabilization, consolidation
and a sustainable exit.
59. Because of the unique circumstances of the Central African Republic, the
approach taken in military, police and civilian deployments must be phased in a
deliberate manner and be linked to the priority objectives of the mission. To deal
with immediate security needs, there will be an initial surge of military personnel
and corresponding military enablers. Alongside this initial military surge, essential

14-24762

13/24

S/2014/142

civilian capacities will be deployed, phased in gradually as the situation stabilizes
and as the necessary living and working facilities are developed, and more work can
be undertaken on civilian tasks. Police will also be phased in and, as the security
environment improves, should eventually replace the bulk of the initial military
surge capacity. While a large, initial military deployment will be necessary to
address the security challenges, it is envisaged that United Nations military forces
would progressively draw down as quickly as conditions permit, allowing the
United Nations to focus as much of its efforts as possible on critical civilian, Statebuilding tasks. System-wide assessments will be conducted to further refine and
elaborate the overall United Nations response. Efforts will be necessary from the
outset of the mission to manage the expectations of the population through a strong
communications strategy.

B.

Mandate of the proposed mission in the Central African Republic
60. It is recommended that, operating under a Chapter VII authorization, the
mandate of the proposed United Nations peacekeeping operation include: (a) the
protection of civilians; (b) the protection of United Nations personnel, installations
and equipment and ensuring the security and freedom of movement of United
Nations and associated personnel; (c) support for the political process and key
elements of the transition, including the restoration of State authority and its
extension throughout the territory; (d) the creation of security conditions conducive
to the delivery of principled humanitarian assistance and the safe, voluntary and
sustainable return of internally displaced persons and refugees; (e) the promotion
and protection of human rights; (f) the promotion of a national dialogue, mediation
and reconciliation at all levels; and (g) support for the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former armed elements, with specific attention to children, and
the repatriation of foreign elements, as well as community violence-reduction
programmes.
61. Additional tasks should include: (a) support for the organization and conduct
of elections; (b) support for security sector reform; (c) support for the police, justice
and correctional institutions to reinstate the criminal justice system; (d) mine action,
monitoring of weapons and ammunition trafficking and stockpile management;
(e) coordination of international efforts in support of enhancing good governance,
including the development of sound fiscal policies and natural resources
management; and (f) institution-building and laying the groundwork for long-term
socioeconomic recovery.
62. It is important to stress that not all of these activities will be carried out in
equal proportions at all stages of the peacekeeping mission’s presence. On the
contrary, the mission will need to regularly adjust its priority activities, and hence
its configuration, to the circumstances on the ground.

C.

Tasks to be fulfilled by the United Nations mission
Protection of civilians
63. The key focus of the United Nations mission in the initial stage must be the
protection of civilians. This requires military and civilian expertise in civil-military
coordination, liaison with local populations, gender expertise, human rights

14/24

14-24762

S/2014/142

monitoring and reporting, integrated common threat analysis and early warning
capabilities at the national and local levels, together with the design of coherent
coordination mechanisms, including with the humanitarian protection cluster. Such
focus should go hand-in-hand with the deployment of specialized civilian
capabilities to restart immediately a minimally functional criminal justice chain
through the robust deployment of justice and corrections functions.
Military component
64. As indicated in my briefing to the Security Council on 20 February,
considering the military threats and virtually non-existent national security
apparatus, more troops are needed in the Central African Republic to address the
situation in the initial phase of the peacekeeping operation. The proposed concept of
operations has been developed on the assumption that the force is deployed with a
robust mandate and adequate resources with the capacity to react adequately to
changing circumstances and pre-empt potentially destabilizing events. The military
component should be progressively reduced as critical benchmarks are met.
65. It is envisaged that the strength of the peacekeeping operation would comprise
up to 10,000 troops and 1,820 police personnel, including the required capacities
and enablers. The proposed force levels have been defined by a number of factors,
which include the need to have a balanced and deterrent presence throughout the
country, to protect civilians, to monitor border areas, to support the transition; to
secure major lines of mobility and communication, in particular the main supply
route from Cameroon, to support the delivery of humanitarian assistance where
appropriate and to safeguard United Nations personnel and installations.
66. In addition to eight infantry battalions, there is a requirement for a properly
constituted reserve and key assets such as logistics, aviation and engineers. In
addition, it is recommended that the force may contribute at a later stage, in
partnership with others, to the broader effort to reconstitute the national defence and
security forces, which will be critical for the United Nations exit strategy.
Depending on the role that the force will eventually take on, the deployment of
additional capability such as a training assistance unit could be considered in due
course. Particular emphasis is placed on the military observers, including female
officers who can reach out and liaise with local communities, in coordination with a
strong civil affairs component, and carry out the vital task of monitoring cross
border movements. The employment of technology for surveillance operations to
assist in the early warning of threats to civilians and United Nations personnel and
in monitoring key areas of instability will be important to enhance mandate
implementation, improve the safety and security of United Nations personnel and
reduce resource requirements.
67. The United Nations operation will be expected, in an initial phase, to continue
MISCA efforts to provide security to key installations and national stakeholders in
Bangui. However, the mission’s capacity to provide security to key national
stakeholders, including members of the Transitional Government and magistrates,
will be limited. It is therefore recommended that the police component assist in
building the capacity of the national police and the gendarmerie in providing close
protection.

14-24762

15/24

S/2014/142

Police component
68. To address the current situation of violence and impunity, a military response
alone, no matter how robust, will not be sufficient. I therefore recommend that the
proposed mission include a United Nations police component with a focused
mandate and supporting capabilities to protect civilians and support the resumption
of activities of the national police and the gendarmerie. The United Nations policing
intervention will face critical challenges, such as the rapid generation of specialist
capacities such as crowd control, to undertake reform and restructuring activities.
Individual police officers and formed police units will be generated and deployed,
including through a rehatting of MISCA police in keeping with United Nations
policies. The United Nations police concept envisages that the initial deployment
will be in Bangui, with a view to expanding outside the capital as security and other
conditions permit. The focus of the police component’s activities, and its
deployment, will be adjusted to the particular requirements on the ground, as with
other components.
69. Stabilizing the security situation requires addressing impunity and bolstering
confidence in the justice system. The proposed mission should therefore also assist
in mobilizing and coordinating international donor support to provide essential
infrastructure, equipment and logistics for the law enforcement institutions and
support national authorities in their training, reform, restructuring and development,
within the context of a national security sector reform strategy. Serious
consideration should be given to the adoption of urgent temporary measures in the
security and rule of law areas to avoid a continuation of the total impunity that
currently exists in the country.
Civilian component
70. While the deployment of a robust, capable, military force is critical to
addressing the urgent security challenges in the country, it is civilians who will need
to work hand in hand with partners to assist the Government and the people of the
Central African Republic as they seek to build their State. Civilian efforts should
focus on the protection of civilians, reconciliation, facilitating the political process,
and building the State’s capacity to address the most pressing challenges and needs
of the population.
71. Progress on the political front will be of paramount importance to ensure that
the transition process remains on track, while creating conditions conducive to the
rebuilding of the national army, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
comprehensive security sector reform, reconciliation and the development of
democratic institutions. The deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation would provide unity of effort and the leverage to promote a political
process and address the root causes of the conflict. This will require a strong good
offices role for the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, as well as an
important analytical capacity.
72. The deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping operation should be an
opportunity to revitalize a meaningful political process, in support of regional
efforts, in order to build a national consensus around the future armed forces and
create the conditions for the holding of free, fair and inclusive elections, including a
level playing field for all candidates. Peacekeeping missions have demonstrated in
the past that their support can be critical to transparent and democratic processes.

16/24

14-24762

S/2014/142

73. The recent crisis has further divided and destroyed the social fabric of the
Central African Republic. A United Nations peacekeeping operation should support
initiatives throughout the country, in close coordination with the United Nations
country team and other partners, including religious and community leaders, to
extend State authority, resolve local tensions and promote local conflict resolution,
mediation and reconciliation efforts in order to enhance the environment for
peaceful coexistence and the voluntary and sustainable return of internally displaced
persons and refugees.
74. The Central African authorities require extensive technical and capacitybuilding support to ensure that State institutions are sufficiently equipped to address
the most urgent challenges and needs of the population. Support to national
institutions both at the central and local levels, in partnership with the United
Nations country team and others, should constitute a critical focus of the
peacekeeping mission. A strong civil affairs presence in the regions should provide
critical support to the local authorities, including in the lead-up to an eventual
electoral process.
75. A strong communications and public information component would contribute
to easing tensions and promoting reconciliation throughout the country. The
establishment of a United Nations radio capacity covering the entire country is
recommended given the complex political context within which the mission will be
operating, the weakness of the country’s media sector and the extremely high
expectations in the Central African Republic pertaining to the deployment of a
multidimensional peacekeeping operation.
76. To support a stabilization of the security situation, the mission should facilitate
the reopening and rehabilitation of existing courts, prisons, police stations and
related infrastructure. It should also support the operation of secure and safe prisons
in line with international minimum standards, including by building the capacity of
prison personnel; the regular judicial review of pretrial detainees; the establishment
of mobile courts; and support for the expansion of legal aid throughout the country.
Support will be provided within the framework of the global focal point on justice,
police and corrections through joint programming where appropriate, and in
coordination with international partners.
77. I recommend the inclusion in the proposed mission of substantial justice and
corrections components. Their mandate should include the coordination of
international assistance. These components will work with national and international
actors and help ensure that these public services are provided impartially and
without discrimination.
78. I also recommend that a small embargo cell be established within the proposed
peacekeeping operation comprising experts on arms, natural resources and customs
in order to support the group of experts in monitoring the sanctions regime and to
advise my Special Representative.
79. The proposed peacekeeping operation should also play a role in support of the
Government in providing expert advice with regard to security sector reform and the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of armed elements.
80. From the outset, the mission will require a strong human rights component to
focus on the fight against impunity, accountability and transitional justice. The
human rights component will also monitor and publicly report on violations of

14-24762

17/24

S/2014/142

international human rights law and have a robust outreach capability, as well as
investigative and reporting capacities.
81. Human rights deployments to high-risk areas will contribute to the missionwide effort to protect civilians, enhance deterrence and advise on mission responses
to identified threats and preventive engagement with potential perpetrators, in close
cooperation with the military and police components. The human rights component
will support the implementation of the recommendations of the International
Commission of Inquiry in order to help the national authorities fight impunity and
devise transitional justice options. Addressing impunity and supporting
accountability for human rights violations will be one of the main areas of focus.
This will entail targeted programmes to support judicial institutions in swiftly
investigating and prosecuting human rights cases. Programmes will also be required
to support access to justice for victims and restore the capacities of civil society to
engage on human rights promotion and protection. Helping to provide a secure
environment to judicial authorities, courts and prisons will be equally important to
ending impunity and creating an environment conducive to respect for human rights.
The human rights component will also assist in strengthening national human rights
institutions and capacities.
82. The systematic and widespread recruitment and use of children will require, in
the initial phase of the mission, a robust response through the deployment of a
strong child protection capability, which would complement the programmatic
efforts of the United Nations Children’s Fund to monitor and report on grave
violations against children, separate children from armed groups and mainstream
child protection concerns within the United Nations response. There are indications
that sexual violence is employed as part of systematic attacks against civilian
populations. There will be a need for a strong capacity to address this issue
including through the deployment of advisers with women and child protection
expertise, notably in the human rights and gender units.
83. Humanitarian access is extremely challenging owing to the prevailing
insecurity, which is also the most significant impediment to the return of refugees
and internally displaced persons. A United Nations peacekeeping operation will
need to make a positive contribution to the restoration of security and the free
movement of goods and people, which would facilitate the provision of
humanitarian assistance and the voluntary and sustainable return of displaced
persons and refugees. While promoting an integrated approach to the crisis, it will
be important to ensure a distinction between political and security efforts on the one
hand and humanitarian operations on the other hand, so that humanitarian assistance
can be provided throughout the country in a manner that is in keeping with
humanitarian principles and is perceived as impartial and independent by the people.
84. The development of sound fiscal policies and good economic governance will
be critical for the functioning of the State and its ability to deliver. The United
Nations mission will cooperate closely with international financial institutions to
support the Government in these areas. In particular, it will be necessary to ensure
that the natural resources of the Central African Republic can be harnessed
effectively to contribute to the restoration of State authority in Bangui and beyond,
as well as to the stabilization of the country through the provision of infrastructure
and basic social services. The United Nations will consult with the Government and
partners to determine how best to assist in this area and, in particular, what role the

18/24

14-24762

S/2014/142

United Nations mission might play in ensuring the collection of customs revenues
and other revenues associated with the exploitation of natural resources.
85. The proposed peacekeeping operation will only succeed if the region continues
to play an important and complementary role, including through the mediation of
President Sassou Nguesso, ECCAS and the African Union. The mission should
therefore work closely with and provide full political support to the African Union
and ECCAS, as well as limited operational support within its means, capabilities
and authorities, so that they can continue to play a role in stabilizing the country.
This may include support to the deployment of African Union and ECCAS human
rights and military observers and other support, as appropriate. While there will be
no rehatting of civilian MISCA personnel, it is recommended that an African Union
liaison capacity be established within the new mission.
86. All support provided by the United Nations will be in strict compliance with
the human rights due diligence policy on United Nations support to non-United
Nations security forces (A/67/775-S/2013/110).

D.

Safety and security of United Nations personnel
87. The principal threats to United Nations staff are expected to derive from
continued violence between armed groups, mob violence and increased criminality,
as well as from efforts to provide resources for armed activity, with vehicles in high
demand. United Nations national staff are at particular risk. They are
indiscriminately targeted on the basis of their religious affiliation and because they
are perceived to be wealthier than the average population by virtue of their United
Nations employment. While, so far, the United Nations has not been targeted
specifically, one national staff member was killed on the basis of his religious
affiliation. Attacks targeting United Nations personnel cannot be ruled out should
the proposed mission be perceived to be undermining the interests of specific groups
or if the United Nations is perceived as partial.
88. Prevailing threats and the absence of the national security apparatus will
require a significant security component with high-quality personnel and a strong
analytical capacity. While United Nations personnel should not take undue risks, it
is critical in the context of the Central African Republic that the mission adopt an
enabling posture, allowing the United Nations to deliver on its mandate.

E.

Support considerations
89. Mounting and sustaining a large, highly decentralized multidimensional
mission in a landlocked country with extremely poor infrastructure will be a
daunting challenge. Building the necessary capacity to support the planned
deployments (working and living accommodations with the necessary security
features; information, communications and technology capabilities; medical services;
air and land transportation infrastructure and vehicles) and putting in place supply
chains for food, water, fuel and other material, will take time to accomplish and be
costly. The phased deployment of the mission’s components will not only need to be
synchronized with the priorities for mandate delivery but will also need to match the
mission’s ability to receive and support personnel and units.

14-24762

19/24

S/2014/142

90. The internal road network is poor and largely impassable during the extended
rainy seasons. This will complicate deployment and increase reliance on air
transport. The airfields outside Bangui are generally in poor condition.
Consequently, the mission will initially have to rely heavily on helicopters for a
wide range of operational tasks. As it is expected that the mission will be present in
the country for a prolonged period, however, it will make some significant
investments early on in air field upgrades to allow for greater use of fixed-wing
aeroplanes. This will enhance operational performance, increase the safety of flight
operations and save money in the long run.
91. Local commercial construction capability will not be able to cope with the
surge in the construction that is required to establish the mission. A surge of
engineering, transport and support capacity will be essential at the outset, while
self-sustained military enabling units must arrive first and in the shortest time frame
possible. The degree to which Member States are willing to provide military
construction engineers at the early stages of deployment will have a significant
impact on the mission’s ability to develop the required facilities. After a heavy focus
on construction during the initial phases of deployment, it is expected that some
engineering units will be able to repatriate as the focus of the mission’s activities
evolves. To augment the military enabling capacity so that the mission can be
mounted in the shortest time possible, partnerships with other United Nations
agencies will be pursued.
92. The mission’s deployment will be underpinned by the principles of the global
field support strategy. I will also instruct my Special Representative and
Headquarters departments to use all the authorities available to me and the
Secretariat to get the mission standing as a matter of priority, especially in the areas
of human resources and service delivery, notably with regard to construction and
engineering services.

F.

Transition
93. Building on the lessons learned from previous transformations of regional
operations into United Nations peacekeeping missions and taking into account
specific challenges on the ground, it will take the United Nations approximately six
months to prepare the deployment of its operation. In order for the United Nations
mission to be ready and to ensure a smooth transition, it is recommended that the
Secretariat, in coordination with the African Union Commission, immediately
deploy a transition team, with MISCA and BINUCA participation, to the Central
African Republic with the task of establishing the proposed peacekeeping operation
and preparing for a transfer of authority by 15 September. As an immediate priority,
the team would develop strategic plans, most importantly a mission concept and
related concepts of operations and support plans, while initiating the construction of
necessary facilities, including the mission’s headquarters, camps and field offices
throughout the country. This would entail the immediate deployment of requisite
civilian capacities, including air assets and engineers. The team should also assist in
the early recruitment of civilian capacities with the required language skills.
94. While the Secretariat should initiate force generation with a particular focus on
the necessary military enablers and police, the team would work with MISCA to
support the strengthening of its contingents and to address critical gaps for possible

20/24

14-24762

S/2014/142

rehatting into the peacekeeping operation, including through the use of the dedicated
trust fund. The facilities provided and services delivered by the team would be made
available to the MISCA troops identified for rehatting to the United Nations mission.
In that regard, the team would seek to prioritize the establishment of rations, water
and fuel supply lines in preparation for the incoming United Nations forces. These
supplies would be made available to the relevant MISCA forces as soon as possible
to assist them in developing their operational capability in preparation for their
joining the United Nations mission. Similarly, while the team would need to quickly
put in place an aviation capability so that it could begin its work around the country,
the United Nations would agree to transport MISCA personnel on its aircraft on a
“space available” basis and without compromising United Nations operations.

VI. Observations
95. I am deeply concerned about the dramatic deterioration in the situation in the
Central African Republic. The staggering level of violence and massive
displacement are changing the country’s demography with potentially long-term
consequences. The attacks by anti-balaka militias in December in Bangui against
ex-Séléka elements reversed the conflict dynamic and sparked a vicious cycle of
reprisals among civilians and clashes between armed militias that deeply affect
civilians throughout the country. International efforts, in particular the swift
deployment of MISCA and the French forces of Operation Sangaris, were critical to
saving the lives of civilians. I commend the African Union and the French forces for
their quick deployment. I pay tribute to their dedication and courage to implement
their mandates in difficult circumstances and extend my sympathy to the families of
those who lost their lives in the service of peace. I welcome the decision to increase
the number of international forces, including through the temporary deployment of a
European Union force. I urge European and other leaders to commit additional
troops and police personnel during this critical interim phase.
96. I am encouraged by the swift formation of the Transitional Government under
the leadership of the new Head of State of the Transition, Catherine Samba-Panza,
and her expressed willingness to tackle the multiple and daunting challenges ahead.
The Transitional Government will, however, need the sustained engagement of its
neighbours, the region and the broader international community to steer the country
out of the current crisis. The United Nations and the international community at
large stand ready to support the Central African Republic. First and foremost,
however, it is the responsibility of Central Africans themselves to find a solution to
the suffering inflicted on their country. I therefore call on all Central African
stakeholders to seize the opportunity of this transition period to address the
immediate challenges facing the country, cease the violence and restore the
country’s tradition of peaceful coexistence, while laying the groundwork for
sustainable peace and stability. I encourage them to cooperate fully with MISCA and
other international forces, as well as with my Special Representative on the ground
and the proposed peacekeeping mission, once it deploys.
97. Despite the presence of international forces, violence and widespread human
rights violations continue to take place throughout the country. It is clear that we,
the international community, have not yet done enough to help the people of the
Central African Republic to confront this crisis, which began long before the Séléka
rebellion of 24 March 2013. The time to act is now. This is why I have presented the
14-24762

21/24

S/2014/142

Security Council with a six-point initiative proposing immediate measures to stop
the violence and killings, protect civilians, prevent the de facto partition of the
country, facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance, and provide the
Transitional Government with urgently needed support. I once again urge the
Council to support these proposals, as a vital bridging measure, pending the
eventual deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping operation.
98. The challenges in the Central African Republic are immense and multifaceted.
The response to the crisis must be comprehensive, multidimensional and sustained
in order to help stabilize the country, restore law and order and rebuild State
institutions that can secure the country and protect the people. This is not the first
time that the United Nations will have deployed peacekeepers in the Central African
Republic. As the lessons learned from the past clearly demonstrate, the United
Nations must, in order to have an impact on the ground, be given a strong role. This
includes supporting the reforms needed to address the root causes of the crisis and
helping to rebuild the State and its institutions so that the Central African Republic
can finally break free from the recurring cycle of political instability, violence and
poverty. The United Nations mission foresees strong and close cooperation with the
World Bank, the African Development Bank and other financial institutions in
rebuilding the Central African Republic.
99. The peacekeeping mission, whose main goals and tasks are outlined in the
present report, would be tailored to the circumstances on the ground. Its military
footprint would decrease as soon as the situation permits, while its police
component would gradually increase. Its civilian staffing would be flexibly
managed on the basis of priority tasks, which would also evolve in response to the
situation on the ground.
100. We must recognize that there will be no quick fix in the Central African
Republic. Responding to the crisis will require time and resources. The scale of the
needs in the country is daunting. Progress in any one area will not be sustainable
without significant and simultaneous engagement in other areas. Further
postponement of a sustainable multidimensional response may well carry even
greater human and financial costs. The potential division of the country along
sectarian lines and the creation of a fertile breeding ground for extremist groups are
real risks, with potentially far-reaching implications for the stability of the region
and beyond.
101. There will be no solution to the crisis in the Central African Republic without
the continued active engagement of the country’s neighbours and the region. I call
on them and the wider international community to increase their efforts in support
of the Central African Republic, taking into account their respective comparative
advantages, while seeking to leverage partnerships and regional initiatives.
102. A strong MISCA will help address the immediate security challenges faced by
the population and facilitate the transition to a United Nations peacekeeping
operation. MISCA, however, still lacks critical capabilities to achieve its full
potential. I call on bilateral partners and Member States to urgently provide MISCA
with rapid and generous financial and material support, including for the payment of
its personnel and for the reimbursement of major military equipment.
103. I recommend that the Security Council, acting under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, authorize the deployment of a multidimensional

22/24

14-24762

S/2014/142

United Nations peacekeeping operation whose mandate is in line with the
recommendations contained in paragraphs 60 and 61 and with adequate resources.
The aim would be for the bulk of MISCA to transition to a United Nations
peacekeeping operation, along with other contributors in accordance with the human
rights screening policy and capabilities, in order to reach an authorized strength of
10,000 military personnel, including 240 military observers and 200 staff officers,
and up to 1,820 civilian police officers, with 10 formed police units comprising
1,400 formed police unit personnel, 400 individual police officers and 20 seconded
corrections officers. These would be deployed together with a significant civilian
component and necessary support staff. This strength would be reviewed on a
regular basis, leading to appropriate recommendations to the Council. With the
establishment of the peacekeeping operation, BINUCA would cease to exist.
104. Many of the problems facing the Central African Republic exceed the
capacities of a United Nations peacekeeping operation, considering the complexities
of the crisis, the absence of the security apparatus and the almost non-existent
capacity of the State. Deploying a United Nations peacekeeping operation in the
Central African Republic should therefore be part of a broader long-term
engagement of the international community. Success in this broader effort to help
the Government and people of the Central African Republic to rebuild a State will
depend on the contributions and commitments of many actors, most importantly
Central Africans themselves.
105. In addition to the Government’s request for the deployment of a peacekeeping
operation, its deployment must come with a political commitment from national
stakeholders to engage in an inclusive political process aimed at creating an
environment that is conducive to the creation of a new army; the rebuilding of the
police and the gendarmerie; disarmament, demobilization and reintegration efforts;
reconciliation; and the conduct of inclusive, fair and transparent elections. The
mission’s deployment should be used as an opportunity to review the transitional
framework in an inclusive manner. National actors should commit formally to a
process that produces a consensual vision for a future republican army that is
representative of the nation’s diversity. They should also consider strengthening
international mechanisms, such as the International Contact Group on the Central
African Republic and the technical follow-up committee, which could be given
additional scope to facilitate the transition process, with an important role for key
regional and international actors, as well as the United Nations, and could function
as an international committee to accompany the transition.
106. The international community must commit to working together and to
providing to the Central African Republic the assistance necessary to ensure the
effectiveness and sustainability of our actions, based on our respective comparative
advantages. There can be no development without peace, no peace without
development and neither without respect for human rights and the rule of law.
Adequate resources must be devoted to each of those pillars. Our common
long-term objective must be a Central African Republic that is secure in its borders,
able to conduct its own affairs and provide services to all Central Africans without
discrimination and without interference from or dependence on outsiders, where
Muslims, Christians and other communities can live peacefully alongside each other,
regardless of creed or political affiliation, and play a vibrant role in the political,
economic and social life of the country.

14-24762

23/24

S/2014/142

107. The deployment of the proposed peacekeeping operation would need, in
particular, to go hand in hand with a commitment of the international financial
institutions to support the rebuilding of the State, which would include support to
rebuilding the financial and banking sectors, including the payment of salaries to
civil servants in the immediate term.
108. At the same time, I recommend that a partnership initiative be established
between the Government of the Central African Republic and the international
community, including the African Union and ECCAS, which would set out key
priorities for a recovery and accountability compact based on critical peace and
State-building goals. In particular, it will be necessary to strengthen public financial
management and accountability in a manner that specifically targets revenue
collection, expenditure controls, public procurement and concession practices as
part of the rebuilding of the State, along the lines of the Governance and Economic
Management Assistance Programme in Liberia.
109. Given the dire conditions and extreme vulnerability of the population,
immediate and sustained support for humanitarian operations is equally important.
Urgent measures are needed to hold accountable perpetrators of human rights and
international humanitarian law violations.
110. I wish to pay tribute to my Special Representative for the Central African
Republic, Babacar Gaye, and the staff of BINUCA and the United Nations country
team for their continued hard work. I am deeply appreciative of the sacrifice that
they are making for the cause of peace in the Central African Republic. I also thank
the transitional authorities, the African Union, MISCA troop-contributing countries,
ECCAS, the European Union, donor countries and multilateral and non-governmental
organizations for their continued efforts to address the crisis in the Central African
Republic. We must build on the sense of hope that the Central African people are
exhibiting to enhance our partnership and redouble our efforts in support of the
people and Government of the Central African Republic.

24/24

14-24762
