TWENTY-

FIFTH

YEAR

MEETING:

7 ,DECEMBER

st

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional
Adoption

1970

agenda (S/Agenda/l561)

Page

. , . . . , , . . . . . . , . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .l

of the agenda . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . ,. . . . . , . . . * . . . , . . . . . . . . . 1

Complaint by Guinea:
(a) Letter dated 22 November 1970 from the Permanent Representative of
Guinea to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Coundil (S/9987);
(b) Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the Republic of Guinea
established under resolution 289 (1970) (S/l0009 and Add.1). :, , . . . a. - 1

! S/PV. 1561

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters cornbined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published
in quartely Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Cbuncil. The
date of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.

I

:

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SIXTY-FIRST

MEETING

Held in New York on Monday, 7 December 1970, at 10.30 a.m.
,
President:

Mr. Y. MALJK (Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
and Zambia.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l561)
1. Adoption

of the agenda.

2. Complaint by Guinea:
(a) Letter dated 22 November 1970 from the Permanent
Representative of Guinea to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/9987);
(b) Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the Republic of Guinea established
under resolution 289 (1970) (S/l0009 and
Add. 1).

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda

was adopted.

CompIain t by Guinea:
Letter dated 22 November 1970 from the Permanent Representative of Guinea to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9987);
Report of the Security Council Special Mission
to the Republic of Guinea established under
resolution 289 (1970) (S/10009 and Add.1)
1. The PRESIDENT
(translatedfiom
Russian): May
I remind the Council that at its last three meetings,
during its consideration of the item under discussion,
it decided to invite the representatives of Guinea,
Senegal, Mali, Saudi Arabia, Mauritania, Algeria,
Liberia, the United Republic of Tanzania, the People’s
Republic of the Congo, Yugoslavia, Mauritius, the
Sudan, the United Arab Republic, Ethiopia, Southern
Yemen and Cuba to participate in the debate on this
question without the right to vote. I also wish to inform
the members of the Security Council that a lettef has
been received today from the representative of Uganda
[s/ZU023)requesting that, in accordance with the established procedure, his delegation should be invited to
participate in the Council’s consideration of the com-

plaint by Guinea without the right to vote. I suggest
that the representative of Uganda should be invited
to participate in the debate on the itemunder discussion
without the right to vote.
2. In view of the limited number of seats at the Council
table, I shall invite the representative of Guinea, in
accordance with the practice followed by the Council
in the past, to take a seat at the Council table and
the other representatives to take the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber, on the
understanding that each will be invited to the Council
table when it is his turn to address the Council.
At the invifntion of the President, Mr. A. Towe
(Guinea) took a place ht the Council table; and Mr.
I. Boye (Senegal),
Mr. G. SOW (Mali), Mr. J. M8
Baroody
(Saudi
Arabia),
Mr. S. Ould Taya
(Mauritania),
Mr. M. Yazid (Algeria), Mr. N. Barnes
(Liberia), Mr. S. A. Salim (United Republic of Tanzania),
Mr. N. Mondjo (People’s Republic of the
.C&go), Mr. A. Psoncnk {Yugoslavia), Mr,. R. K.
Ramphul (Mauritius), Mr. M. Khalid (Sudan), Mr. M.
H. El-Zayyat (United Arab Republic), Mr. T. Gebr-e
Igzy (Ethiopia), Mr. R. M. Ismail (Southern Yemen),
Mr. R. Alar&n {Cuba),nnd Mr. P. Ofwono (Ugmda)
took the places reserved for tlzem.

3. The PRESIDENT
(translatedfipm Russian): The
Security Council will now cpntinue its discussion of
the item indicated in document S/Agenda/ 1561.
4. Mr. MWAANGA
(Zambia): Mr. President, allow
me to perform the exceedingly pleasant duty of congratulating you upon your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this crucial month of December.
The bonds of friendship between our two countries
and peoples are long-standing, dating as they do as
far back as the period when the people of Zambia were
heroically struggling to rid themselves of the oppressive
yoke of British colonialism and imperialist rule. We
shall always remember and cherish the moral and
material support that your great country and the Soviet
people rendered us during that dark period.
5. Needless to say, knowing as I do that you are
a man with unique qualities and abilities, a skilful master of diplomacy; with a wealth of experience, I have
no doubt in my own mind concerning the Council’s
privilege in having you to direct its important deliberations for this month to the satisfaction of all concerned.
I assure you of my delegation’s full co-operation.

: Republic of Tanzania and, indeed, my own country,
6. Furthermore, I should like to pay an unstinting
Zambia-have
been and still are constant objects of
, tribute to your predecessor., the Ambassador of Syria,
Professor George Tomeh, for the skilful manner in I Portugal’s acts of aggression. These States border on
the Territories of &gold, Mozambique and Guinea
which he got the deliberations of the Council under
(Bissau), which are under the fascist regime of Porway last month-an
eventful month when the world
witnessed one of the ugliest instances of naked aggrestugal. And in the view of this fascist rCgime and of
sion by a Member State-the
fascist State of Porcertain Western circles, these free and independent
African countries constitute a challenge to their intertugal-against
another, contrary to the p$nciples of
the United Nations Charter and of the Declaration on
ests. Consequently, Portugal, in connivance and colluFriendly Relations among States.’ The speed and
sion with its NATO allies, conducts criminal aggression
thoroughness with which he and the Secretary
against prGgressive and democratically
constituted
Governments with the intention of replacing them with
General, in consultation with Council members, successfully dispatched the Special Mission to the Repubpuppet regimes.
. lit of Guinea2, let alone the manner in which he had
10. From the report and conclusions submitted by
earlier directed the Council’s consideration of the grave
the
Security Council’s Special Mission to the.Republic
situation itself, is one of the living testimonies of his
of Guinea, Portugal’s responsability
for the preeminent qualities of skill, ability, patience and undermeditated arnied aggression against the Republic of
standing. We are deeply grateful to him.
Guinea is unquestionable and irrefutable. That is evidenced by many factors, including the evidence of
7. ?;he Council, having before it a report by its Special
Lieutenant Lopes, a captured Portuguese prisoner who
Mission contained in document S/10009 and Add.1 of
maintained that the Portuguese Governor-General of
3 December 1970, has now reached the crucial stage
Guinea (Bissau) was on board the invading ships before
in its consideration of Portugal’s criminal act of aggresthey departed for Conakry; and the Portuguese charge
sion against the peace-loving Government and people
d’affaires to the United Nations has communicated
of the Republic of Guinea and against Africa as a whole.
with the Security Council only through an unconvincAs a member of the Special Mission, my delegation
ing letter[S/Z0014)and a hastily called press conference
would like first to express its sincere appreciation of
instead
of appearing personally to account for his counand satisfaction at the able manner in which the Mistry’s criminal acts of aggression.
sion’s Chairman, the Ambassador of Nepal, General
Khatri, presented the report to the Council last Friday,
11. At a press conference on 4 December 1970, the
4 December [1559th meeting]. My delegation fully supPortuguese chargk d’affaires not only alleged that the
pdrts the Chairman’s presentation. I would, in fact,
Special Mission consisted of what he called “an Afrobe failing in my duty if1 did not express my delegation’s
Asian
and communist majority” but also indicated that
gratitude and appreciation to Ambassador Khatri and,
the report of the Special Mission should be viewed
indeed, congratulate him on the excellent leadership
in that context. I leave it to the members of the Council
which he gave to the Special Mission.
to draw their o&n conclusions. For my part, I can
best describe, Portugal’s statements on this matter as
8. My gratitude also goes ta the other members of
unworthy of serious consideration.
the Special Mission, Ambassadors K&ga, Jakobson
and Espinosa for the serious and bysiness-like manner
12. Portugal’s crimes against independent Africa are
in which they performed the task entrusted to them
also NATO’s crimes against Africa. There are no two
by the Security Council. I feel honoured to have been
ways about that. It is with NATO arms and material
associated with all these great men and I am gratified
assistance that an’impoverished
Portugal is waging its
to have benefited from their wealth of experience. The
colonial wars and committing acts of aggression against
Secretariat staff who accompanied the Special Mission
independent African States. Writing in a publication
deserve our commendation,
and I would request the
entitled Portugal-and NATO, the Dutch professor
Secretary-General to convey our deep appreciation for
Dr. S. J. Bosgra in no uncertain terms states as folloWs:
the excellent job they perfortied, sometimes under the
most trying circumstances.
“That Portugal has been able to continue her COlOnial wars in Africa for years is due to the fact that
9. The grave events of 22, 23 and also 27 and 28
she is supported by her NATO partners . . . They
November
1970, involving
Portuguese aggrkssion
take advantage of the fact that Portugal is a NATO
against the Republic of Guinea, are elements of the
member and they supply substantial quantities of
total question of western colonialism and imperialism
“war material under the pretext that Portugal has to
in Africa. As has already been indicated by many prebe assisted so as to meet her NATO commitments.
vious speakers, several independant African counA great part of this armament is used in the colonial
tries-Senegal,
the People’s Republic of the Congo,
wars of Africa, At the same time Portugal’s NATO
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the U’nited
partners accept that Portugal has withdrawn almost
all her units’ from the NATO force, so as to use
.L
them in her colonies.”
* Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations (General Assembly resolution

Professor Bosgra goes on to say:

membership to carry out criminal arms sales. NATO
as an organization has never protested against the
fact that NATO troops and armament are withdrawn
from the NATO area to be used elsewhere. . , Also
NATO as an organization is an accessory to the
injustice which is rampant in the Portuguese colonies
in Africa,”

15. It is revealing and disturbing that while this Council is considering Portugal’s aggr&sion.and, therefore,
possible punitive measures, the NATO countries could1
decide to hold their next meeting in Lisbon. What does
that mean, in fact?
16. Besides NATO’s sinister role in Portugal’s criminal activities, there is also the equally sinister role of
Western economic, financial and other vested interests
in Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau). In an
article entitled “US trade with Angola and Mozambique” in the publication Afiicn Today of July-August
1970, the following is stated:

Referring to the attitude of the leadership itself within
NATO, he confirms that:
“General Lemnitzer spoke in 1963 of his admiration for the Portuguese troops in the ‘overseas territories’, saying also that not only did the Portuguese
fight for principles, but also for the indispensable
raw materials and bases, which are not only of great
importance for Europe, but for the entire West.”

“It is clear that US economic connexions with.
Angola, Mozambique, and Portugal itself are rapidly
becoming more tense and complex, When this happens the colonialpoweris
strengthened immediately.
It gain! not only new finances to fight its wars, but
also the increasing assurance that once American
economic interests are at stake, the United States
will stand firmly on the side of stability and the government in power against the growing attacks of the,
liberation movements. New Viet-Nams
are being
built in Africa today.”

13. Addressing the commemorative
session of the
United Nations General Assembly; President Kaunda,
speaking at the 1872nd plenary meeting as the current
Chairman of the Organization for African Unity and
of the non-aligned countries, said, imer da,
“It is clear, however, that the strength of freedom
fighters, far from decreasing, will increase both in
intensity and magnitude, and Portugal is bound to
lose the war. One of the stumbling blocks remains the
the Western countries-the
members of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization in particular.

17. In its general declaration, the International
Conference in support of the”Peoples of the Portuguese
Colonies, held in Rome, stressed, inter’din,
that the
colonial fascists of Lisbon were, in order to oppose
the struggle of the people of the territories under their
colonial yoke for freedom and independence,
“ . * . facilitating penetration ofpowerful economic
interests of imperialist powers to’ensure that these
interests should consider their fate as linked to that
of Portuguese domination. They’become defenders
of the cause of Portugal’s colonialism,
expressing
themselves through the policies of their Govemments, and thus create conditions for an increasing
internationalization
of the confrontation.”
18. Is not that the crux of the matter with regard
to the devilish role of foreign economic, financial and
strategic interests in Angoia, Mozambique and Guinea
(Bissau)-let
alone in Zimbabwe, Namibia and South
Africa? It is against that background that we unreservedly condemn, for instance, the Cabora Bassa project
in Mozambique,
In this connexion, the Council will
wish to know that the United States Gulf Oil monopoly
in Angola contributed over $11 million to Portugal’s
colonial war effort. It is also common knowledge that
most of the exports from Angola and Mozambique,
such as coffee, go to the United States, West Germany
and other Western countries.

“In the Treaty, the parties reaffirmed:
“ ‘ 1 I . their faith in the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and their desire
to live in peace with all peoples aild all Governments.
They are determined to safeguard the freedom, common heritage and civilization
of their peoples,
founded on the principles of democracy, individual
liberty and the rule of law.’
“Article

2 of the Treaty provides that:

“ ‘The Parties will contribute toward the further
development of peaceful and friendly international
relations by strengthening their free institutions, by
bringing about a better understanding of the principles upon which these institutions are founded, and
by promoting conditions of stability and well-bejng.’
“The Portuguese colonial
violation of these principles.”

system constitutes

a

14.. In its dispatch from Brussels of 4 December 1970,
the Associated Press, reporting on the NATO Ministerial Council meeting said:

19. In the final analysis, the Western political,
military, economic and financial complex is the worst
enemy of Africa. It is also against this background
that we view and condemn Britain’s intention to resume
arms sales to South Africa. There is no question about
those arms being used in the so-called defence of the
Cape route. South Africa is heavily involved in Angola,
Mozambique and Zimbabwe. It is there in independent
Africa that the British arms sent to South Africa will
be used.

“There was a last minute fuss over whether to
stage the next meeting of the Foreign Ministers, 3
and 4 June, in Lisbon. Canada, Denmark and Norway expressed strong views about the wisdom of
meeting in a country accused of involvement in the
invaSion
of Guinea. But the United States and Britain
strongly backed Lisbon in a closed meeting and the
decision stood.”
3

inhumanity of the Portuguese colonial wars in Africa
surpasses even the brutality of the Nazis against the
Jews. The people of the great continent of the future
Africa await with impatience and anxiety the outcome
of this debate. Nations represented around this table
will be judged by the positions they take on this important question, and it is my hope that faced with such
a naked act of aggression the members of the Security
Council who stand for justice and right will vindicate
the good conscience of the international coinmunity,
Thereafter, it will be up to Africa to learn the necessary
lessons and draw the appropriate conclusions.

20. Portugal must be severely punished for its crimes
against Africa and, most immediately,
for its wanton
aggression against the Republic of Guinea. The b;louncil
should decide to call upon Portugal to pay compensation for the loss of lives and the extensive damage
inflicted on the Republic of Guinea; the Council should
decide to apply fully the provisions of Chapter VII
of the Charter of the’ United Nations against Portugal;
of the international criminal does not respond it should
be expelled from the United Nations. Finally, Portugal
should be forced to relinquish without delay its colonial
domination
over the Territories under its yoke, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514
WV).

25. The PRESIDENT
(translated from Russian): I
wish to thank the representative of Zambia for his kind
words about me and my countrjr and also for his kind
offer of co-operation.

21. Let those-particularly
those in the Western
countries-who
loudly preach the high ideals and principles of freedom, democracy, justice and the rule of
law, fully stand up to the test of realities. Portugal
is an international criminal against humanity. Are they
going to accept that fact and therefore do everything
possible to isolate Portugal? Are they going to accept
in practice the legitimacy of the struggle for freedom,
justice and independence now being heroically waged
by the peoples of Angola, Mozambique,
Guinea
(Bissau), Zimbabwe, Namibia and South Africa?

26.

I now give the floor to the representative

of Cuba.

27. Mr. ALARCON
(Cuba) (interpretation
from
Spanish): First of all, I wish to express my gratitude
to you, Mr. President, and, through you, to the members of the Council for giving us this opportunity to
participate in the debate called for by the delegation
of Guinea to denounce the recent aggression against
his country.

22. I should like to emphasize two important factors.
First, it is evident from the foregoing that colonialism
is a threat to international peace and security, as was
shown by Portugal’s aggressive invasion of the Republic of Guinea. It is therefore the hope of my delegation
that this twenty-fifth session of the United Nations
General Assembly, in its resolution on international
peace and security, which I hope will be finalized
today, will in no uncertain terms denounce the existence of colonialism and the oppression ofpeople under
foreign domination,
and call for its immediate
elimination.
Secondly, events in Guinea have demonstrated once again the impotence and ineffectiveness
of the Security Council in times of crisis. As my Head
of State, Dr. Kenneth Kaunda, pointed out when he
spoke at the commemorative
session of the General
Assembly at the 1872nd plenary meeting on 19 October
1970, the United Nations becomes wise only after the
event. .What would the United Nations have done if
the people of Guinea had not repulsed the armed
aggression? There would be no Guinea today, and that
would only have served to confirm the suspicion of
many people who believe that in their search for compromise Members of the United Nations compromise
even the basic principles of the Charter.

28. May I be permitted, too, to congratulate your
predecessor, Ambassador Tomeh, the representative
of Syria, for the very effective manner in which he
conducted the Cou,ncil debates during last month.
29. Likewise, I should like to congratulate you, Mr.
President, and to congratulate the Council for having
you as President during the month of December. My
delegation trusts that, under your wise guidance, the
Council will take just action in view of the complaint
of Guinea. It is fortunate that this serious problem
is being examined under the presidency of someone
who, like Ambassador Malik, has fought so many battles in this Council in defence of the rights of peoples
and for the full implementation
of the principles of
the Charter.
30. My delegation has requested to participate in this
debate so as to place on record our condemnation of
the aggression committed against the Republic of
Guinea, with whose Government and people my own
country has bonds of the closest solidarity.
31. The report submitted by the Special Mission of
this Council, and its addendum, leave no room for
doubt whatsoever regarding the nature, origin and sig
nificance of the events which occurred in November
this year.

23 + The pride, honour and dignity of the African continent has been hurt and insulted by this act of international banditry committed by the fascist rCgime in Lisbon against the Republic of Guinea, The Secuiity
Council cannot remain indifferent to this major crime
against a Member State.

32. It has been fully proved that Guinea was a victim
of an attack that was organized and directed from
abroad, and that responsibility for the aggression falls
squarely on the Government of Portugal, which acted
through the colonial authorities of Bissau. The military
aggression had as its purpose to try to overthrow the
Govertiment of Guinea and, at the same time, to deal

24. As long as a single square foot of Africa remains
under foreign domination,
the world will know no
peace. I believe that we have now reached a stage
where the possession of colonies is becoming incompatible with membership in the United Nations. The
4’

a serious blow to the national liberation movement
of so-called Portuguese Guinea. From the report, one
even deduces that the plans of the mercenaries included
the murder of the President, Ahmed Sekou Tour6 himself and the Secretary-General
of the African Party
for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde, Amilcar Cabral.

remarks he addressed to me as President of the Security
Council.
38. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): May I first of all address
my warmest and sincerest thanks to the representatives
of France, Southern Yemen, tki: United Arab Republic,
Senegal, Zambia and Cuba for the kind words they
were good enough to address to my humble self.

3.3. This aggression constitutes a gross violation of
the San Francisco Charter and once again proves that
the persistence of the colonialist rCgime in Africa is
not only a negation of the sacred right to independence
of peoples who are subject to the colonial yoke, but,
furthermore, it is a direct threat to the independence
and security of the young African States, and therefore
places international
peace and security in jeopardy.
This is not the first aggression of which the Republic
of Guinea has been a victim, nor has Guinea been
the only country which has had to suffer armed attacks
promoted and encouraged by the colonialists. The
People’s Republic of the Congo, the United Republic
of Tanzania, Zambia and other African States have
had to face similar situations in the past.

39. The Security Council is examining the question
.of a flagrant violation of the Charter, the gravity of
which exceeds even that of a deliberate well-planned
armed aggression a&inst a sovereign State. The
revolutionary
and progressive Republic of Guinea,
people and Government, have bravely withstood the
colonial onslaught; but it remains the imperative duty
of the Council to ponder over the far-reaching implications of this aggression, particularly since the aggressor
adopts no’attitude other than outright rejection of the
charges brought and proved against him.
40. What are these implications
the Council to act adequately?

34. The colonized Territories of Angola, Mozambique, Guinea (Bissau) and Kabinda are used by the
colonialists as means of aggression, of provocation and
pressure against the neighbouring independent States.
,In these activities they count on the obvious support
of the racist r6gimes of Rhodesia and South Africa,
and on the co-operation and material and military SUPport of certain Western Powers, particularly the group
organized in NATO. For that reason this aggression
against Guinea, as has already been pointed out in
the debate, constitutes an aggression against all African
peoples, For that reason also it forms part of the series
of aggressions which the peoples of Africa, Asia and
Latin America suffer at the hands of imperialists-aggressions which today have reached their climax in the
criminal war being waged against the people of IndoChina.

which must prompt

41. First, that the reactionary forces which still hold
colonialism as a creed and basic policy are now passing
over to the offensive in order to impose their will.
Not content with repressing the masses under their
yoke, they now attempt to eliminate one by one the
progressive and freedom-loving rigimes which oppose
the colonial domination hanging over their brothers.
The attack on the Republic of Guinea is intended to
demonstrate to the international community that the
colonialists have the ability not only to subject with
impunity the colonies under their domination to strict
control, but aIso to extend their ravages further around
them and to threaten in their very existence the
sovereign States opposed to their policies. By this they
seek to impose on the whole world the surrender of
its cherishedprinciples
of self-determination and equality of peoples on which tlie Charter of the United
Nations is fundameiltally
based. Thus the aggression
against the Republic of Guinea represents an open
threat to every sovereign country that dares, by deeds
or by words, to condemn the rule of conquest, the
philosophy of racial discrimination,
and the policy of
imperialist
exploitation.
But more than this, there is
its ominous substance as defiance of the international
will to put an end to colonial rule.

35. That is why, in coming here to express our solidarity with the people and Government of Guinea, we
do so not only because that Government has been the
victim of a direct aggression, but because we are aware
of the significance for all thepeoples of the Third World
of the struggle of the Guinean people to consolidate
their independence and to achieve social progress.
Since the last century, Guinea and its people have been
like a defence shield of African independence.

42. Secondly, the aggression against Guinea gives an
actual demonstration
of the real use the colonialists
make of the arms supplied to them by their allies for
the alleged purpose of self-defence. These arms are
not used for self-defence. They are used to suppress
innocent people and to commit aggression against
sovereign countries. They are used for a three-fold
purpose: the consolidation of colonial acquisition, the
steady expansion of the domain of conquest, and
hegemony over entire continents through the supremacy of the rule of force and the law of the jungle.
If these purposes are allowed to take their course, the
United Nations principles and the Organization Itself
will’be reduced to a myth.
.

36. Since the last century the resistance struggle of
the people of Guinea to European colonialism, which
reached legendary heights in the resistance of Almamy,
Samory and Tour& has placed that country in the vanguard of the peoples of the Third World. All of us,
the peoples of Africa, Asia and Latin America, owe
a debt and have a commitment
of solidarity to the
people of Guinea, which my delegation wished to place
On record at this meeting.
37. The PRESIDENT
(trandatedfrom
Russian):
I
thank the representative of Cuba for his kind words
-to the SeFur$y Council and I am gratified by the
5

43. Thirdly, the aggression on the Republic of Guinea
proves the existence of the colonialist trend of preventing sovereign States, hardly emancipated from colonial
rule, from developing their resources and restoring to
their peoples their long-usurped rights. In a word, this
aggression is a symptom of the deliberate policies of
obstructing the renascence of the African, the renascence of the Asian, and the emancipation of man from
his colonial status and from imperialist domination.

posed of dissident Guineans trained and armed on /
the territory of Guinea (Bissau).
“In the best judgement of the Special Mission,
the invading force was assembled in Guinea (Bissau). 5
The invasion of the territory of the Republic of
Guinea on 22 and 23 November was carried out by
naval and military units of the Portuguese armed
forces, acting in conjunction with Guinean dissident
elements from outside the Republic of Guinea,”

44. Consequently,
as peace is indivisible,
colonialism, under no matter what-guise, whether it takes
the form of the attack on Guinea pr the form it has
taken in the Middle East, or the form it is now taking
in Viet-Nam. and the whole of Indo-China, is also
indivisible.

[SllOOO9, paras. 40 and 41.1

49. What was the purpose? To silence forever the
voice of truth of the progressive Republic of Guinea,
by murdering its great leader, President Ahmed Sekou
Tour&, toppling its revolutionary rCgime, massacring
the leaders of the liberation movement of Guinea
(Bissau) and installing a subservient Government
which would acquiesce in the crimes of Portuguese
colonialism against Guineans, Mozambiquans
and j
Angolans and in the denial of their right to selfdetermination.

4.5. Undoubtedly,
the Security Council had such
grave threats in mind when it unanimously decided
to dispatch a Special Mission of its own members to
the Republic of Guinea and requested an immediate
report on its findings. Our highest appreciation goes
to the Chairman of the Special Mission, Ambassador
Khatri of Nepal, and to its members, Ambassador
Espinosa of Colombia, Ambassador Jakobson of Finland, Ambassador Kdaga of Poland, and Ambassador
Mwaanga of Zambia; and to the Secretary-General for
his most valuable help, as well as to the UnderSecretary-General, who, together with members of the
Secretariat, rendered possible the arrangements for a
diligent, and successful mission.

SO. The Council, faced with this overwhelming
evidence, ought now to proceed with the same speed
as it did when it dispatched the Mission: by condemning
the aggressor, invoking Chapter VII of the Charter,
requiring compensation and redress for the extensive
damage to Guinean life and property, imposing the
appropriate sanctions and, last but not least, enjoining
the aggressor to put an end to its colonial rule in Africa.

46. The report of the mission, document S/l0009 and
its addendum, is outstanding in its precision, objectivity, procedure, and sound legal judgement based on
the substantiation of conclusions by concrete and
irrefutable evidence.

51. The Council would be remiss in its duties if it
did not deplore the material and military assistance
extended to Portugal by its allies and if it did not require
that this assistance should cease forthwith.
4
52. It would befit those who supply the aggressors
with military weapons to explain before the Council
the purposes they serve and the plans they wish to
fulfil, and to clarify what other aim is served by those
arms supplies, apart from the suffocation of the rights
of peoples and the series of aggressions against
sovereign States. Otherwise, the condemnation of the
Portuguese aggression is, in reality, a condemnation
of their own policies.

47. One main conclusion emerges from the report: an
external force has committed aggression against
Guinea; the attackers were foreigners, and the testimony, particularly of one eye-witness-none
other
than the Ambassador of the Federal Republic of Germany-spells it out loudly and concisely; regular military troops and mercenaries participated in the attack.
48. What is the identity of the planners and perpitrators of the attack? The Mission gives the straightforward reply: Portuguese. The report states:

53. The Afro-Asian community should not fail to
draw the appropriate conclusions; and their condemnation of aggression, neo-colonialism and racial discrimination should be one and indivisible.

“After a thorough analysis of all the material it
hz!s gathered concerning the external armed attack
launched from the sea against the Republic of
Guinea, the Special Mission has reached the considered opinion that:

54, Mr. KUYAGA
(Poland) (interpretation
./Yom
F/.ench): Mr. President, it is a special pleasure for me
to extend to you my sincerest congratulations on your
accession to the presidency of the Security Council t
for the month of December. I should like to avail myself
of this opportunity to transmit my most cordial wishes 1
to you personally, Comrade Ambassador, as an eminent statesman who is universally
known and
respected, and one with whom I am very happy to ,
be on the best and most comradely terms; and to the I
delegation of the Soviet Union, with whom we have ,
the closest ties of brotherhood, friendship and CO- I
operation. I also wish to express my gratitude to your j

“(a) The ships used to transfer the invading force
to Guinean waters were manned by predominantly
white Portuguese troops and commanded by white
Portuguese officers;
“(b) The force consisted of units of Portuguese
armed forces, mainly African troops from Guinea
(Bissau) under the command of the regular white
Portuguese officers, as well as of a contingent com6

predecessor, the President of the Security Council for
the month of November, His Excellency the Ambassador of Syria, Mr. Tomeh. His contribution
to the
work of the Council was particularly important. His
presidency was marked by a unanimous decision of
the Council regarding the dispatch of a Special Mission
to Guinea-a landmark decision in the history of the
Security Council. As a member of that Special Mission
I wish to express to him and to our Secretary-General
and to his representatives, my gratitude for the aid
and assistance they gave us in discharging our mandate.
May I also be permitted to say how very much I
appreciated the co-operation grid team spirit which
characterized the work of our Mission, under the Chairmanship of His Excellency, Ambassador Khatri. That
co-operation with such eminent diplomats as Ambassadors Khatri, Mwaanga, Espinosa and Jakobson was
for me personally a most valuable experience which
I shall never forget. It also enabled us to submit the
report which is now before members of the Council.

Government of Guinea. The attainment of those objectives were to have ensured the success of the under-’
taking.
59. Such is the typically narrow colonialist reasoning,
I would say, which ignores the fundamental element
of the situation: namely, the attitude of the people of
Guinea-of
the population of Conakry-its
will and
strength to resist. The seizure of Radio Conakry and
the attainment of other targets might have sown confusion in the world at large. They could not break the
will and strength to resist, of the people of Guinea.
60. Neither can we ignore the machinery of that act
of aggression against the Republic of Guinea. I have
already spoken about the accuracy-holding
good up
to a certain point--of that machinery. Another important element was the care the aggressors took to
conceal their origins--toeliminate,
in so far as possible,
all traces of their aggression. Thus there were-ships
whose names it was impossible to detect-and
this
has been confirmed, in partictilar, by the ambassadors
of Yugoslavia, the United States and the Federal
Republic of Germany. Uniforms and weapons had been
exchanged shortly before the invasion; and, above all,
there was the characteristic detail of the make-up of
the white officers and soldiers who participated in the
invasion of the territory of the Republic of Guinea.
Finally, there was the most dangerous element-the
fact that the world was presented with a fait accompli
in circumstances in which it would have been impossible to establish the chain of events or to determine
with certainty the external responsibility for the act.

55. The rep&t contains a summary of the work of
the Special Mission, as well as the conclusions reached
by the Mission as a result of a very careful study of
all the material submitted to it. Addendum 1 contains
the complete record of the statements made before
the Mission.
56. As a member of the Mission, I, of course, fully
subscribe to the conclusions appearing in section III
of the report, so that my statement is not intended
to add to the conclusions, nor to interpret them. On
the contrary, my statement is intended to submit some
more general considerations which, in the view of the
delegation of Poland, are rendered necesspy by the
events which the Council is now considCring.

61. In the opinion of my delegation, we have witnessed and imperialist
act of neo-colonialist
reconquest, psychologically, politically and militarily
adjusted to present circumstances. We have seen an
illustration of a sophisticated technique aimed at implementing imperialist
strategy in Africa. That is an
extremely important observation for Africa and for the
world.

57. In the view of my delegation, there is no doubt
that the events which occurred in Guinea on 22
November and thereafter were basically a determined
and implacable
attempt at imperialist
and neocolonialist reconquest of a proud and valiant people-a
champion of decolonization and of the sovereign and
independent development of the African peoples; that
is, an imperialist reconquest of the Republic of Guinea.

62. The resistance of the Guinean people and its victory in the face of this aggression is thus not only
a victory for the Guinean people; it is also their contribution to the cause of the struggle against attempts
at recolonizing Africa. It is also the Guinean people’s
contribution,
at the price of the blood and lives of
some of its best sons; which has made it possible to
unmask the most recent and very dangerous forms of
imperialist and neo-colonialist activity.

58. From that observation, which for US has the value
of objective truth, flows a series of essential questions
for the United Nations: first of all, the need for a
detailed analysis of all the elements of this attempted
imperialist reconquest to which we were witness; secondly, the’need to draw the necessary conclusions
without ambiguity or subterfuge. First, as regards the
analysis, an element that deserves particular emphasis
is the care, the expertise and the accuracy with which
the armed invasion by Portugal against the Republic
of Guinea was prepared. Troops were specially trained
and specially camouflaged,
to attack by groups
assigned to specific targets, in an over-all plan in which
the key elements were surprise and speed. The objectives were the physical elimination of the President
of the Republic of Guinea, the elimination of the leader
of the African Party for the Independence of Guinea
and Cape Verde and the destruction of the headquarters
of that organization, and the overthrow of the legal

63. The imperialist strategy for the reconquest of
Africa intends to use the subjugated Africans, who
are enrolled by force in the colonialist troops, to try
to halt the struggle of the former colonjzed peoples,
and to try to undermine the independence and dignity
of the African States. It also uses mercenaries who
are recruited, trained and armed by the enemies of
Africa. This strategy is not new. We have cibserved
it and we continue to observe it elsewhere in Africa.
as well as on other continents, in Asia in particular.
But what seems to be characteristic, nevertheless, and
most important, is the resistance of those Africans
7

which colonialism and neo-colonialism would, by force
i and deception, compel tp serve their purposes. The
decision of Lieutenant Lope8 and his group not to carry
out the order to destroy the Conakry airport because
this would mean destruction of the work of the fraternal
Guinean people-and here I am referring to the statement made by Prisoner Lopes at the eighth meeting
of the Special Mission, held on 27 November 1970,
contained in document S/10009/Add.l, is one of the
most positive illustrations of this evolution:
64. For. many years we have been discussing in the
Security Council and in the General Assembly the question of colonialism as a threat to international peace
and security. Polapd has always maintained that colonialism, by its very existence, represents a constant
threat to international peace and security.
65. A,s a condemned historical phenomenon colonialism cannot remain passive. To remain where it is for
colonialism and imminent death sentence. It cannot
maintain the stntcls quo other than by continued acts
of aggression against the liberation movement of colonial peoples in the first place, against the independent
and anti-colonialist African states as a corollary. The
recent Portuguese invasion against the Republic of
Guinea is an absolute illustration of that truth. If we
accept that truth which I consider’to have been objectively established, it is no longer possible for anyone
to clain;l that colonialism does not constitute a constant
threat to international peace and security. Now it is
no longer possible to play with words, to invent formulas that speak of situations which, quoting from one
of the Security Council’s resolutions, “might endager
international peace and security”. In the opinion of
my delegation we have 10 put an end to ‘this casuistry.
It is incumbent upon US to qualify each,situation as
it deserves and to take the necessary action when such
a situation arises.
66. Portugal is one of the “strike-forces”
of the
strategy of the imperialist reconquest of Africa.
However, it would be mistaken and perhaps even dangerous to see only Portugal behind this strategy, or
even Poitugal as the main element.

69. First, an unequivocal condemnation of Portugal
for the aggression it committed against the Republic
of Guinea, as well as the application of the arsenal
of sanctions provided for under Chapter VII of the
Charter. One of the forms of action which the Council ,
is duty bound to recommend is an appeal for the
immediate cessation of all military and political assistance to the aggressor, Portugal. The response to this
appeal will enable the Security Council to assess the
sincerity and the true value of the anti-colonialist protestations of faith of the allies of Portugal.
70. Secondly, an assurance to be given to the Republic of Guinea that the repetition of such an act of aggression could never take place. A decision of the Council
to adopt, if need be, all the measures provided for
underchapter VII of the Charter, it seems to us, would
meet such a need.
71. Thirdly, reparation for the losses suffered by the
Republic of Guinea. We are aware that only the material losses can be compensated for, that we shall not
return to life all those, both military and civilians, who
died while resisting Portuguese aggression; for them,
we can but pay tribute to their memory, which we
dq from tile bottom of our hearts.
72. Fourthly, the Security Council must take note
of the fact that the maintenance of Portuguese colonialism in Africa and the continuation of the colonial wars
it wages against the peoples of Africa in themselves
contain the constant danger of acts of aggression
against the independent countries of Africa, which is
contrary to the most fundamental principles of the
Charter.
,73. It is the duty of the Council to note that only
the final liquidation’ of Portuguese colonialism, onIy
the immediate’granting
of independence to the peoples
under Portuguese domination will make it possible to
remove the constant threat weighing on peace and security in Africa.
74. In conclusion, my delegation wishes to emphasize
the positive elements of this heinous act of aggression
against Guinea, the reaction of the Guinean people,
the spontaneous reaction of all the anti-colonialist
forces in the world, and more particularly in Africa,
their determination
to adopt measures which would
not only assist the Republic of Guinea in these very
difficult hours, but would also mobilize the efforts of
all the forces which are for the achievement of the
final goal: the complete elimination of colonialism.

67. Portugal and its ramifications in Africa are part
of a well-defined military, strategic and ideological
system. Portugal is a member of NATO. NATO gives
it the material and military means which it uses to
implement its colonialist policy which, as I said, constitutes a constant threat to the peace and security
of Africa. On the other hand NATO protects it from
any condemnation or effective action by the United
Nations, so it could be said that NATO supplies Portugal with the sword it uses against Africa and at the
same time, with the shield to protect it from the fury
of the African’ peoples.

75’. I wish to assure the Republic of Guinea and the
members of the Security Council that the People’s
Republic of Poland, faithful to the consistent attitude
which it has adopted in this connexion, supports and
will continue actively to support all their efforts.

68. The aggression of Portugal against the Republic
of Guinea and the context and the ramifications of
that aggression require that the Security Council take
a clear-cut and firm position. Might I mention those
elements which, in the opinion of my delegation, should
be at the basis of such a position.

76. The PRESIDENT
(translated from Russian): I
thank yo6, Comrade Ambassador, for the kind words
you have spoken about me and the good wishes you
have extended to me as President of the Security
Council.
,8
I

77. The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Uganda, whom I invite to take a place at the Council
table.

and the boats beionged to Portugal and wer manned 1
by Portuguese sailors and troops. Those members of /
the Security Council which doubted the truth of President Sekou Tour6’s complaint now have before them
indusputable findings of the Special Mission to the
effect that Portugal was the aggressor. President Sekou
Tour& has never failed to identify the colonialists and
the neo-colonialists.

78. Mr. OFWONO
(Uganda): The delegation of
Uganda, wishes to express its appreciation for the
dpportunity affoided it to discuss the question of Portyguese aggression against the peace-loving Republic
of Guinea. My delegation is also extremely happy, Mr.
President, to see you assume the presidency this month
when this important issue is before the Council and
we give you our hearty congratulations.

83. In 1958, when the people of the Republic of
Guinea won their struggle for independence and
decided to be their own masters under the leadership
of President Sekou Tour& the former colonial Power
became embittered, and to quote William Attwood,
former Ambassador of the United States to Guinea:

79. The recent Portuguese aggression against the
Republic of Guinea is not a new thing. It is, in fact,
part of the colonialist and neo-colonialist manoeuvres
to which the whole of Africa is being subjected by
Powers that would like to see the peoples of Africa
remain hewers of wood and drawers ‘of water while
they themselves benefit from our natural resources.
As the report of the Security Council Special Mission
states, theaim of the Portuguese invasion of the Republic of Guinea was to kill President Sekou TourC and
replace him with a puppet Government which could
be coerced and which would agree to selling the people
of Guinea back into slavery as in former days.

angrily decided to .make an example of
Guinea as a warning to the other French African
leaders not to follow suit. He ordered all French
administrators, teachers, doctors and techniciansout
of Guinea. Before leaving they destroyed documents, ripped out telephones, smashed light bulbs
and stripped the police of their uniforms and
weapons. Tour6’s Guinea had been condemned to
death.”
“

*

*

I

84, However, the enlightened people of Guinea did
not succumb to that act of. humiliation and barbarism.
They have been steadfast in their strnggle to remain
free and to free the whole of Africa from coloni’al
domination. In their determination they have several
times defended their sovereignty against Portuguese
aggression.

80. When one looks at the continent of Africa today,
one clearly sees outside forces of agression coming
from all directions. That continent of peace-loving
young nations is being attacked directly or indirectly
by rkgimes or organized forces commonly called mercenaries. Those swcalled soldiers of fortune who have
the backing of imperialist Powers have been operating
only in Africa and are, of course, primarily intended
to serve the interests of colonial Powers in small
countries which the imperialists are ashamed of invading directly for fear of losing face. The mercenaries
have a definite role to play. They serve as a camouflage
for the imperialist for&s 9s in the recent case of Portuguese aggression, the intention being to mislead the
world and divert attention from the actual aggressors.
If this were not true, would it be by sheer coincidence
that those so-called mercenaries have hitherto operated
only in Africa? Jean Schramme’s residence in Portugal
and the hospitality and honour he enjoys there and
in other Western countries explains his usefulness for
the defence of imperialism in Africa.

85. The Lisbon rCgime has denied that the invading )
forces were Portuguese although they were caught redhanded. Of course, it is not usual for aggressors to
plead guilty. We have witnessed this in many countries
where acts of aggression were committed and then the
victims of aggression were accused of being the aggressors.
86, My delegation and several others have repeatedly
stated in this Council and in the various committees
of the General Assembly that Portugal alone could not
effectively subdue the liberation movements in Guinea
(Bissau), Angola and Mozambique. It is the support
that the NATO Powers give Portugal that makes that
poor country proud and impervious to reason. It is
because of NATO support that Portugal undertook an
invasion of the Republic of Guinea. It is because of
NATO support that Portugal ignores all the resolutions
that have been adopted by this CounciI and the General
Assembly.

81. It is a well-known fact that certain great Powers,
in order to prove that the indigenous populations cannot rule themselves, would like to see their leaders
who are properly elected and who work for the good
of their peoples disgraced and overthrown so that PUPpet rCgimes can be placed in their stead. We have seen
this done in several countries in Africa, Asia and Latin
America. That is why Portugal is being used by NATO
Powers to invade the Republic of Guinea.

87. The Sectirity Council is meeting again to discuss
the same old problem in a new setting. This is not
the first time that Portugal has committed aggression
against an African country. It has done so against
Senegal, Tanzania, Zambia and the Congos. Indeed
it js time that the Security Council showed some firmness in executing its role as a peace-keeping organ
of the United Nations. If the United Nations is to be
worthy of its name, the big Powers which helped Portugal to commit aggression should be brought to see

82. The report of the Security Council Special Mission to the Republic of Guinea established under resolution 289 (1970), has confirmed that a naval force consisting of two troop-carrying ships described as being
of the type known as LST, as well as three or four
patrol boats, invaded the Republic of Guinea. The ships
9

reason, otherwise they will realize too late when a
point of no return has been reached.

of the Sudan on one of the most critical questions facing
our continent.

88. When President Sekou Tour& asked for United
Nations forces to ward Off‘Portuguese aggression, the
Security Council failed to respond to his request and
was even reluctant to send a special mission. Many
of us who believe in justice, peace and security, were
disappointed at the indifference shown by the Security
Council. However, the Council has been fortunate in
being presented with a very comprehensive and objective report by the Special Mission. My delegation will
therefore expect the Council to take appropriate action
under Ctiapter VII of the United Nations Charter.

96. More than two weeks have elapsed since the President and the Government of Guinea addressed a moving appeal to this Organization for immediate intervention to meet a premeditated act of aggression against
the Republic, its territory and its institutions. The
appeal was made while the culprit was still running
amuck red-handed at the scene of the crime. However,
for the past two weeks the supremeorgan of the United
Nations responsible for maintaining peace and security
has been procrastinating here in this slate-roofed palace
in order to gather proof and evidence of the culpability
of Portugal, the most notorious international felon that
the United Nations books have ever known, together
with the other unmentionable
governments in the
southern part of our continent. The Security Council
was procrastinating while Portuguese legions of terror
and treachery inflicted on the Republic of Guinea a
first, second and third attack.

89. Portugal should also be made to pay for the damage it inflicted on the Republic of Guinea. My delegation will be shocked if the Council only finds it fitting
to adopt a resolution condemning Portugal, for mere
condemnation will not repair the extensive damages
and losses inflicted on the Republic of Guinea. Condemnation will only give encouragement to the defiant
attitude of the Portuguese colonialists and their collaborators.

97. Aggression against Guinea has a particular significance to Africans. If the whole of our continent stood
up as one man on 22 November in the face of this
dastardly and ill-bred assault, it did so because Portugal
and its allies by proxy have touched us where it hurts
most. Guinea is not merely another State. Sekou Tour6
is not merely another leader. The attack on Guinea
in the eyes of every forward-looking
African is an
attack on the African pilot socialist State. The attack
on Sekou TourC is an attack on the oracle of African
revolution. Africa knows that Portugal and its allies
are aiming neither at the country nor at its leader,
They are aiming at the Guinean revolution and its ideas:
its efforts for the eradication of colonialism in all its
malignant forms in Africa, the liquidation of capitalistic
monopolies, the edification of socialism. However,
imperialism never learns its lessons. Africa is scarred
with the tokens of colonial and liberation wars, and’
every added scar reinforces our determination to continue the struggle to achieve the dignity of the African
man.

90. Recently there was a group of demonstrators outside United Nations Headquarters and one of the
placards they carried read: “United Nations is a place
where big countries sell small countries.” Let the
Security Council prove the demonstrators wrong in
the matter before it now.
91. The PRESIDENT
(translated j?om Russian): I
thank the representative of Uganda for the good wishes
and congratulations he has expressed to me as President of the Security Council.
92. The next speaker on my list is the representative
of the Sudan and I invite him to take a place at the
‘Council table. Before giving him the floor, I wish to
inform the Council that I have just received a letter
from the representative of India requesting that his
delegation should be invited to participate in the Security Council’s discussion of this item, without the right
to vote [,Y/10025]. If there are no objections, I shall
invite the representative of India to take part in the
Council’s deliberations in accordance with rule 37 of
the Security Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
93. I invite the representative of India to take the
seat reserved for him in the Council Chamber, it being
understood that he will be invited to take a seat at
the Council table as soon as it is his turn to address
the Council.
At the invitation of the President,
took the place reserved for him.

Mr. S, Sen (In.dia)

94. The PRESIDENT
(translated j?om Russian):
now call on the representative of the Sudan.

98. Imperialism, using the United Nations, murdered
Patrice Lumumba. What did they gain out of it other
than fanning the spark of African revolution into a
blaze in central Africa? Imperialism is now engaged,
; aided by the temporlzation of the United Nations, in
a campaign to eliminate Sekou Tour& through the gaunt
and bloody hands of Portugal. But what have they
gained out of it other than uniting the whole of Africa
behind the man who will always be remembered, dead
or alive, as the foremost champion of African freedom?
Governments
come and go, but Africa endures,
Leaders come and go, but the African revolution
abides.
,99. Within this context, Africa stands as one man !
behind Guinea. The African people stand as one man
behind Sekou Tour& That is the essence of the message
sent by my President, General Gaafar Mohamed
Nimeiri, to President Sekou Tour& on the morrow of
the infamous attack on his country. That is the reason
for the action taken by my Government, in concert

I

95. Mr. KHALID
(Sudan): Mr. President, I wish at
the outset to thank you and the members of the Council
for allowing my delegation to participate in this debate
to make known the views of the Democratic Republic
10

with the sister States of the United Arab Republic and
Libya and in consultation with the Organization of African Unity, to make available to Guinea al1 assistance
within our means to meet its defence needs. Action
: to this end was promptly and appropriately taken.

“Portuguese Guinea is the last territory in West
Africa possessed by a NATO Power and should be
considered in relation to the vital Cape route and
the strategy of western resistance to tricontinental
subversion.”

100. The question, now that the facts are assembled
and the verdict has been given in the expeditious and
objective work of the fact-finding mission of this
Council, is not whether we should enunciate a condem: riatory sentence against Portugal. Portugal, as one of
the last remaining heirs of ancient thefts in Africa,
stands condemned in the eyes of the whole civiIized
world. Resolutions in this sense have been adopted
for the last ten years at all instances of the United
Nations organs. But Lisbon is determined much more
than ever not to lend an ear to the urgings of the world.
That was confirmed only yesterday while the whole
wortd was still expressing its shock at the Portuguese
aggression against Guinea’. It was confirmed by the
Prime Minister, of Portugal, Marcello Caetano, when
he told Parliament, in the course of the elaboration
of a deceptive home tile policy for the African colonies, that Portugal will never give up its African Territories. Premier Caetano’s statement means in plain
words “to hell with the United Nations and its
resolutions”.

104. I quote the following from For&w Affaai?.s of
January 1953, an article entitled “Portugal’s Strategic
Territories”
: “Angola
and Guinea, with
1,816
kilometres
of coastline on the Atlantic,
may
be
regarded as an integral part of Atlantic defence. They
also offer a vital outlet to the inland territories
of
Africa. ”
105. The evidence is too overwhelming to be hidden
behind a haze of mystifying declarations and windowdressing statements that we hear time and again from
NATO Powers. Our brothers in Africa are being killed,
maimed and dragged into bloody servitude by British
Lockheeds, American B-26 bombers, German Fouga
Magister jets, French frigates and Panhard armoured
cars. And while we are meeting here to consider Portuguese aggression against an African country, three
1,400. ton warships destined for Portuguese colonies
are being built at the West German shipyards of Blohm
and Voss, possibly to transport more mercenaries
and
arnlies of invasion into other African harbours. Yesterday it was the Congo, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Zambia and Senegal. Today it iS Guinea. The whole
of Africa is asking whose turn it will be tomorrow.

101. .What is requested, therefore, is that this Council
should take the appropriate sanctions to make that
international felon abide by the laws of nations. If the
Charter has any meaning at all it will have to be displayed in such an action, an action very Long overdue.

106. The allies of Portugal are now faced with a difficult moral choice. They have united with Portugal
in the name of a so-called free world, gathering together
in face of a so-called totalitarian threat. That is the
lesson we have been taught by our anointed educators
of the West. Subjugating whole nations to save their
souls from the communist threat; muzzling the mouths
and intell(gence of millions of people in the metropolitan country and colony alike .to safeguard the liberty
of the “free world”, Portugal, the “free world”.
How
ridiculous can one be? Let us define the meaning
of
the words. To that end over 2,000 years ago Aristotle
wrote a treatise entitled “Logic”. If Portugal stands .j
for anything, it stands as a monument to Western
hypocrisy. We have nothing against the people of Portugal, which. also has its victims and martyrs, but if
the Portuguese Government is beipg used by its allies,
it is being used for what it is. A scoundrel may be
of use to us just because he is a scoundrel. But for
what end is this Iberian scoundrel being used by the
free world in Africa? If Africa means, anything to the
NATO Powers-and
many of them count friends
in
Africa-they
should try to come to terms with what
the United Nations Charter, international morality
and
good conscience dictate.

102. The irony of it all is that Portugal, the country
with the lowest per capita income in Europe, is able
to scoff at the resoIutions of the United Nations and
continue to wage the longest colonial war in contemporary history. But if that is possible, it is only possible
through the generous military and economic aid furnished to Portugal by its NATO allies, many of which
stand condemned for complicity. These are no rash
words. Those who speak for NATO do not themselves
hide the fact that in both tactics and strategy Portugal
in their sense also encompasses Portuguese Territories
in Africa. Should I refer those interested to the statements made at the NATO General Assembly meeting,
at Lisbon, of all places, in October 1968? Or should
I refer them to the host of articles and comments in
the military and strategic journals of the West? For
a sample of this evidence you may wish to lend me
yopr ears. I cite the following from the French Publica@HI Revue militairr g&h-ale,
of 8 November 1963:
.“‘Owing to the presence of the Portuguese and
as long as the Portuguese remain there, the Portuguese positions in Africa are safe and as such they
are of great significance to the West. It is therefore
obvious that the West serves its own cause if it supports Portugal’s efforts in Africa.”
! 103. I quote the following from NATO’s
I Nations, October-November
1968:

107. Africa, which is now following the deliberations
of this Council, is looking forward neither to more
of our supine utterances nor to more of our tired condemnations. Africa is looking forward to our action
to bring an end to the most malignant form of colonialism in our continent-Portuguese
colonialism.
It is
waiting for us to take the appropriate punitive measures

Fifteen
11

against the wanton transgression of the Charter, to
the concern of my Government and its position on
indemnify the victim of aggression for its losses, and
the aggression of Portugal against a sister African State,
to make available to it all the economic and technical 1 the Republic of Guinea.
help necessary.
115. When the news of the invasion of the sovereign
108. The attack on Guinea has awakened many a
State of Guinea by the armed forces of Portugal was
slumbering African to the reality that the war of
first reported to my Government the reaction was not
independence is not yet completely won. It has
one of doubt or surprise but of utter indignation, This
awakened us to the reality that our continent is still
incident was not the first and only testimony of violarampant with treacherous quislings, whose ultimate
tions by the Government of Portugal of the cardinal
. fate will be neither better or worse than that of their
principles of the Charter of the United Nations governNorwegian counterpart. It has awakened us to the realing inter-State relations. Portugal has repeatedly vioity that colonialism, which is condemned by history
lated the sovereignty and territorial integrity of many
to political sterility, will not hesitate to resort to the
African States in its futile pursuit of the perpetuation
most dastardly acts to survive in our midst. It has of its colonial rule in Africa. The latest act of
awakened us to the reality that African swords must
unprovoked aggression committed by Portugal against
not yet sleep in our hands, not until we have completely
the Republic of Guinea differed greatly both in magerased this colonial infamy from our soil. History
nititude and overtness. It was the most audacious act
knows no pause in progress and nobody can forbid
of aggression by Portugal, having the clear intention
Africa the future.
of overthrowing the lawfully constituted Government
of an African State and of destroying the institutions
109. To conclude, let me hope for this Council that’
of a liberation movement. That act of banditry by the
its decisions will measure up to the necessities of thei Portuguese Government sets a new record in a series
situation. By so doing the Council will save the soul; of acts arising from the impervious disregard manof the United Nations and shore up its eroding prestige
ifested by Portugal for the principles enshrined in the
in the eyes of African men and women. And for you
Charter of the United Nations.
personally, Mr. President, let me hope that you will
never find yourself in the impossible situation where
116. The conclusive report contained in document
you will be made to react in the way Maxim Litvinov
S/l0009 and Add. 1, submitted to the Security Council
reacted three decades ago when he said, “international
by the Special Mission established under its resolution
diplomacy has never done anything which Hitler
289 (1970), confirms beyond any doubt the fact that
disliked”.
the Government of Portugal conceived, planned and
executed the invasion launched against the people of
110. The PRESIDENT
(translated from Russiun):
Guinea in the early hours of 22 November 1970. PorThank you for your kind words to the Security Council
tugal has been caught in the act. We are satisfied that
and to its President.
this recent aggression by Portugal is corroborated by
the teport of the impartial mission sent by the Security
111. Before I invite the next speaker to the Council
Council.
table, I wish to inform the members of the Council
that I have just received aletter from the representative
117. I should like to take this opportunity of expressof Somalia [S/10026], requesting that his delagation
ing to the Chairman and members of the Special Misshould be invited to participate in the consideration
sion the appreciation of the Ethiopian Government for
of the item under discussion by the Security Council,
their exhaustive and clear report, which I believe will
without the right to vote. If there are no objections,
make the Council’s task easier.
I shall invite the representative of Somalia to partici118. Too often, both inside and outside the United
pate in our deliberations in accordance with rule 37
Nations,
charges of armed aggression brought against
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
Portugal by African States have, in order to thwart
effective action by the United Nations, been cast aside
112. I invite the representative of Somalia to take
as nothing more than mere allegations. Now that its
the seat reserved for him in the Security Council
own
investigating
Mission
has incontrovertibly
Chamber, it being understood that he will be invited
indicated the charge of the Government of Guinea,
to take a place at the Council table when it is his turn
what action will the Security Council take? Will it,
to speak.
as in the past, content itself with adopting one more
resolution of mere condemnation and thus in effect
At the invitation of the President, Mr. A, A. Farah
reward Portugal by letting it go unpunished for itsfla(Somnlia) took the place reserved.for him.
grant act of aggression against a State Member of this
Organization? A proven act of armed aggression in
113. The PRESIDENT
(translated from Russian):
clear contravention of the principles of the Charter
The next speaker on my list is the representative of
of the United Nations has been committed by one
Ethiopia, and I invite him to take a place at the Council
Member State against another. The aggrieved party
table and make his statement.
has asked for effective measures to be taken against
114. Mr. GEBRE IGZY (Ethiopia): Mr. President,
the aggressor. Are we to witness continued helplessallow me to thank YOU and the Council for giving me
ness on the part of the United Nations, unable to act
this opportunity to take part in this debate to express, even when the proven lawlessness’ and impunity of
12

an offending State clearly warrants the taking of
measures in accordance with the provisions of the
United Nations Charter?

will undoubtedlv nersist in its impudent
the authority ofthk United Nation;.

defiance of

123. The ceaseiess aggression being perpetrated by
Portugal against independent sovereign African States
demonstrates beyond any doubt the danger which Portuguese colonialism poses to international peace and
security. Had the political will of the United Nations
been actively mobilized to compel Portugal to give up
its colonies, this Organization would have removed
one major source of the danger to peace and tranquillity
in the African continent. Today Guinea is the victim
of overt Portuguese aggression and, as long as Portuguese colonialism is permitted to continue, tomorrow
it will be some other African country which opposes
Portuguese colonial oppression and exploitation of the
peoples of the Territories under its administration.

119. We must be alert to the fact that failure to meet
the challenge posed by this aggression against a peaceful people can have dire consequences for the
Organization. I believe that this latest Portuguese act
of aggression against the people of Guinea clearly
merits the taking of effective measures forthwith if the
call for action submitted to this Organization by the
Government of the Republic of-Guinea is to have any
meaning at all. The present case is not one of “innocent
until proved guilty”. Portugal has been found guilty,
and whatever it may now fabricate to claim innocence
must be understood as one more link in the chain of
manoeuvres and falsifications it uses in its attempt to
prevent any effective action being taken against it. In
this regard, the letter of the chargC d’affaires of the
Permanent Mission of Portugal to the United Nations,
contained in document S/10014, is very instructive.
That letter does not deny that Portugal has committed
an act of aggression; it merely pleads that Portugal
has not authorized or consented to its being launched.
The Council should not be diverted from holding Portugal responsible, for an operation of this magnitude
and audacity cannot be undertaken without the active
engagement of all State organs.

124. In the light of the foregoing, permit me to suggest
to the Council that it should take the following
measures: first, the Council must, in our view, adopt
the report of the Special Mission; secondly, the Council
must condemn Portugal for the act of unprovoked aggression committed against the Republic of Guinea;
thirdly, the Council must compel Portugal to compensate the Republic of Guinea for the loss of life and
damage to property; and, finally, the Council must
seize this opportunity to remove once and for all one
of the major reasons for the threat to peace and security
in Africa by eliminating Portuguese colonialism.

120. The question under consideration
has yet
another aspect of the greatest importance for the peace
and security of the African continent. The Council is
certainly aware that the States of Africa have been
pleading with the Powers concerned to desist from
extending military assistance to Portugal because such
assitance is inevitably used to suppress thk freedom
of peoples under Portuguese administration.

12.5. The PRESIDENT
(translated
Thank you for your statement.

fionz

Russian):

126. The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Somalia and I invite him to take his place at the
Council table and make his statement.

121. In the light of this recent Portuguese aggression
against the Republic of Guinea, I trust that the Powers
concerned will be persuaded to discontinue both the
sale of arms to South Africa and assistance to Portugal
as detrimental not only to freedom, peace and security
in Africa but actually to their own interests. I do not
wish to labour the point but I must simply point out
the fact that military assistance and the saIe of arms
to the avowed enemies of Africa is decidedly harmful
to the continued sound and harmonious
relations
between Africa and the patrons of its adversaries.

127. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): Mr. President, I should
like to thank you, and, through you, the members of
the Security Council for allowing my delegation to participate in thjs debate on the comi>laint of Guinea, so
that the attitude of my Government on some of the
issues involved can be clearly expressed.
128. The report of the Special Mission to the Republic
of Guinea should have dispelled any doubts that may
have existed in the minds of members of the Security
Council as to whether an act of armed aggression had
indeed been committed against the people and territory
of Guinea on 22 and 23 November 1970.

122. Portugal must be severely condemned for its
armed aggression against the valiant people of Guinea.
But that is not enough by itself, for Portugal has, over
the years, amply demonstrated its capacity to ignore
without compunction the moral weight of the United
Nations. Portugal must be compelled to pay compensation for the considerable damage done to property as
a result of its armed aggression against the Republic
of Guinea. Furthermore, this Council must agree to
impose sanctions against Portugal, for no one can now
seriously claim that Portuguese policy in Africa is’no
threat to international peace and security. Portugal has
for too long been allowed to flout the decisions of this
Organization.
Unless enforcement action is taken
against it by the Council, the Government of Portugal

129. As stated by President Sekou Tour& when he
requested military assitance, from the United Nations,
the evidence is clear that armed aggression by an external Power did take place and that that Power was Portugal. The report indicates three possible. motives for
the attack: to overthrow the Government and replace
it with dissident elements; to strike at the leadership
and headquarters of the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC), and to
free Portuguese prisoners. Those are the motives that
have been cited by the Government of Guinea, and
all the evidence that has been collected by the Special
Mission clearly supports this view.
13

130. Now that the facts have been established, Africa
, and, indeed, the world is waiting to see what action
the Security Council will take in order to discharge
its responsibilities and its duties under the Charter.
In referring the matter promptly to the United Nations,
the Government of Guinea quite properly acted in
accordance with the letter and spirit of the Charter
and was entitled to a positive and immediate response.
My delegation can fully understand the deep sense of
disappointment felt by the Government of Guinea at
the inability of the United Nations to provide assitance
at a time when that Government was engaged in driving
from its territory a wave of enemy troops, and when
there was a distinct possibility that other attacks were
in the offing.

This would entail the diversion of scarce funds from
development to military forces, but if that is the price
that African States have to pay to maintain their
independence and national sovereignty, they are willing to pay that price.
135. The Security Council can do much to restore
the confidence of smaller States in the integrity and
usefulness of this Organization in matters relating to
international peace and security, by taking immediate
measures on the substance of the Guinean complaint
and instituting others so as to prevent a recurrence.
When the complaint has been remedied, the Security
Council should then discuss ways and means by which
its peace-keeping and peace-making machinery can be
geared to deal quickly and effectively with situations
of the kind that confront Guinea.

131. It was fortunate that the Guinean armed forces
were able to contain the invaders and drive them back
to the sea. But what would the position have been
had Portugal followed up its reckless adventure by
committing further troops to the battle’? There would
have developed a situation of grave dimensions and
of incalculable consequences.

136. In dealing with the substance of the complaint,
my delegation would expect the Security Council to
take into account, among other matters, the questions
of indemnification for Guinea, the application of punitive measures against Portugal, the effects of Portuguese colonialism and the threat it poses to international peace and security, the role of NATO arms in
feeding the Portuguese colonial war machine, and the
activities of mercenaries in Africa.

132. If there should be doubt in anyone’s mind on
this score, let them study the intense reaction to the
situation throughout Africa. Many States, including my
own, have offered the people and Government of
Guinea military assistance should this still be required.
Several thousand Somalis have registered themselves
for service in Guinea should a volunteer force be
recruited. Today, the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity will assemble in Lagos
to discuss the Guinean situation.

137. It stands to reason that the first step the Cduncil
should take is to require Portugal to pay for its acts
of lawlessness. My delegation believes that appropriate
action should be taken under Chapter VII of the’
Charter. In addition to the payment of indemnification,
Portugal, as the aggressor State, should be subjected
to enforcement action in order to demonstrate international disapproval of its lawless conduct, to serve as
a deterrent to further acts of aggression and to persuade
it to terminate its colonial wars and bring its colonial
policies into line with the requirements of the Charter
and of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV).

133. For five years, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations has been debating the question of
the provision of adequate peace-keeping machinery for
the United Nations. Year after year in the General
Assembly, Members express their regret that no progress has been made by the Committee. The events
we are now considering show clearly the failure of
the United Nations in this respect, a failure that was
highlighted by the words of the Guinean Minister of
Finance, Mr. Ismael Tour&, in his evidence given to
the Special Mission at its first meeting[S/10009/Adu’.I).
Referring to the fundamental aim of the United Nations
to bring about international solidarity in situations of
this nature he said:

138. Ever since the question of the Portugueseadministered Territories in Africa was brought to the
attention of the Security Council in 196 1, Portugal has
repeatedly violated the land and air space of African
States bordering on its Territories, inflicting casualties
in human lives, destroying property and conducting
terror raids. This kind of conduct, unless checked,
will certainly lead to a breakdown in international law
and order.

“We believe, therefore, that the United Nations,
in not acting with the speed requested by the Republic of Guinea, and in not sending it any military aid,
has not fulfilled that aim of the Charter.”
134. Guinea’s experience will certainly have a radical
effect on the manner in which African States will deal
with their own security problems. It had been hoped
that Africa would be spared the necessity of having
to provide for this form of defence; but it is obvious
that if the United Nations cannot devise machinery
‘to enable it to respond effectively and immediately
to situations involving acts of aggression, then its Members will turn away from the Organization and devise
means for their own individual or collective security.

139. There is no need for me to dwell on the unhappy
nature and extent of Portuguese colonialism in Africa,
nor on the intolerable attitude which the Portuguese
continue to hold on the question of self-determination
for the indigenous inhabitants of those Territories,
since these are matters well-known to members of the
Security Council, What I should like to emphasize,
however, is that @ this situation there are two diametrically opposed forces at work. In one direction, there
is the stubborn Portuguese insistence on keeping the
people of Guinea (Bissau), Angola and Mozambique
under colonial rule, and imposing on Africans an identity, a culture and a way of life alien to their character,
detrimental to their interests and at variance with their
14

national aspirations. At work in the opposite direction
are the national liberation movements, united, strong,
determined, with the objective of regaining control of
their political destiny, restoring the dignity of their
peoples, and uplifting the moral, social and economic
fabric of their societies.
140. ; The United Nations cannot claim ignorance of
the wars of attrition that are currently being fought
in those Territories. If the valiant African freedom
fighters have suffered great casualties, it is not because
of their fighting qualities, but because the Portuguese
colonial forces are equipped with superior armaments
of all kinds, including naval ships and aircraft, all
supplied by NATO. It was those same weapons and
naval ships that were used to carry out the aggressive
act against Guinea two weeks ago. The least that
NATO members can do in this situation is to withhold
their military supplies to Portugal as long as Portugal’s
colonial wars in Africa continue. Unless they do so,
they cannot escape responsibility for the untold suffering that is being inflicted on the African peoples, nor
can they hope to retain the friendship of Africa.
141. The other day it was announced that the Portuguese Government had proposed basic reforms, for
its overseas Territories, under which they would have
wider autonomy and parliamentary
representation.
The situation in those Territories has gone’too far to
ahow a leisurely, unrealistic and limited approach to
the political needs and demands of the people. In
Guinea (Bissau), in Angola and in Mozambique, the
forces of liberations are themselves in a position now
to dictate the pace of political development. The people
refuse foreign domination. That is why the Portuguese
are desperate; that is why they savagely turn on
neighbouring States from time to time in an effort to
alter the course of events.

determination,
coupled with the resulting civil strife
in those Territories, has created situations in Guinea
(Bissau), Angola and Mozambique which are a threat
to international peace and security.
146. As far back as 1961, the attention of the Security
Council was drawn to the situation in those Territories,
but no action has been taken because of a conspiracy
of indifference. Persistent refusal by the Council to
recognize the gravity of that situation would, in the
view of my delegation, continue to create potential
areas of conflict between Portugal and African States
bordering on those Territories,
147. Another matter for international concern is the
fact that in their incursions into the territory of
sovereign African States, the Portuguese employ the
services of mercenaries, those ruthless adventurerers
who have no compunction at serving as hired assassins y
for the highest bidder. According to The New York
Times of 5 December 1970, it is an open secret that:
mercenaries have been operating together with Por-’
tuguese forces in the cross-frontier hostilities along the
borders of Guinea (Bissau). This evil phenomenon,
which is the result of recent colonial wars and of the
international market in arms, will continue unti1 we
dan establish effective international preventive machinery to serve as a deterrent: Those mercenaries
exploited and aggravated the situation in the Congo,
in Nigeria during the civil war and in other parts of
Africa. They have now reappeared in Guinea (Bissau).
It is time that the United Nations took forceful action
to rid Africa of their presence.

148. There is one other field of action which should 1
receive serious consideration by this Council: that is
the question of bringing to justice those responsible
for this outrage in Guinea. In another organ of the
United Nations, a study is already under way for the
creation
of an international crimes tribunal in which
142. Guinea has always been a source of inspiration
those
who
are directly responsible for crimes against
to freedom-loving peoples in Africa. The resolute stand
humanity can be brought to justice. In this particular
which the Guinean people have taken against colonialincident, many people including women and children,
ist and imperialist exploitation, and the unqualified sup- ’ have
been killed or maimed for life. From the evidence :
port they have given to national liberation movements,
received by the Special Mission, it should be possible
have earned them a special place among the peop1es to identify some of the leaders of the aggression. Efforts
of Africa.
should be continued in that direction so that a salutary
example can be made of them.
143. It is quite obvious that the Portuguese armed
aggression against Guinea was aimed at neutrahzing
149. We Africans do not seek violence; we seek peace
their position, effecting a change of leadership to one
and social benefit. We do not want war, except war
more sympathetic to Portuguese aspirations and at
against disease, poverty and illiteracy. We cannot
destroying the PAIGC leadership based in Conakry.
afford to waste our limited resources when we need
al] that we have to promote our national development,
so that our peoples can have a better standard of living.
144. The plan has failed; the people of Guinea are
But all these become secondary considerations when :
even more determined to resist colonialism wherever
circumstances arise which present a threat to our dearly ’
it may appear, and Africa has been alerted to the danger
won independence. Having struggled to regain that;
that is ever present while bastions of COhialism
independence we will not allow it to be wrested from
remain on the continent.
us without a struggle. And while we jealously guard’
our independence, we do not consider it complete until ;
145. But it is the duty of the %!CUritY Council to conthe r&t of our brothers on the African continent have 1
sider ways and means by which Portuguese colonialism
also
attained freedom from colonial bondage This is !
can be speedily brought to an end. In the view of my
the spirit that moves Africa; this is the reason for the,
Government, the continued refusal of Portugal to give
creation of the Grganization of African Unity; this is
African peoples under its domination their right.to self-

of the Security Council, the next meeting, at which
the Council will continue its discussion of this item,
will be held at 3 o’clock this afternoon. I have three
speakers on the list for that meeting and I request those
r,epresentatives who intend to participate in the discussion of the question and to speak at the afternoon meeting ot inscribe their names on the list of speakers.

the spirit that animates the courageous people of,
Guinea; this is the spirit that moves the peoples of
Africa to respond as one to the situation created by
the latest Portuguese adventure.
150. The PRESIDENT
(b’a%slated from Russinrz):
The list of speakers for this meeting is now exhausted.
In accordance with consultations held with members

The meeting rose at 1.5 p.m.

16

HOW TO OBTAIN

UNITED NATIONS

PlJBLlCATlONS

United Notions publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughput
the world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Notions, Soles Section, New York
or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Ler publications
der Notions Unies sent en venle dons les libroirier
et les ogencer
d$positai,res du monde entier. Informez-vour
ouprbr de votre libroirie ou adressez-vous
br
Notions Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Genive.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Los publicociones
de Iof Nacioner Unidas estbn en vento en librerios y colas dirtribuidoros
en todos portes del mundo. Consulte o JV librero o dirljosc a: Nociones Unidor, Seccih de
Ventos, Nuevo York o Ginebra.

L.itho in United Nations.

New York

j Price: $U.S. I.00 (or equivnlent

in orher currencies)

82 I IO-May

1973-2,050
