UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/1041
8 October 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 8 OCTOBER 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ADDRESSED
TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated
6 October 1999, which I have received from the Secretary-General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members
of the Security Council.

(Signed)

99-29340 (E)

081099

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1999/1041
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 6 October 1999 from the Secretary-General
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to
the Secretary-General

In accordance with Security Council resolution 1088 (1996), I attach the
monthly report on the operations of the Stabilization Force. I would appreciate
your making this report available to the Security Council.

(Signed)

Javier SOLANA

/...

S/1999/1041
English
Page 3

Enclosure
Monthly report to the Security Council on the operations of
the Stabilization Force

1.
Over the reporting period (21 August-20 September), there were
approximately 31,000 troops deployed in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, with
contributions from all North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) allies and from
16 non-NATO countries. Stabilization Force (SFOR) troops continued to conduct
surveillance and reconnaissance by means of ground and air patrols, with combat
aircraft flying approximately 93 hours.
2.
SFOR troops continued to monitor compliance with the provisions of
Security Council resolution 1160 (1998), prohibiting the transport of weapons
into the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia with an intensified presence on the
ground, in order to enforce the embargo. Encouraging results have been reported
in weapons being handed over voluntarily by the entities, or being uncovered by
SFOR.
3.
SFOR continues to monitor the movement of controlled petroleum
products into the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia by establishing traffic control
points, and to date, 26 violations have been reported. SFOR handed over
responsibility for the vehicles in question to the United Nations International
Police Task Force (IPTF) or to local police, who subsequently escorted them back
to their point of origin. An SFOR monitoring team has also been deployed to the
refinery in Bosanski Brod to receive advance information on fuel movements, in
order to increase the efficiency of border controls.
4.
On 31 August, two hand grenades exploded at a building belonging to
the Joint Commission Observers in Doboj. The building was damaged, but there
were no injuries to personnel.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
5.
Over the reporting period, the situation in theatre remained stable,
with the entities in substantial compliance with the military provisions of the
Peace Agreement. There was moderate reaction in the Republika Srpska to the
detention of General Talic, the Bosnian Serb Army Chief-of-Staff, in Vienna on
24 August, but the political situation there remains tense.
6.
Over the reporting period, there were again isolated incidents of
intimidation and violence in response to the return of refugees and displaced
persons, with houses damaged or destroyed by grenades or home-made bombs. At
the end of August, approximately 60 Bosnian Serbs, en route to a scheduled house
assessment, were confronted by a group of around 50 violent and hostile Bosniacs
near Bocinja in Multinational Division North (MND (North)). SFOR troops
monitored the situation and provided security support to the IPTF and to local
police on the ground. There were no injuries, and the Bosnian Serbs decided to
postpone their visit. At the beginning of September, Bosniac returnees were
shelled with five mortar rounds when resettling in the area of Faziagica Kula in

/...

S/1999/1041
English
Page 4

MND (South-East). There were no casualties, but SFOR troops monitored the area
and continue to maintain a presence there.
7.
Despite these incidents, during the month of August there was a
significant increase in the number of minority returns of displaced persons and
refugees as compared with the month of July. In August, SFOR troops monitored
5,641 minority returns and over 7,000 displaced persons and refugees conducted
house visits and cleanings.
8.
On 25 August, locals in the Bosniac district of Lipa in MND (SouthWest) once again established a roadblock outside the SFOR base there, in protest
at the extra traffic generated by SFOR convoys crossing the village. The
protests continued for approximately three days until the roadblock was removed
on order of the local authorities.
9.
Over the reporting period, SFOR conducted a total of 357 military
weapons storage sites inspections: 126 Bosniac; 70 Bosnian Croat; 121 Bosnian
Serb; and 40 Federation.
10. SFOR troops monitored a total of 1,071 training and movement
activities: 437 Bosniac; 127 Bosnian Croat; 409 Bosnian Serb; and 98
Federation. The training and movement ban on the Republika Srpska Police
Anti-Terrorist Brigade remains in effect until further notice, because of the
Brigade’s non-compliance with instructions of the Commander of SFOR to the
parties.
11. The summer demining campaign continued, with the deployment of 44
Entity Armed Forces demining teams. Over the reporting period, these teams
conducted 621 mine-clearing operations, removing 5 anti-tank mines, 484
anti-personnel mines and 15 items of unexploded ordnance from 71,839 square
metres of land.
12. On 9 September, a meeting of the Joint Military Commission took place
at SFOR headquarters in Sarajevo. Among the topics discussed were training and
movement activities, ammunition storage implementation and Brcko
demilitarization. The next meeting is scheduled for 9 December.
Cooperation with international organizations
13. Within capabilities, and in accordance with its mandate, SFOR
continues to provide assistance to the international organizations in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, including the United Nations Mission in Bosnia (UNMIBH) and IPTF,
the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, the Office of the
High Representative (OHR), the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR).
14. SFOR continues to play an active role in supporting OHR efforts to
establish joint institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina, particularly the
Standing Committee on Military Matters. As reported last month, significant
progress had been made over the summer period in the establishment of the new
secretariat of the Standing Committee on Military Matters, with the basic
/...

S/1999/1041
English
Page 5

administrative infrastructure largely in place, and rules of procedure having
been agreed "ad referendum". However, following the detention of General Talic
at the end of August, the Republika Srpska delegation refused to attend the
8 September meeting of the Standing Committee on Military Matters, which was
consequently cancelled. Firm action by OHR, SFOR and OSCE, including a joint
demarche by the High Representative, the Commander of SFOR and the Head of OSCE
in Bosnia and Herzegovina appeared to have resolved the issue, and the meeting
was rescheduled for 23 September. However, the meeting was again postponed
until early October.
Outlook
15. The return of refugees and displaced persons is likely to continue to
lead to isolated acts of intimidation and violence.

-----
