United Nations

A/RES/63/196

General Assembly

Distr.: General
10 March 2009

Sixty-third session
Agenda item 97

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2008
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/63/431)]

63/196. United Nations African Institute for the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 62/174 of 18 December 2007 and all other relevant
resolutions,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 1
0F

Bearing in mind the urgent need to establish effective crime prevention
strategies for Africa, as well as the importance of law enforcement agencies and the
judiciary at the regional and subregional levels,
Bearing in mind also the Programme of Action, 2006–2010, endorsed by the
Round Table for Africa, held in Abuja on 5 and 6 September 2005, 2
1F

Aware of the devastating impact of crime on the national economies of African
States and of the fact that crime is a major obstacle to harmonious and sustainable
development in Africa,
Noting that the financial situation of the United Nations African Institute for
the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders has greatly affected its
capacity to deliver its services to African Member States in an effective and
comprehensive manner,
Commends the United Nations African Institute for the Prevention of
1.
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders for its efforts to promote and coordinate
regional technical cooperation activities related to crime prevention and criminal
justice systems in Africa;
Also commends the initiative of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
2.
Crime in strengthening its working relationship with the Institute by supporting and
involving the Institute in the implementation of a number of activities, including
those contained in the Programme of Action, 2006–2010, on strengthening the rule
of law and criminal justice systems in Africa;2
0H

_______________
1
2

08-48255

A/63/87.
Available from www.unodc.org/art/en/ppaa.html.

A/RES/63/196

3.
Further commends the Secretary-General for his efforts to mobilize the
financial resources necessary to provide the Institute with the core professional staff
required to enable it to function effectively in the fulfilment of its mandated
obligations;
Reiterates the need to strengthen further the capacity of the Institute to
4.
support national mechanisms for crime prevention and criminal justice in African
countries;
Notes the efforts of the Institute to establish contacts with organizations
5.
in those countries which are promoting crime prevention programmes and its
maintenance of close links with regional and subregional political entities, such as
the African Union Commission, the East African Community, the Commission of
the Economic Community of West African States, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and the Southern African Development Community;
Urges the States members of the Institute to continue to make every
6.
possible effort to meet their obligations to the Institute;
Welcomes the decision of the Governing Board of the Institute, at its
7.
tenth annual meeting, held in Khartoum on 19 and 20 May 2008, to convene a
conference of African ministers to discuss measures for improving the flow of
resources to the Institute;
Urges all Member States and non-governmental organizations and the
8.
international community to continue adopting concrete practical measures to
support the Institute in the development of the requisite capacity and to implement
its programmes and activities aimed at strengthening crime prevention and criminal
justice systems in Africa;
Urges all States that have not already done so to consider ratifying or
9.
acceding to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and the Protocols thereto, 3 as well as the United Nations Convention against
Corruption; 4
2F

3F

10. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify efforts to mobilize all
relevant entities of the United Nations system to provide the necessary financial and
technical support to the Institute to enable it to fulfil its mandate;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to mobilize
the financial resources necessary to maintain the Institute with the core professional
staff required to enable it to function effectively in the fulfilment of its mandated
obligations;
12. Calls upon the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to
work closely with the Institute;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to enhance the promotion of regional
cooperation, coordination and collaboration in the fight against crime, especially in
its transnational dimension, which cannot be dealt with adequately by national
action alone;

_______________
3
4

2

United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 2225, 2237, 2241 and 2326, No. 39574.
Ibid., vol. 2349, No. 42146.

A/RES/63/196

14. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue making concrete
proposals, including for the provision of additional core professional staff, to
strengthen the programmes and activities of the Institute and to report to the General
Assembly at its sixty-fourth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
71st plenary meeting
18 December 2008

3
