0.79
0.05
0.08
6.00
0.17
0.05
0.04
0.04
0.04

Egypt ............................. .
El Salvador ........................ .
Ethiopia ........................... .
France ............................ .
Greece ............................. .
Guatemala ......................... .
Haiti .............................. .
Honduras
.................. .
Iceland
............. .
India . .
. ...... .
Iran ..... .
Iraq .... .
Israel .. .
Lebanon
Liberia
Luxembourg
Mexico
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Norway
Pakistan
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Saudi Arabia
Sweden
Syria ..
Thailand
Turkey
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic
Union of South Africa
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland
United States of America
G"ruguay
Venezuela
Yemen
Yugoslavi;i

11.37
39.79
0.18
0.27
0.04
0.33

TOTAL

100.00

3.25
0.45
0.17
0.12
0.06

0.04
0.05
0.63
1.40
O:SO
0.04
0.50
0.70
0.05
0.04
0.20
0.29
0.95
0.08
1.98
0.12
0.27
0.91
0.84

with the Chairman of the Committee on Contributions, a portion of the contributions of Member
States for the financial year 1950 in currencies
other than United States dollars.
231st plenary meeting,
20 October 1949.

344 (IV). Appointments to fill vacancies in the membership of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
The General Assembly
1. Appoints the following persons as members
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions :
Mr. William 0. Hall;
Mr. Olyntho P. Machado;
Sir William Matthews;
2. Declares these members to be appointed for
a three-year term to commence on I January 1950.
255th plenary meeting,
24 November 1949.

345 (IV). Appointments to fill vacancies in the membership of the Committee on Contributions
The General Assembly
1. Appoints the following persons as members
of the Committee on Contributions:
Mr. Kan Lee;
Mr. Frank Pace;
Mr. Mitchell W. Sharp;
2. Declares these members to be appointed for
a three-year term to commence on 1 January
1950.
255th p!rnary m('efinq,
24 November 1949.

1.12

6.34

346 (IV). Appointment to fill a vacancy in the membership of the
Board of Auditors

2. That, notwithstanding the provisions of rule
149 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, the scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations shall
be reviewer! hy the Committee on Contributions
in 1950 and a report s1~li111i1terl for the consideration of the General Assembly at its next regular
session;

The General Assembly
Appoints the Auditor-Ceneral of Canada as a
member of the Board uf Auditors for a three-year
term to commence on 1 July 19:i0.
:'5.,.ih f"o111ry n:!',,1:11_,1.

3. That Israel, which was admitted to membership in the United Nations on 11 May 1949, shall
contribute for the first year of membership seventwelfths of its percentage assessment for 1950
applied to the budget for 1949;

2-1 N ovemher 10./0.

34,7 (IV). Audit procedurc5 of the
Unite.I Nations and the specializ,•d
l!gencies

4. That Switzerland shall contribute 1.65 per
cent of the expenses of the International Court of
Justice for the year 1950, this assessment having
been established after consultation with the Swi~,
Government, in accordance with the terms nf
General Assembly resolution 91 (I) 9 of 11
December 1946;

The General Asscmbl5•,

Having taken no/c uf tlit" set oi co111111tm pri11
ciples to govern audit prncedures of the l',1itcd
Nations and the specialized agencies as agreed by
the Administrative Committee on Cu-Prd1'.1a1i"ll,
and of the recommcn<lation 10 of the Cu-ord;•i:1t1uu
Committee of the Economic and Social C,rnnril in
this respect,

5. That, notwithstanding the terms of regulation 20 of the Provisional Financial Regulations,
the Secretary-General shall be empowered to
accept, at his discretion, and after consultation

10
See Official Records of the Economic and Social
Council, Fourth Year, Ninth Session, Resolution;.

0

See Resolutions adopted by the General Assembls during the second part of its first session, page 182.

page 71.

47

1. Declares that the audit principles contained
in annex A to the present resolution shall constitute the instructions of the General Assembly relative to the conduct of the audit of the United
Nations accounts as referred to in paragraph (f)
of provisional financial regulation 34, 11 and that
resolution 74 (I) 12 adopted by the General Assembly on ? December 1946 shall be considered
as amended accordingly ;

3. Subject to the provisions o{ ·,e Provisional
Financial Regulations, the Board of Auditors shall
be the sole judge as to the a·cceptance in whole or
in part of certifications by the Secretariat and may
proceed to such detailed examination and verification
as it chooses of all financial records including those
relating to supplies and equipment.
4. The Board of Auditors may affirm by test the
reliability of the internal audit and may make such
reports with respect thereto as the Board may deem
necessary, to the General Assembly or to the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetarv
Questions, or to the Secretary-General.
5. The several members of the Board and staff
working under its direction shall subscribe to such
oath as may be approved by the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions. Thereupon the members of the Board and its staff shall
have free access at all convenient times to all books
of account and records which are, in the opinion of

the Board, necessary for the performance of the
audit. Information classified as confidential in the
records of the Secretariat and which is required by
the Board for the purposes of the audit shall be
made available on application to the Assistant Secretary-General for Administrative and Financial Services. In the event that the Board is of the opinion
that a duty rests on it to draw to the attention of the
General Assembly any matter respecting which all
or part of the documentation is classified as confidential, direct quotation should be avoided.
6. The Board of Auditors, in addition to certifying the accounts, may make such observations as
it may deem necessary with respect to the efficiency
of the financial procedures, the accounting system,
the internal financial controls and, in general, the
financial consequences of administrative practices.
7. In no case, however, shall the Board of Auditors include criticism in its audit report without first
affording the Secretariat an opporiunity of explanation to the Board on the matter under observation.
Audit objections to any items arising during the
examination of the accounts shall be immediately
communicated to the Assistant Secretary-General
for Administrative and Financial Services.
8. The Board of Auditors shall prepare a report
on the accounts certified in which it should mention:
(a) The extent and character of its examination
of any important changes therein;
( b) Matters affecting the completeness or accuracy of the accounts, such as:
( i) Information necessary to the correct interpretation of the account,
(ii) Any amounts which ought to have been received
but which have not been brought to account,
(iii) Expenditures not properly substantiated;
(c) Other matters which should be brought to
the notice of the Genera 1 Assembly such as:
(i) Cases of fraud or presumptive fraud,
(ii) Wasteful or improper expenditure of United
Nations money or other assets (notwithstanding that the accounting for the transactions
may be correct),
(iii) Expenditure likely to commit the United Nations to further outlay on a large scale,
(iv) Any defect in the general system or detailed
regulations governing the control of receipts
and expenditure, or of supplies and equipment,
(v) Expenditure not in accordance with the intention of the General Ascembly, after making
allowance for duly authorized transfers within
the budget,
(vi) Expenditure in excess of appropriations as
amended by duly authorized transfers within
the budget,
(vii) Expenditure not in conformity with the authority which governs it;
(d) The accuracy or otherwise of the supplies and
equipment records as determined by stock-taking
and examination of the records ;
In addition, the reports may contain reference to:
( e) Transactions accounted for in a previous
year, concerning which further information has
been obtained. or transactions in a later year con-cerning which it seems desirable that the General
Assembly should have early knowledge.
9. The Board of Auditors, or such of their officers as they may designate, shall certify the financial
statements in the following terms:
"The financial statements of the United Nations
for the financial year ended 31 December . . . have
been examined in accordance with our directions.

11
See Official Records of the second session, of the
General Assembly, Resolutions, page 74.

12 See Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
during the second part of its first session, page 135.

2. Approves the principles regarding a joint
panel of au<litors for the United Nations and the
specialized agencies as set out in annex B to the
present resolution;
3. Requests the Secretary-General and the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination to conclude arrangements for the establishment of the
joint panel of auditors under the provisions of
annex B to the present resolution;
4. Resolves that members of the Board of
Auditors of the United Nations be nominated
to the joint panel of auditors;

5. Expresses the hope that such of the specialized agencies as have not yet agreed to the
common system of external audit will do so in the
near future.
255th plenary meeting,
24 November 1949.

Annex A
Principles to govern the audit procedures of
the United Nations
1. The principles set out in regulation 34 of the
Provisional Financial Regulations are reaffirmed. A
representative of the Board of Auditors shall be
present when the Board's report is being considered
by the General Assembly.
2. The Board of Auditors shall perform an audit
of the accounts of the United Nations, including all
trust and special accounts, as it may deem necessary
in order to certify:
(a) That the financial statements are in accord
with the books and records of the Organization;
( b) That the financial transactions reflected in
the statements have been in accordance with the
rules and regulations, the budgetary provisions and
other applicable directives;
( c) That the securities and monies on deposit and
on hand have been verified by certificate received
direct from the Organization's depositaries or by
actual count.

48

We have obtained all the information and explanations that we have required, and we certify, as a
result of the audit, that, in our opinion, the financial
statements are correct",
adding, should it be necessary:
"subject to the observations in our report".
10. The Board of Auditors shall have no power
to disallow items in the accounts, but shall draw
to the attention of the Secretary-General for appropriate action any transaction concerning which it
entertains doubt as to legality or propriety.

Annex B
Joint system of external audit
1. In principle there should be a panel of external
auditors of the United Nations and the specialized
aiencies composed of persons having the rank: of
Auditor-General (or its equivalent in the vanous
Member States).
2. Such a panel should consist of the auditors
appointed by the United Nations and the specialized
agencies, c)i.osen by common consent for a period of
three years in such a manner that the members of
the panel would not exceed six in number, and
bearing in mind the location of the specialized
agencies, the ability of the governmental audit staffs
to undertake the total audit load within the appropriate time-limits, and the desirability of securing
continuity of audit.
3. Each organization should select one or more
members of the panel to perform its audit. Payments of salaries, fees or honoraria should be a
matter for settlement between the parties directly
concerned.
4. Each auditor ( or the auditors) performing an
audit should sign his ( or their) own report or
reports.
5. Members of the panel selected to perform the
audit should be requested to take appropriate steps,
in particular by meeting together annually, to coordinate their audits and to exchange information
on methods and findings. The panel of auditors
should be invited to submit from time to time any
observations or recommendations which it might
wish to make on the co-ordination and standardization of the accounts and financial procedures of
the United Nations a,id the specialized agencies.
6. Cost of the annual meetings of active members
of the panel should be borne by the participating
organizations.

Alternates:
Miss Carol C. Laise;
Dr. A. Nass;
Mr. P. Ordonneau;
2. Declares these members and alternate members to be appointed for a three-year term to
commence on 1 January 1950.
255th plenary meeting,
24 November 1949.

349 (IV). Appointment to fill a va•
cancy in the membership of the
Investments Committee
The General Assembly
Confirms the appointment by the SecretaryGeneral of Mr. Ivar Rooth as a member of the
Investments Committee for a three-year term
to commence on 1 January 1950.
255th plenary meeting,
24 November 1949.

350 (IV). Headquarters of the United
Nations
The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the Secretary-General's report13 on the Headquarters of the United Nations;
2. Decides that the Headquarters Advisory
Committee, established by General Assembly
resolution 182 (II) 14 of 20 November 1947, shall
be continued with the existing membership ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to
the fifth regular session of the General Assembly
on the progress of the construction of the Headquarters;
4. Draws the Secretary-General's attention to
the observations and suggestions made by the
representatives of Member States during the discussion of the Secretary-General's report on the
United Nations Headquarters at the fourth regular session of the General Assembly.
255th plenary meeting,
24 November 1949.

351 (IV). Establishment of a United
Nations Administrative Tribunal

348 (IV). Appointments to fill vacan•
cies in the membership of the
United Nations Staff Pension Com•
mittee

A
The General Assembly
Resolves that the fol,lowing Statute shall be
adopted for the United 'Nations Administrative
Tribunal to come into force on 1 January 1950:

The General Assembly
1. Appoints the persons named below as members and alternate members of the United Nations
Staff Pension Committee, in accordance with the
provisions of article 20 of the Regulations for the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund:
Members:
Mr. R. T. Cristobal;
Mr. E. de Holte Castello;
Mr. N. I. Klimov;
11 See Official Records of the fovrlh ses.rion of the Cmn-al Assembly, Annex to the Fifth Committee, document
A/1009.

STATUTE OF THE UNITED NATIONS ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
ARTICLE 1

A Tribunal is established by the present Statute
to be known as the United Nations Administrative
Tribunal.
ARTICLE 2
1. The Tribunal shall be competent to hear
and pass j udgment upon applications alleging
. ,-,.non:-Q~ce
of contracts of employment of
; -,,-/J.v~- ,-U-H See Official R,cords of tlu seco,wJ 6'Ssion of flu
General Assembly, Resolutions, page 1S1.

49
