S/2021/470

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 May 2021
Original: English

Situation in the Sudan and the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2524
(2020), in which the Council decided to establish the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) and requested that the
Secretary-General report to the Council every 90 days on the implementation of the
UNITAMS mandate. The report covers the situation in the Sudan related to political,
security, humanitarian and socioeconomic developments and to the protection of
civilians, human rights and the rule of law, as well as climate security and
development cooperation, during the period from 16 February 2021 to 1 May 2021.
It provides an update on the establishment of the Mission, and outlines benchmarks
and associated indicators designed to measure progress in the delivery of the nine
strategic priorities across the four pillars of the UNITAMS mandate, as per resolution
2524 (2020).

II. Significant developments
A.

Political situation
2.
Despite persistent challenges, the transitional Government of the Sudan
continued to advance towards broadening democratic governance and furthering
peacemaking efforts. However, the reporting period was characterized by limited
progress in advancing key elements of the political transition, with the establishment
of the Transitional Legislative Council still pending. While the Prime Minister had
announced that State governors (walis) would be appointed by 15 February, followed
by the formation of the Transitional Legislative Council no later than 25 February,
these appointments did not occur in accordance with the envisioned timeline. The
only exception was the reported appointment of Minni Minawi, head of the Sudan
Liberation Army-Minni Minawi faction (SLA/MM), as Governor of the Darfur region
per a decree of 29 April. This appointment is in keeping with the provisions of the
Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan, which granted the authority for this
appointment to the Darfuri armed groups that participated in the peace process, with
the deputy to be appointed by the transitional Government.

21-06085 (E)

190521

*2106085*

S/2021/470

3.
On 28 February, the expanded transitional Government (referred to as the “peace
Government”), which now includes representatives of the armed group signatories to
the Juba Peace Agreement, announced its programme of work, forming the basis of
its strategic vision. Notably, the programme of work identifies the following five
priority areas:
(a) Socioeconomic issues, including the empowerment of women and the
improvement of basic service delivery;
(b) Peace, which includes the implementation of the Agr eement and the
completion of the peace process;
(c) Security, including the drafting of a national security strategy, the
protection of civilians, disarmament, demobilization and the reintegration and reform
of security agencies;
(d) International relations, including the improvement of regional and
international relations;
(e) Democratic transition, including the establishment of transitional bodies
and commissions, transitional justice, the combating of corruption, preparations for
elections, a national census and the drafting of a constitution.
4.
On 4 March, Lieutenant General Abdel Fattah al-Burhan, Chairperson of the
Sovereign Council, issued a constitutional decree outlining the broad parameters of a
federal system of government in the Sudan. The decision remains in line with the
Constitutional Document, which calls for the establishment of a federal Government
in the Sudan, and with elements of the Juba Peace Agreement. However, the decree
postponed the formal application of the federal system unti l the conference on the
system of governance is convened in due course. The Ministry of Federal Governance
commenced technical preparations for the holding of the governance conference,
which includes three steps: a technical workshop, followed by consulta tions at the
State level, and the convening of the governance conference itself at the national
level. The technical workshop was held from 27 to 29 April. The governance
conference, once it is formally convened, is expected to address a number of key
issues, including the demarcation of borders and administrative divisions of the
various regions, as well as aspects related to governance, such as the associated
structures, powers and competencies of the various regions. To increase inclusivity
and legitimacy, the process envisages broad civic participation, including through the
establishment of a constitutional commission, with chapters at the regional level.
5.
Efforts to engage with the non-signatories to the Juba Peace Agreement
continued during the reporting period. On 28 March, Lieutenant General al-Burhan
and the commander of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement – North (SPLM/N)
Abdelaziz al-Hilu faction signed a declaration of principles affirming the parties’
commitment to engage in negotiations in Juba. The negotiations are scheduled to start
towards the end of May under the auspices of the Government of South Sudan. Among
other elements, the declaration affirms the following: the recognition of the diversity
of the Sudan; the right to a federal or decentralized system of governance; the need
to establish a civil, democratic, federal State that guarantees freedom of religion and
belief; and the need to ensure that personal status laws do not conflict with basic
rights. It also calls for an equitable distribution of resources and wealth, the
ratification of human rights conventions and the integration and unification of armed
forces. However, the declaration recognizes that a permanent ceasefire will follow
only after broader security arrangements are agreed upon as part of a comprehensive
settlement.

2/28

21-06085

S/2021/470

6.
The signing of this declaration of principles was welcomed by Prime Minister
Abdalla Hamdok, the National Ummah Party, the Sudanese Congress Party and armed
group signatories to the Juba Peace Agreement, namely SLA/MM, the Justice and
Equality Movement and the SPLM/N Malik Agar faction. However, the Ansar
movement, the religious movement closely affiliated with the National Ummah Party,
criticized the parties’ commitment to the separation of religion an d State and
emphasized that this concept could not be superimposed by one party and should be
determined at the constitutional conference.
7.
On 18 March, Abdul Wahid al-Nur, leader of the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul
Wahid faction (SLA/AW), met with the President of South Sudan, Salva Kiir, in Juba
to discuss their respective visions for achieving a comprehensive peace in the Sudan.
Abdul Wahid Al-Nur proposed a road map for a Sudanese-Sudanese dialogue not
related to the Juba Peace Agreement. On 29 April, the SLA/AW issued a statement
denying engagement with the South Sudanese mediation team as part of the Agreement.
8.
Meanwhile, there was limited progress in the implementation of the Juba Peace
Agreement. On 11 March, the Sovereign Council established the National High
Committee for Monitoring the Implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement, led by
the Deputy Chairperson of the Sovereign Council, General Mohamed Hamdan
Dagalo, also known as Hemedti, and four out of the five subcommittees
corresponding to the five tracks of the Agreement. The remaining committee
(focusing on the eastern track) will be established following the resolution of
outstanding political issues, including matters related to representation and
reconciliation. In this regard, consultations between the transitional authorities and
relevant eastern stakeholders continued to proceed.
9.
On 25 March, the Sudan Liberation Movement faction led by Mostafa Tambour
became the latest signatory to the Juba Peace Agreement. Tambour signed the
Agreement in Juba in the presence of General Mohamed Hamdan Dagalo, Sovereign
Council member El Hadi Idris, the Minister of Youth and Sports of the Sudan and the
South Sudanese mediation team.
10. The transitional Government commenced the process for the identif ication of
assembly areas for the armed groups, although the ceasefire monitoring mechanisms
in Darfur as envisaged in the Juba Peace Agreement have not yet been established.
Following the escalation of intercommunal violence in El Geneina, West Darfur, in
early April, the Security and Defence Council of the Sudan announced that it would
accelerate plans to form the joint protection force for Darfur. It is expected that the
size of this force, which will have a substantial police component, will be expanded
from 12,000 to 20,000 personnel.
11. The South Sudanese mediation team visited Khartoum during the reporting
period to discuss with Sudanese parties to the Juba Peace Agreement and the United
Nations the steps needed to accelerate the implementation of th e Juba agreements.
Discussions included efforts to complete the formation of the Transitional Legislative
Council, government institutions, the appointment of walis, the status of the eastern
track and engagement with non-signatories. UNITAMS expressed its readiness to
support the upcoming rounds of negotiations through the provision of good offices,
technical assistance and logistical support. As one of the guarantors of the Agreement,
South Sudan issued a letter on 13 April requesting UNITAMS, participati ng Member
States and international organizations to nominate their representatives to serve on
the monitoring and evaluation mechanism of the Agreement, which was to hold its
first meeting after Ramadan.
12. On 30 March, the technical committee of the Security and Defence Council
called for the rapid implementation of security arrangements provided for under the

21-06085

3/28

S/2021/470

Juba Peace Agreement and the removal of armed elements from the capital and major
cities to reduce the potential for armed conflict. This call was made in response to
growing concerns over the presence of multiple armed groups in the capital, despite
being signatories to the Agreement. There was a well-founded fear that, unless
addressed, the proximity of troops and underlying tensions might lead to violent
confrontations and to the further militarization of the urban centre. Moreover, their
continuing presence would be in contrast to the expressed objectives of the revolution,
which underscored the importance of strengthened civilian rule. This follo wed an
announcement by Lieutenant General al-Burhan on 15 March, in which he called on
SLA/MM forces to vacate the premises of the Sudan Olympic Committee, which they
had reportedly entered on 8 March.
13. On 4 April, SLA/MM issued a statement criticizing the lack of progress in the
implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement six months after its signature, noting
delays in completing the transitional governance structures and appointing the walis,
and “stagnation” in the implementation of the security arran gements. The statement
added that the December revolution was “at a crossroads”.
14. Women continued to advocate for their rights. On 8 April, women protesters
marched to the Ministries of Justice and Interior and to the Office of the Attorney
General to present a petition calling for the rights of women to be guaranteed at all
levels of governance and in legislation. Protesters demanded the adoption of
international treaties and conventions, including the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the Protocol to the African Charter
on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa (Maputo Protocol),
aimed at ending discrimination against women, and called for political rights,
including by removing obstacles to the political participation of women, notably in
the peace process, and amending the electoral law to facilitate the participation of
women as voters and candidates. They also called for an end to gender-based
discrimination in the workplace and criminal justice reform, emphasizing the
criticality of repealing laws that restrict the rights and freedoms of women, including
freedom of movement, the right to adopt and equal inheritance rights, and that permit
forced or early marriages. Protesters also called for the criminalization of domestic
violence, for the safety and security of women and girls in the public and private
spheres and for the reform of law enforcement and the judiciary, including the
formation of prosecution offices and courts specialized in gender-based violence.
Some demonstrators filed complaints after reportedly being assaulted at the protest.
Notably, on 27 April, the Council of Ministers approved the Maputo Protocol, and
approved the ratification of the Convention on the Elimination o f All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, with reservations to articles 2, 16 and 29 (1).
Women’s groups have been vocal in their criticism of these reservations, as they relate
to the core provisions of the Convention, notably those designed to elimina te
discrimination and provide women with access to justice.
International relations
15. Throughout the reporting period, tensions escalated over the eastern border in
the Fashaqah area between the Sudan and Ethiopia, resulting in sporadic clashes. On
28 February, the Sudanese Armed Forces clashed with Ethiopian armed groups in the
Ibra and Taldi areas of Fashaqah, Gedaref state. On 3 and 7 March, similar clashes
occurred in the Barakat area of Fashaqah, and thereafter on 29 March close to t he
Gedaref-Sennar border.
16. On 18 February, Ethiopia issued a statement criticizing the Sudan. Two days
later, the Sudan responded by criticizing the Ethiopian statement and reiterating its
position that the border was demarcated and internationally reco gnized, and that the

4/28

21-06085

S/2021/470

Sudan was extending its sovereignty over its land in accordance with international
norms. Ethiopia reiterated its readiness to resolve the border dispute using existing
conflict resolution mechanisms once the status quo was maintained as per the 1972
exchange of notes between the two countries. The Sudan continued to stress the need
for Ethiopian recognition of the demarcated border and the sovereignty of the Sudan
over the area as a basis for further discussions.
17. Tensions also persisted over the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam. On
24 February, the Minister of Irrigation and Water Resources of the Sudan reportedly
called for the “broadening” of trilateral negotiations on the dam between the Sudan,
Ethiopia and Egypt, notably to include the involvement of mediators from the United
Nations, the United States of America and the European Union, in addition to the
African Union. Trilateral negotiations were held from 4 to 6 April in Kinshasa, but no
agreement was reached. On 13 April, the Prime Minister of the Sudan, Abdalla
Hamdok, proposed the activation of a dispute resolution mechanism provided for in
the 2015 Declaration of Principles on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, which
would convene at the Heads of State and Government level. On 21 April, the Prime
Minister of Ethiopia, Abiy Ahmed, responded by proposing that the negotiations
continue under the auspices of the African Union and that a meeting of the African
Union Bureau of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government be requ ested.
18. The Peace and Security Council of the African Union conducted a three -day
field mission to the Sudan from 29 March to 1 April to assess developments in support
of the political transition. They were briefed by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Sudan and discussed further cooperation between the
African Union and UNITAMS.

B.

Security situation
19. Intercommunal clashes continued to be a major source of insecurity in the
Sudan, especially in the Darfur region, while criminality affected the local population
and humanitarian actors. During the period under review, no incidents of armed
clashes between SLA/AW and Sudanese security forces were recorded in the Darfur
region.
20. Intercommunal clashes took place in West, South and North Darfur, as well as
in Southern Kordofan. In Darfur, these incidents resulted in 170 fatalities and over
230 injuries. In South Darfur, Fallata and Masalit tribesmen clashed in Dikka on
3 March, resulting in seven Masalit tribesmen being killed and 35 people from both
communities being injured. One local staff member of an international non -government
organization was also injured. Clashes between Tama and Fur tribesmen in Saraf
Umrah, North Darfur, over land ownership left 10 people dead and 1 5 injured on
3 March. On 21 March, violent clashes erupted between Nuba and Arab Baggara
tribesmen in Seraf Eldyi, Southern Kordofan, when a group of Arab Baggara
tribesmen looted livestock. The Arab tribesmen returned with reinforcements,
resulting in a heavy exchange of fire and several casualties.
21. The most significant intercommunal clashes started on 3 April in El Geneina,
West Darfur, when unknown assailants shot at a group of Masalit tribesmen, killing
two and injuring one. The incident triggered the mobilization of armed fighters by
Masalit and Rizeigat Arab tribes and within four days violence peaked. A total of 144
people were killed and 232 injured. Heavy weapons were reportedly used. Homes,
private property and civilian infrastructure were destroyed or damaged in the clashes,
including a hospital building and a United Nations compound, both hit by a rocket propelled grenade. The Abu Zar camp for internally displaced persons in downtown
El Geneina was also partially burned. A power plant – the only source of electricity

21-06085

5/28

S/2021/470

in El Geneina – was damaged, resulting in a critical disruption to most of the town’s
communication facilities, in addition to electricity and water supplies in some areas.
22. In a press conference on 8 April, the wali of West Darfur, Mohamed al-Douma,
accused heavily armed militias from neighbouring countries, with alleged ties to the
former regime, of collaborating with local militias and instigating the fighting aimed
at fomenting instability. Tensions between the communities in West Darfur are linked
to land, water resources, pasture rights and years of sectarian manipulation along
tribal lines by the former regime. The continued displacement of the Masalit and other
internally displaced persons points to a lack of accountabilit y and entrenched
impunity as major factors contributing to Darfur’s cycles of violence. This was the
second such incident of violence in El Geneina this year between these groups, and
the third since January 2020.
23. The clashes had a significant impact on the United Nations and the wider
humanitarian community. As a result of the violence, 55 United Nations international
and national personnel, as well as 24 international and national personnel from six
international non-governmental organizations and 13 dependants of United Nations
national personnel, were relocated from El Geneina to Zalingei, Central Darfur.
Humanitarian operations were suspended until 15 April and humanitarian flights
resumed on 21 April. At the request of the transitional Government, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) conducted medical
evacuation of 93 persons to Khartoum for treatment.
24. During the period under review, there were several incidents of criminality
targeting the United Nations, including robbery, intrusion into United Nations
facilities, stone-throwing, looting and theft of United Nations property. Several
former UNAMID team sites were looted or vandalized.

C.

Socioeconomic situation
25. The continuing economic challenges noted in previous reports notwithstanding,
the transitional Government has forged ahead on ambitious economic reform measures.
The international community has welcomed the Government’s commitments and
achievements. However, economic hardship remains tangible to the broader population,
even as social mitigation measures are gradually being put into place.
26. On 21 February, the transitional Government unified the exchange rate,
signalling its strong commitment to the reform path agreed under the staff-monitored
programme of the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Since the exchange rate
unification, the currency has largely remained stable and, as such, has constituted a
trust-building measure with investors and international partners. Another key step is
the Central Bank Act being reviewed by the Board of the Central Bank of Sudan ahead
of its submission to the Ministry of Justice.
27. On 26 March, the World Bank announced that the Sudan had cleared
$1.15 billion in arrears owed to the International Development Association through a
bridge loan from the United States, which the World Bank repaid fully on the same
day. The clearance of arrears enabled the full re-engagement of the Sudan with the
World Bank Group, thus opening access to $2 billion in grant financing from the
International Development Association over the next two years, with the immediate
provision of $215 million in much-needed budgetary support to alleviate the country’s
fiscal burden. On 23 April, the Board of Directors of the Afric an Development Bank
Group approved a proposal for the clearance of $413 million in arrears on loans owed
by the Sudan. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland agreed to
provide a bridge loan for the arrears clearance and Sweden provided gr ant financing
of $4.2 million to meet the burden share of the Sudan for the operation. The

6/28

21-06085

S/2021/470

transitional Government also undertook preparations for the 17 May Paris investors
conference, to be hosted by the President of France, Emmanuel Macron, including
through outreach to the business community, the identification of key projects in
priority sectors and coordination with the host.
28. On 23 and 26 March, the Executive Boards of the World Bank and IMF
discussed the preliminary document under the enhanced He avily Indebted Poor
Countries Initiative. The Boards commended the transitional Government’s sustained
commitment to economic and institutional reforms under challenging circumstances.
They also agreed that the Sudan could be eligible for assistance under the Initiative
and would qualify for debt relief subject to meeting the requirements established
under the Initiative framework. On 17 February, the Sudan restarted the accession
process to the World Trade Organization – a step welcomed by that organization on
17 March, affirming its full support for the reform programme.
29. Over the reporting period, the United Nations and partners launched several
development initiatives. The United Nations Industrial Development Organization
provided information technology equipment to the vocational training centres in
Khartoum State, with support from the European Union; the World Food Programme
launched a school feeding programme to cover the entire country and help achieve
stability in education; and the World Bank approved $420 million in additional
financing for the Sudan Family Support Programme aimed at mitigating the social
impact of the ongoing economic reforms ($210 million in pre-arrears clearance grants
and $210 million from donor resources), bringing the total programme funding to
$820 million. In addition, the United States offered 300,000 tons of wheat through
2021 to address shortages.
30. Declarations of investments in the Sudan during the reporting period included a
$400 million investment in agricultural projects by Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates. Trade and investment cooperation was discussed with Egypt, Japan, Saudi
Arabia, South Sudan and the United States (including the entry of that country’s banks
into the Sudan and creation of a United States-Sudan Business Council).
31. At the same time, socioeconomic conditions continued to deteriorate. Inflation
remained high, disproportionately affecting the poorest, with annual inflation
increasing to 341.8 per cent in March from 330.8 per cent in February. The Sudanese
Doctors Association highlighted an increase in the prices of imported medicines,
ranging between 464 and 691 per cent, fuelling a medicine shortage. Living
conditions remained critical, as inflation continued to be accompanied by fuel and
food shortages. On 23 March, the Bakeries Union in Khartoum State reported that
40 per cent of bakeries had closed due to a lack of subsidized flour despite the United
States flour grant. On 2 April, the transitional Government increased the price of
petrol to 150 Sudanese pounds from 122 pounds per liter in the light of rising
international prices and in an effort to bring down inflation. In response to the dire
socioeconomic conditions, strike actions and protests took place on numerous
occasions.
32. In a step towards initiating a reduction in the military’s involvement in the
economy, on 17 March one of the largest military companies, Defense Industrial
Systems, agreed to a gradual handover of civilian operations to the Ministry of
Finance and Economic Planning, with the goal of eventually converting them into a
publicly held company.

21-06085

7/28

S/2021/470

D.

Situation with regard to the protection of civilians, human rights
and the rule of law
33. In the aftermath of the outbreak of fighting between Masalit and Rizeigat Arab
communities in El Geneina in early April, leaders of Darfur armed movements, local
officials and Juba Peace Agreement signatories expressed concern over the
transitional Government’s inaction with regard to restoring order and immediately
deploying protection forces in Darfur, as stipulated in the National Plan for the
Protection of Civilians. During the first two days of clashes, there was no intervention
by Government forces, which were in El Geneina at the time of the violence.
34. However, this latest outbreak of violence has led the transitional Government to
take eight critical security enhancement measures, some derived from the Juba Peace
Agreement. These include ordering the establishment and deployment of the joint
security forces; operationalizing transitional security arr angements and related
ceasefire committees; preventing manifestations of armed presence in cities,
including through weapons and ammunition management; and addressing the urgent
humanitarian situation in West Darfur. The transitional Government and the arm ed
movement signatories are responsible for implementing these measures.
35. The transitional Government’s efforts to advance institutional and legal reforms
continued, albeit at a moderate pace. On 17 March, the Sudan became the fiftieth
country to ratify the Protocol to the International Labour Organization Forced Labour
Convention, 1930 (No. 29), and also ratified the Freedom of Association and
Protection of the Right to Organise Convention, 1948 (No. 87). Laws providing the
legal basis for the Transitional Justice Commission, the Peace Commission and the
Anti-Corruption Commission were adopted on 24 April, while the adoption of the law
on the Human Rights Commission remains pending. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) supported the transitional Government in hosting consultations
on the draft laws on the establishment of the Human Rights Commission and the
Transitional Justice Commission. Consultations are particularly imp ortant at a time
when the Transitional Legislative Council has not yet been formed. Calls for
accountability for serious conflict-related crimes continued, including demands for
the handover of members of the former regime, including the former President, to the
International Criminal Court for crimes committed in Darfur.
36. On 28 March, the Minister of Interior replaced the Director of the Khartoum
State Police, following public criticism over his alleged remarks calling for the Public
Order Law to be reinstated to combat crime. His comments came in the aftermath of
the killing of a 14-year-old girl and following reports of incidents of women being hit
in the streets with whips by unknown assailants. The transitional Government had
repealed the Public Order Law, which disproportionately affected women, in
November 2019. The Public Prosecutor stated that he would take action against
anyone trying to implement the repealed law.

E.

Humanitarian situation
37. The fragile economic situation, intercommunal conflict in Darfur and Ethiopian
refugees in the east continued to drive humanitarian needs during the reporting period.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic also remained a challenge, affecting
the lives and livelihoods of vulnerable Sudanese and refugees. High food prices
persisted amidst deepening inflation, causing increasing food insecurity. In February,
despite a good harvest season, the cost of a local food basket reached 149 Sudanese
pounds, an increase of 21 per cent compared with the month b efore and 206 per cent

8/28

21-06085

S/2021/470

higher than during the same period in 2020. The recent devaluation of the currency
will likely increase food prices further in the near term.
38. Close to 237,000 people have fled their homes so far in 2021 due to
intercommunal conflict reported in West, North and South Darfur, according to the
International Organization for Migration. This is a significant increase compared with
2020, when about 58,000 people were newly displaced in Darfur. In West Darfur,
humanitarian actors assisted those affected by the conflict between Masalit and Arab
communities in mid-January, which had led to the displacement of 109,000 people in
and around El Geneina.
39. Renewed fighting in El Geneina in early April caused an estimated 65,000 new
displacements. Some humanitarian partners temporarily paused operations due to the
security situation but resumed them as of 15 April. By 29 April, about 104,000 people
had received emergency food assistance, about 65,000 had accessed health -care
services and 2,000 had received non-food items in El Geneina town, while 9,500
internally displaced persons had received non-food items outside El Geneina.
Congestion at gathering points for internally displaced persons, as well as the need to
find solutions for the voluntary relocation or return of displaced persons, remained
priorities to be addressed.
40. South Darfur has witnessed increasing intercommunal conflict since the
beginning of the year. The latest conflict-induced displacement occurred on 30 March,
when the Government’s Humanitarian Aid Commission reported that about 2,800
people had fled from Graida, Sharg al-Jabal and Tullus localities. This followed
earlier displacement caused by intercommunal conflict in East Jebel Marra in January
and February. Food has been delivered to 13,000 internally displaced persons and
13,000 residents and non-food items have been distributed to 1,360 people; water,
sanitation and hygiene and nutrition services have also been provided.
41. The influx of refugees from the Tigray region of Ethiopia into eastern Sudan
continued, though at a slower rate. Between February and April, 2,599 Ethiopian
refugees fled from Tigray to the Sudan. Since January, 20,609 Ethiopian refugees
have been relocated to Tunaydibah settlement, after the camp of Umm Rakubah,
which is currently hosting 20,573 people, reached its full capacity. Furthermore, since
15 February, 6,699 people have arrived in Blue Nile State from the Benishangul Gumuz region of Ethiopia due to intercommunal violence and have sought refu ge in
six locations – Yabacher, Menza, Manchaleng, Dem Saad, Magano and Shamfoz –
increasing the total number of Ethiopian arrivals in Blue Nile State to 7,209 since
November 2020. Since mid-March, the influx has almost come to a halt. About 1,000
people have received food assistance and access to health and water. The United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees launched an inter-agency response plan for
2021 requesting $574 million to assist more than 1 million refugees in the Sudan.
42. There has been an increase in the number of COVID-19 cases since early March.
As at 1 May, 33,648 cases had been confirmed, with 2,365 associated deaths. The
World Health Organization and the United Nations Children’s Fund are supporting
the Ministry of Health with a three-month plan to respond to the pandemic. On
3 March, the Sudan received over 800,000 doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine through
the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility. A week later, on 10 March,
the Ministry of Health launched a COVID-19 vaccination programme with the aim of
covering 20 per cent of the country’s population by September 2021.

F.

Climate security
43. The Sudan remains highly vulnerable to the climate crisis and in many global
indices ranks among the most affected countries. Temperatures are projected to rise

21-06085

9/28

S/2021/470

above the global average and floods and droughts are expected to increase in
frequency and intensity in the coming years. In 2020, the worst floods in three decades
damaged or destroyed the homes of nearly 830,000 people and caused more than 120
deaths. Extreme climate patterns would have a major impact on the agricultural sector,
with potentially devastating consequences for the country’s livelihoods and food
security.
44. Peace and security in the Sudan are also likely to be affected negatively by the
effects of the climate crisis, as water scarcity and the loss of livelihoods can intensify
competition for natural resources and lead to increased displacement and migration,
both of which have been linked to insecurity in the country. UNITAMS is exploring
ways to analyse and address climate-related security risks and build the resilience of
the Sudanese States and communities to cope with, adapt to and recover from climate
stressors. The empowerment of women and youth, including with regard to natural
resource management and local conflict resolution, can strengthen critical coping
capacities as livelihood patterns shift due to climate change.

III. Update on the establishment of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
and Mission activities
45. UNITAMS has reached its initial operational capacity. The Special
Representative and section chiefs for all the substantive units are on the ground. In
addition, the Deputy Special Representative, who also serves as the Resident
Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator, Khardiata Lo N’Diaye, took up her duties
during the reporting period, in mid-March. Eleven individual police officers were
deployed and two experts from the Standing Police Capacity arrived as the advance
team for the Police Advisory Unit. Recruitment and onboarding of priority national
and international staff positions for 2021 continued. As at 1 May, 12 national staff
and 62 international staff were either onboard or en route to the Sudan. UNITAMS
continues to make every effort to achieve both geographical diversity and gender
balance in its first year of operation.
46. Useful assets from UNAMID, such as engineering materials, communications
equipment and vehicles, are being transferred to UNITAMS. The UNITAMS
headquarters in Khartoum is fully operational and will absorb the former UNAMID
Khartoum Liaison Office to better accommodate an increasing number of personnel.
Preparations for the deployment of UNITAMS staff to the regional and satellite
offices in El Fasher, Kassala, Kadugli, Zalingei and Nyala have concluded. Efforts
are under way for UNITAMS staff to co-locate with the United Nations country team
in Kauda, El Damazin and Port Sudan.
47. In his first mission outside of Khartoum, on 17 and 18 March, the Special
Representative travelled to Kassala and the Red Sea States of eastern Sudan. There,
he met with the Governors and other local authorities, tribal leaders, university
officials, civil society leaders, young entrepreneurs, women’s groups and other
stakeholders. Interlocutors conveyed frustrations about the deep marginalization of
the east over decades and highlighted the significant humanitarian and development
needs and challenges. They also stressed the need for capacity- building in relation to
civic engagement and political parties, as well as the importance of ensuring that
inclusive peace agreements deliver tangible benefits. They further highlighted
ongoing efforts led by local leaders to promote dialogue and reconciliation and
prevent tribal conflicts.

10/28

21-06085

S/2021/470

48. The Special Representative also travelled to Darfur from 28 to 30 March,
leading an integrated mission that included representatives from the United Nations
country team to learn about needs and challenges related to the protection of civilians,
the deployment of the government protection forces and the implementation of the
National Plan for the Protection of Civilians, and discuss how the United Nations
could provide support. Interlocutors included State authorities, State security
committees, State-level protection of civilian committees, tribal leaders, women’s
groups, youth representatives, civil society organizations and internally displaced
persons in four of the five Darfur States. They emphasized the need for security,
economic opportunities, accountability and justice for past atrocities, equal rights and
the importance of the political and economic participation of women.
49. On 25 and 26 March, the UNITAMS mine action component visited Ullu in Blue
Nile State, jointly with the Sudanese National Mine Action Centre, to assess explosive
ordnance contamination and establish a joint coordination structure. The teams met
with SPLM/N Malik Agar representatives on the ground and discussed possible
support from UNITAMS for establishing joint coordination efforts and promoting
confidence-building initiatives. In addition, the team identified the urgent tasks
related to the clearance of the two major roads connecting to Ullu and assessed the
types of assets required in preparation for the upcoming deployment of mine action
teams.
50. UNITAMS continued to develop its plans to support the Sudanese Po lice Force,
in line with the human rights due diligence policy. On 24 and 25 March, the Mission’s
Police Advisory Unit held a workshop with the Force to explore how the Unit’s
concept of operations could best support the Force. The workshop was attended by
over 20 senior police officers and covered issues regarding the Force’s responsibilities
in relation to the implementation of the National Plan for the Protection of Civilians.
The Minister of Interior has requested the deployment of additional United Nat ions
individual police officers to assist with capacity-building on strengthening the
protection of civilians.
51. In line with the electoral assistance mandate of UNITAMS, and pursuant to a
request made by the national authorities for support, an electora l needs assessment
mission visited the Sudan from 5 to 23 April. The mission was composed of
representatives from the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and
UNDP. Meetings were held with a wide range of interlocutors, including representativ es
from the national authorities, political parties, the media, civil society, women’s
groups and members of the donors community, as well as various United Nations
agencies. The needs assessment mission sought to review and discuss the overall
electoral environment in the Sudan, as well as the legal and institutional framework
that may govern an electoral process and the various needs of key stakeholders. The
Mission will present recommendations to Sudanese partners on the parameters and
modalities under which the United Nations might provide technical support to assist
a nationally owned and led process, and outline preparatory steps needed to enable
United Nations entities to better ready themselves to provide technical electoral
support, as it becomes necessary.

IV. Development cooperation
52. Important policy planning continued to pave the way for the sustainable
economic development of the Sudan. In addition to the workplan of the transitional
Government, the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning is developing a three year programme for stability and economic development, with the support of the
United Nations country team. The transitional Government is now finalizing the

21-06085

11/28

S/2021/470

poverty reduction strategy paper, which was started in 2017 but progress on which
later stalled due to the political developments in the country. The United Nations is
working to align its programming with the vision of the transitional Government as
set out in these planning documents, as well as to expand its work to support the
transition.
53. To this end, the Mission continued to work with the United Nations country
team to develop a programmatic framework which will ensure an integrated approach
to the work of the United Nations in support of the UNITAMS mandate. The
framework is aimed at bringing together existing and future programming to ensure
that Sudan-wide targeted activities are jointly developed, at both the national and
subnational levels. The Sudan Peacemaking, Peacebuilding and Stabilization
Programme is structured around four strategic pillars, in keeping w ith the UNITAMS
mandate: political transition; implementation of peace processes; peacebuilding, rule
of law and the protection of civilians; and development assistance coordination. On
12 April, the draft document was discussed with the transitional Gover nment’s
National Committee for Coordination with the United Nations, which includes
representatives of all concerned ministries. More detailed discussions will continue
in working groups. The United Nations is also undertaking consultations regarding
the governance structure for the peacebuilding and stabilization window of the Sudan
financing platform multi-partner trust fund, to ensure system-wide coherence between
the Mission and its integrated United Nations country team partners, as well as
additional lines of accountability for results at the highest level of the Mission’s
leadership.
54. To foster greater alignment on the planning and delivery of development and
peacebuilding support, work is also currently under way on the creation of the Sudan
National Development Forum, which will constitute a national mechanism for the
coordination of development assistance under the leadership of the transitional
Government, in line with the global principles of effective development cooperation.
The envisaged mechanism will comprise three levels. The highest level will be
chaired by the Prime Minister, together with partners from the international
community. The strategic level, at which meetings will be chaired by the Minister of
Finance and Economic Planning, will provide a forum for policy dialogue on the
effectiveness of development cooperation in the light of its overall support for the
implementation of the national development plan. A number of thematic or sectoral
working groups will be established, reflecting national priorities and providing a
forum to discuss sector and cross-sector planning and prioritization in the context of
strategic plans and development programmes. These working groups will also be
responsible for supporting the development and implementation of sector-wide
strategies.

V. Benchmarks
55. The Security Council requested, in its resolution 2524 (2020), that the
Secretary-General provide a report on the implementation of the UNITAMS mandate
and develop related clear and measurable benchmarks and indicators to track
UNITAMS progress against its strategic objectives, to enable early planning for a
future reconfiguration of the United Nations presence in the Sudan in keeping with
the evolving situation.
56. After consultations with the United Nations country team and the transitional
Government, a total of 20 benchmarks and 107 indicators (see annex I) have been
identified to measure progress in the delivery of the nine strategic prio rities across
the four pillars of the UNITAMS mandate.

12/28

21-06085

S/2021/470

57. UNITAMS will work with the United Nations country team and the transitional
Government to establish a baseline and targets for the benchmarks in the second
quarter of 2021 to begin tracking progress. In doing so, some of the indicators may
be adjusted as the Mission and the country team develop, in consultation with national
partners, a fully fledged integrated strategic framework. UNITAMS will work with
partners on joint fundraising, planning, resource allocation and tracking in
achievement of these benchmarks. In consultation with the United Nations country
team and the transitional Government, it will also seek to establish a robust
monitoring and data collection mechanism to track progress agains t the benchmarks,
drawing on existing data collection mechanisms.
58. The benchmarks reflect the initial foundation for the identification of system wide critical priorities that United Nations entities in the Sudan will work towards
collectively over the course of the transition, in keeping with their respective
mandates and areas of expertise. UNITAMS will seek to focus on its political and
advisory functions, while drawing upon the deep expertise of the more operationally
focused capacities of the United Nations country team in their respective areas. Such
an integrated, calibrated approach, utilizing the comparative advantages and strengths
of United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, will allow for more coordinated
action to ensure the achievement of the benchmarks in alignment with the priorities
of national counterparts.

VI. Observations
59. The Sudanese transition continues to face significant challenges, even as the
transitional Government endeavours to move forward with key reforms. The
establishment of the remaining transitional institutions is critical for advancing an
inclusive political transition and addressing long-standing challenges. I urge the
transitional authorities to expedite the formation of the Transitional Legislative
Council, with 40 per cent representation of women, and of the relevant committees
and commissions emanating from the Constitutional Document and the Juba Peace
Agreement.
60. The establishment of the National High Committee and the creation of four out
of five subcommittees to follow up on the implementation of the Juba Peace
Agreement are welcome steps. Despite these efforts, progress remains too slow. A
concerted and coordinated effort to accelerate the implementation of the Agreement
by the transitional Government and signatories, with the support of the international
community and the guarantors of the Agreement, is urgently needed. It is urged that
the transitional Government prioritize the implementation of the security
arrangements provided for in the Agreement, including the operationalization of
ceasefire mechanisms.
61. The recurring violence in Darfur and elsewhere is deeply concerning. The recent
events in El Geneina are a tragic reminder of the toll civilians continue to pay in the
absence of peace and stability. The transitional Government has to do more to
effectively protect its civilians, despite the immense challenges it faces in this
transitional period. In doing so, the needs and perspectives of women and girls, who
are often the most vulnerable during conflict require particular attention.
62. In this regard, the implementation of the National Plan for the Protection of
Civilians need to be accelerated, with the objective of creating a gender-responsive
and a protective environment for all Sudanese. The transitional authorities and
signatories to the Juba Peace Agreement must ensure that the joint protection forces
are deployed without delay. The recent announcement by the transitional authorities

21-06085

13/28

S/2021/470

of eight measures to enhance the protection of civilians is a positive step. The timely
implementation of these measures will also be critical.
63. The Declaration of Principles signed by the Chairperson of the Sovereign
Council, Lieutenant General Abdel Fattah al-Burhan, and the Commander of the
SPLM/N Abdelaziz al-Hilu faction, as well as their commitment to commence
negotiations, is a welcome development. These are important steps which can
contribute to a comprehensive and lasting peace in the Sudan. UNITAMS stands ready
to support all efforts in this regard.
64. Peace in the Sudan will not be complete until all conflicts come to an end. This
requires armed movements that remain outside the peace process to display leadership
and commit to negotiations that will lead to a fully inclusive and sustainable peace in
the Sudan. With the new prospects for peace created by the Juba Peace Agreement, it
is critical to address the consequences of these conflicts. This includes finding
sustainable solutions to the plight of more than 2.5 million internal ly displaced
persons, with the support of the United Nations and the international community. As
part of finding a lasting solution to the conflicts in the Sudan, the transitional
Government should strengthen reconciliation and transitional justice mechani sms.
65. As efforts continue to consolidate peace in the Sudan, ensuring the meaningful
participation and inclusion of women has to be priority. It is important that the
transitional Government continue to heed the demands of Sudanese women and fulfil
its commitments regarding representation under the Constitutional Document. I am
also concerned by the level of violence against women in the private and public
spheres. It serves as reminder that sufficient steps have yet to be taken to create a
protective environment that respects the full and equal rights of women. The
operationalization of a framework of cooperation with the United Nations to prevent
and respond to conflict-related sexual violence is critical, as is the establishment of
the Women and Gender Equality Commission as part of broader legal reform efforts.
66. The clearance of the country’s arrears held by the World Bank is an important
development towards unlocking much-needed financial support, bringing the Sudan
closer to a decision point for the Highly Indebted Poor Countries Initiative. In the
light of the very challenging circumstances, the transitional Government is to be
commended for its sustained commitment to implementing difficult economic and
institutional reforms. I welcome the support provided by the international community
and international financial institutions to help the Sudan clear its arrears and provide
social protection. It will remain essential that the transitional Government persevere
in its reform efforts as it heads to the Highly Indebted Poor Country Initiative decision
point, all the while prioritizing the provision of support to the population to address
its growing socioeconomic needs and address the root causes of conflict. At the same
time, the international community’s continued support at this critical inflection point
in the country’s history.
67. The ongoing response of the Sudanese authorities to the COVID -19 pandemic,
which the United Nations continues to assist, is commendable. The Sudan will
continue to require the support of the international community in providing continued
lifesaving assistance, including to alleviate the economic impacts and to address the
humanitarian consequences. The pandemic entails refocusing attention on the
suffering of the most vulnerable.
68. The tensions between the Sudan and Ethiopia over the Fashaqah region are
deeply concerning. I urge the leadership of both countries to take concrete steps to
de-escalate the situation and find a peaceful way forward to resolve this issue, in the
interests of both nations. I will continue to explore opportunities to encourage a
peaceful resolution, in collaboration with key partners, including at the regional level.

14/28

21-06085

S/2021/470

69. I also thank my Special Representative, Volker Perthes, the officer-in-charge for
UNAMID ad interim, M’Baye Babacar Cissé, and all United Nations personnel in the
Sudan for their dedication and untiring efforts, working in challenging conditions in
support of the Sudan and its people.

21-06085

15/28

S/2021/470

Annex I
Benchmarks and indicators

Strategic priority 1:
support political
stability

Strategic priority 2:
support the constitutiondrafting, electoral and
census processes

Benchmarks

Indicators

Sudanese transitional institutions are
inclusive and engaged in national efforts
towards democratic governance,
sustainable peace and the realization of
the objectives of the political transition,
as outlined in the Constitutional
Document, including the constitutional
process, the population census, elections
and the Juba Peace Agreement

• Number of meetings, dialogues and
sessions held with political and civil
society actors to support the
constitutional process

Women meaningfully participate in and
inform decision-making processes in
realizing the objectives of the
Constitutional Document

• Number of women in key decisionmaking bodies, transitional institutions
and processes

National stakeholders, including youth
and civil society, are engaged in
realizing the objectives of the
Constitutional Document, resulting in
good governance and responsive
transitional institutions

• Number of meetings with youth
participation

A constitution that meets internationally
recognized standards and promotes
good governance, the fundamental
rights of all Sudanese, gender equality
and the rule of law is drafted and
adopted, following an inclusive process,
with the meaningful participation of
women and in line with the
Constitutional Document and the
international human rights treaty
obligations of the Sudan

• Percentage of women in the
constitution-drafting body

A population census that enumerates all
residents in the country, including in
areas of displacement, and provides
high quality information, disaggregated
by sex and age, is conducted

• Number of international best practices
put in place during the census-planning
process

• Constitution drafted through an
inclusive process
• Election time frame agreed
• Population census carried out according
to international best practice standards

• Number of meetings with civil society
participation

• Constitution-drafting body meets with
representatives of all regions of the
Sudan
• Constitution lists human rights,
including women’s rights
• Constitution has explicit provisions on
the separation of powers, including
judicial independence in line with
international standards

• Number of laws enacted to enable the
census to be undertaken
• Number of public information
campaigns undertaken on the census
• Census completed

16/28

21-06085

S/2021/470
Benchmarks

Indicators

Free, fair and credible elections are held
in a peaceful manner at the end of the
transitional period, with the meaningful
participation of women as candidates
and voters

• Electoral calendar defined
• Electoral management body formed
according to international best practice
standards
• Number of election awareness
campaigns undertaken
• Percentage of female candidates
• Percentage of registered female voters
• Number of voting stations for internally
displaced persons
• Number of measures enacted to address
nomadic voters
• Balanced geographical distribution of
polling stations
• Number of technical assistance training
sessions and workshops delivered
• Number of capacity-building and
training sessions given to the Sudanese
Police Force on electoral security
• Number of gender-based violence
mitigation clauses in the Sudanese
Police Force’s election security
framework

Strategic priority 3:
support institutional
reforms and the
promotion and
protection of human
rights

Justice, governance and human rights
institutions are set up based on the
Constitutional Document and discharge
their mandate in line with international
standards and norms

• Number of consultation meetings with
civil society on justice reforms
• Number of populated websites of rule
of law institutions
• Number of reasoned human resource
decisions of rule of law institutions
published
• Number of emblematic cases on serious
human rights violations, past abuses and
corruption tried in accordance with
international standards and norms
• Number of policies/reform frameworks
created and/or edited for the
empowerment of women
• Percentage of women represented in
ministries and institutions as provided
for in the future constitution
• Number of capacity-mapping exercises
undertaken with the national human
rights commission

21-06085

17/28

S/2021/470
Benchmarks

Indicators

• Number of technical capacity-building
sessions delivered
Strategic priority 4:
support the conclusion
of an inclusive peace
process

Peace negotiations and processes
between the Government of Sudan and
non-signatories are inclusive, with
United Nations support, as requested, to
reach a comprehensive and sustainable
peace across the Sudan

• Number of women’s groups consulted
as parties to negotiations
• Number of civil society organizations
engaged in the consultative process
• Number of youth groups engaged in
consultative groups
• Number of small conferences held in
the Two Areas and Darfur to prepare
and draft the constitution within the
framework of preparations for the
national constitutional conference
• Number of armed groups with which a
negotiated settlement signed

Progress is achieved between the
transitional Government and the
remaining non-signatories to the peace
agreements, bringing them closer to
reaching peace agreements

• Number of meetings and consultations
held between the transitional
Government and the remaining
non-signatories
• Percentage of non-signatory
representatives who agree with
recommendations resulting from
consultations
• A national durable solutions strategy
developed
• Number of parties agreeing to
guarantees in pre-negotiations and
committing to extending such
agreements into actual settlements

Strategic priority 5:
support the
implementation of the
peace agreement

Peace agreements are implemented with
the continued commitment of the parties
and diverse stakeholders, and scalable
United Nations support, in an equitable
manner to effectively address regional
disparities

• A national peace commission
established and functional
• A gender commission established and
functional
• A land commission established and
functional
• Balanced regional representation at
governance conference to define powers
and responsibilities in the new regional
system and to review administrative
borders of the regions
• Percentage of national civil service and
justice institutions staff that are drawn
from the Two Areas and Darfur

18/28

21-06085

S/2021/470
Benchmarks

Indicators

• Percentage of priority areas previously
contaminated with explosives ordnance
that the local population and the United
Nations can safely use
An inclusive and effective monitoring
and evaluation mechanism regarding
implementation of the Juba Peace
Agreement is operational and enabled to
function

• Parties remain committed to the
implementation of the Juba Peace
Agreement and all its protocols
• Monitoring and evaluation mechanism
of the Juba Peace Agreement is
established and operational
• Integrated national disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration
strategy developed and operationalized,
including the establishment of
coordination mechanisms
• Disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration capacity developed across
national and regional institutions
• Number of demobilized armed groups
• National framework and institutional
capacities on transitional weapons and
ammunition management developed and
operationalized
• Number of legal and legitimate security
governance mechanisms finalized
• Number of women represented in
security governance arrangements,
including at senior decision-making
levels
• Number of gender-responsive and
youth-sensitive ceasefire mechanisms
established and functioning to monitor
and report on violations
• Number of civil society initiatives to
monitor the implementation of the
peace agreement

Strategic priority 6:
support the
strengthening of the
protective environment,
in particular in conflict
and post-conflict areas

21-06085

National capacity, in particular of the
Sudanese Police Force, for conflict
prevention and physical protection of
civilians, including displaced
populations, is enhanced through the
support of the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan
(UNITAMS) for the implementation of
the National Plan for the Protection of
Civilians

• A commission on refugees and
internally displaced persons is
established and functional
• Number of returnees overseen by the
commission on refugees and internally
displaced persons
• Number of returnees reintegrated

19/28

S/2021/470
Benchmarks

Indicators

• Number of capacity-building and
training sessions on the protection of
civilians based on domestic legal
provisions, international human rights
law, refugee and criminal law and the
Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement
• Number of participants that agree with
the recommendations of the capacitybuilding and training sessions
• Number of early warning analysis
mechanisms established and functioning
• Amount of early warning data provided
• Number of civilian protection patrols,
for protection through presence and
visibility
• Percentage of women participating in
security forces and community-based
mechanisms for the protection of
civilians
• Legal framework to prevent, respond to
and hold accountable perpetrators of
conflict-related sexual violence
developed and operationalized
• Percentage of human rights actors who
acknowledge progress by authorities in
the fight against conflict-related
violence
• Number of community violence
reduction projects developed across
regions to prevent recruitment, build
community resilience and increase
capacity to absorb former combatants
• Number of former combatants absorbed
• Number of cases of serious violations
and sexual and gender-based violence
that are reported, investigated and tried
in a manner compliant with the rule of
law increases after training in cases
involving such violence
• Number of female police investigators
trained for the investigation of cases of
sexual and gender-based violence and
child abuse

20/28

21-06085

S/2021/470
Benchmarks

Indicators

Community-level protection capacity,
including civil society actors and local
protection networks, is increased and
supported to promote and protect human
rights, particularly the rights of civilians
in need of protection, including children

• Number of early warning civilian
protection mechanisms and networks
for Darfur and the Two Areas
established
• Number of women-led protection and
early warning initiatives, such as the
women’s protection networks,
strengthened and expanded
• An inclusive and gender-responsive
community-oriented policing policy and
protocol is put in place to also support
early warning
• Number of standardized tools developed
for documenting early warning
incidents of attacks against civilians and
civilian objects and human rights
violations and abuses in Darfur and the
Two Areas

Comprehensive accountability
measures, transitional justice processes
and mechanisms that are survivorcentered and gender-responsive, and
that contribute to addressing the root
causes of instability and insecurity, are
established and effectively promoted in
line with the Constitutional Document
and the Juba Peace Agreement

• Key commissions and institutions
envisioned under the Constitutional
Document are operationalized
• Number of special accountability
mechanisms for Darfur crimes
established and functioning in
accordance with the Constitutional
Document and international norms and
standards
• Truth and Reconciliation Commission
established and functioning in Darfur
• Number of victims groups established
and supported
• Number of witness protection
mechanisms established

Strategic priority 7:
support the achievement
of peaceful coexistence
and reconciliation
between communities

The Juba Peace Agreement is
implemented at the community level in
a coordinated and inclusive manner

• Number of national and local policies,
strategies and plans related to
peacebuilding and durable solutions
developed
• Number of community violence
reduction initiatives drafted with a
particular focus on intercommunal
violence
• Number of women engaged in the
design and implementation of
peacebuilding initiatives

21-06085

21/28

S/2021/470
Benchmarks

Indicators

• Number of conflicts addressed through
reconciliation measures (symbolic acts,
judicial acts, normative statements and
strategic policy statements)
implemented at the national and local
levels
Mechanisms for monitoring, prevention,
management and resolution of
intercommunal conflicts, including
those related to land and access to
resources, and the prevention of crop
destruction are in place, building on and
strengthening existing local women-led
initiatives

• Number of established mechanisms for
monitoring, preventing, managing and
resolving conflict (i.e. State conflict
resolution committees)
• Number of inter-community or land
disputes mediated by courts, rural
courts and State conflict resolution
committees
• Number of women-led initiatives
• Number of youth-led initiatives
• Number of initiatives to de-escalate
violence and promote confidence
established
• Number of civil society organizations
involved in reporting

Strategic priority 8:
support international
resource mobilization
and national
socioeconomic reforms

Continued international political
consensus and engagement, including
sufficient mobilization of economic and
financial resources, in support of the
political transition and economic
reforms and recovery of the Sudan

• Amount, in Sudanese pounds and
United States dollars, of support for the
Sudan provided by international
financial institutions for the period
2021–2024

The Sudan demonstrates continued
commitment to achieving a functioning
and sustainable national economic
framework through collaboration with
donor States, international financial
institutions and United Nations support

• Technical support provided to the Sudan
to complete the poverty reduction
strategy paper, and as a prerequisite for
reaching the Heavily Indebted Poor
Country Initiative decision point

• Number of partners providing sustained
multi-year financial support to the
economic recovery of Sudan during the
period 2021–2024

• Number of consultations to inform
completion of the poverty reduction
strategy
• Amount of expenditure in the national
budget dedicated to health and
education is increased over the period
2021–2024
• Gender budgeting mechanism
introduced across the transitional
Government of the Sudan

22/28

21-06085

S/2021/470

Strategic priority 9:
support the
establishment of a
national architecture for
development planning
and aid effectiveness

Benchmarks

Indicators

An improved aid coordination and
effectiveness architecture is established
under the leadership of the transitional
Government of the Sudan

• A national Sustainable Development
Goal indicator framework is adopted
under the United Nations Sustainable
Development Cooperation Framework
• Percentage of funding channeled
through the multi-partner trust fund
peacebuilding and stabilization window
in support of programming towards the
UNITAMS mandate
• The Friends of Sudan group and the
Khartoum-based coordination
mechanisms continue to support
resource mobilization for the period
2021–2024
• Mechanisms to ensure accountability to
affected populations, including in
relation to the policy on protection from
sexual exploitation and abuse, are
established and functioning
• Percentage of outreach initiatives to
affected populations in the development
planning stage

International and national stakeholders
adopt an evidence-based approach to
development and peacebuilding needs

• Number of early warning systems
established by both the crisis risk
dashboard and the common data
information management board
• Number of consultations with women’s
rights leaders and with experts on
macroeconomic policies
• Number of gender-specific
macroeconomic policies enacted

21-06085

23/28

S/2021/470

Annex II
Report on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2559 (2020)
I. Introduction
1.
The present annex is submitted pursuant to Security Cou ncil resolution 2559
(2020), by which the Council requested regular updates on the drawdown and
withdrawal of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) as an annex to the regular report on the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS). The present annex provides
an update on the context and the progress made in the drawdown for the period from
1 February to 6 May 2021.

II. Update on the drawdown of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
A.

Closure of team sites and facilities
2.
UNAMID remains on schedule for the closure of its 14 team sites in five phases,
and has accelerated the process to allow for contingencies. Phase I (Saraf Umrah and
Kutum) and phase II (Khor Abeche, Menawashei, Nyala II and Kalma) closures were
completed as scheduled, with a minor adjustment for Kalma, which was handed over
a week later than the originally envisaged date. Phase III has als o been accomplished,
with the completed handover of Sortony (8 April), Golo (11 April) and Nertiti
(22 April). This was followed by the phase IV closures of Tawilah (4 May), Kass
(5 May) and Zalingei (6 May). Phase V team site closures include Kabkabiyah
(20 May) and Shangil Tobaya (25 May), leaving the El Fasher logistics hub for the
conduct of liquidation activities.
3.
The handover of the Kalma team site was delayed from 11 to 18 March 2021,
and Sortoni from 28 March to 8 April 2021, at the request of th e transitional
Government to allow time for efforts to create more conducive conditions for the
handovers, including engagement with local communities. The Operation was
informed that the Kalma facility, established to address protection concerns for
internally displaced persons in the Kalma camp, was now being managed by the
internally displaced persons as a medical centre, while the Nertiti team site was to be
converted for use as an agriculture and forestry college of the University of Zalingei.
For the former operational headquarters of UNAMID in Zalingei, early transition to
the University of Zalingei, one of the key beneficiaries, is under way, with partial
occupancy by the university having already taken place. The handover dates for some
of the team sites have been brought forward in order to allow for potential delays due
to the rainy season and other contingencies. Accordingly, Tawilah was handed over
on 4 May instead of 11 May as previously planned, and Zalingei on 6 May instead of
27 May. Kabkabiyah is now scheduled for handover on 20 May instead of 16 June
and Shangil Tobaya on 25 May instead of 5 June.
4.
After reported looting at the former UNAMID Saraf Umrah team site on
17 February 2021, there were smaller-scale looting incidents in Kutum and
Menawashei, where the timely actions of State authorities limited the damage and
restored security. These include an incident on 12 March 2021 when some 200 local
residents broke into the former team site in Menawashei, with joint Government

24/28

21-06085

S/2021/470

forces firing shots to prevent further looting, resulting in the death of 2 civilians and
injuries to 17 others. UNAMID is following up on unverified reports of similar
looting in Sortony, which it understands are under investigation by the authorities.
Personnel separation
5.
The Operation is on schedule to separate staff and repatriate contingent
personnel and contingent-owned equipment in accordance with its drawdown plan
and timeline. As of the end of April, most remaining staff were those engaged in
technical and logistical support of the drawdown, and it was expected that in early
May repatriation of uniformed personnel would accelerate in line with the closure of
team sites. As at 21 April 2021, 688 military contingent members (18 per cent of troop
strength) and 66 individual military personnel (55 per cent of the total) had been
separated. With regard to the drawdown of police personnel, 962 formed police unit
members had been repatriated by 3 May 2021 (59 per cent of the those present as at
1 January 2021), along with 590 individual police officers (95 per cent of those
present on 1 January 2021). A total of 477 staff members (181 international staff and
296 national staff) had been separated by 30 April 2021, while 654 (176 international
staff and 478 national staff) were to be separated in May and June 2021, leaving
299 staff members (129 international staff, 155 national staff and 15 United Nations
Volunteers) for the liquidation phase.
Coordination with the Government and local communities
6.
Engagement and coordination with the Government at the federal and at the
Darfur State levels, as called for by the Security Council in its resolution 2559 (2020),
has improved. The Operation has observed greater willingness on the part of federal
authorities to intervene on its behalf, with the Government’s joint task force for
drawdown playing an increased role. On 4 March 2021, a framework agreement was
signed between the transitional Government and the Secretariat on the handover of
team sites and assets exclusively for civilian use.
7.
The Operation faced challenges due to some misunderstanding among local
communities and State officials regarding the ownership of UNAMID assets,
including contingent- and United Nations-owned equipment, and their related
expectation that such assets would be donated to the State and local communities
when UNAMID exited. This has resulted in some attempts to prevent the movement
of assets from team sites. In extreme cases, obstructions have delayed the movement
of UNAMID equipment for several days, often at significant cost. Robust engagement
by UNAMID with federal and State authorities, as well as with concerned
communities, led to the positive resolution of these situations.
Civilian end-use of sites
8.
The conclusion of the framework agreement on the civilian end-use of team sites
and assets is a significant step in realizing the intention stipulated by the Security
Council in resolutions 2525 (2020) and 2559 (2020). In most cases, the Government
has committed to ensuring that facilities and assets will be used for social and
community services, including health and education. Decisions regarding their use
have been taken after consultation between the federal and State governments, and
outreach to the local communities.

B.

Post-drawdown activities: liquidation
9.
On 1 July 2021, the Operation will enter its liquidation phase, which is expected
to be completed within a 12-month period. Liquidation activities will be conducted

21-06085

25/28

S/2021/470

from the El Fasher logistics hub, but the Operation will maintain a presence in
Khartoum within the UNITAMS complex, to liaise with Government officials on
operational matters, and in Port Sudan for export logistical operations. Liquidation
activities will include the transition of the El Fasher camp to designated civilian end users, the disposal of property holdings of about $116 million in residual value, the
completion of the environmental clean-up and restoration, the disposal of hazardous
materials (including expired ammunition), the transfer of archives and the disposal of
archival paper records, and the completion of administrative activities, including
claims, contracts, financial records, and legal and administrative cases.
10. Subject to budgetary approval, the liquidation team will be composed of
215 civilian operational personnel (111 international staff, 89 national staff and
15 United Nations Volunteers), a United Nations guard unit of two formed police units
with a total strength of 363 uniformed personnel and 84 civilian security personnel
(18 international staff and 66 national staff). A security element of 50 police and
206 military personnel provided by the Government of the Sudan is expected to
complement the security arrangements.

C.

Security context
Current developments
11. Starting on 31 March 2021, local community groups clashed in Sereif, North
Darfur, resulting in 10 fatalities and 20 people injured. Government security forces
deployed in the area, and UNAMID and the United Nations country team suspended
movement in the area until the situation was fully contained.
12. As reported in the UNITAMS report above, many critical United Nations
activities were affected as a result of the resurgence of intercommunal violence
starting on 3 April 2021 in El Geneina, West Darfur. On 7 April 2021, UNAMID,
which retains overall leadership for the security of United Nations personnel in Darfur
under the United Nations security management system, activated its crisis
management team. The Operation supported the temporary relocation of non -essential
United Nations country team staff and the personnel of international non -governmental
organizations from El Geneina to its facility in Zalinge i, and organized flights, from
9 to 12 April 2021, to evacuate 93 injured people from El Geneina to Khartoum for
medical treatment at the request of UNITAMS and the Sudanese authorities. While
these activities were carried out without much disruption to th e drawdown, the
fighting forced UNAMID to revise its troop repatriation plans for one contingent,
which will now be airlifted from El Fasher, instead of being repatriated from
El Geneina as previously planned.
13. On 29 March 2021, approximately 50 El Fasher University students staged a
peaceful march towards the UNAMID El Fasher logistics hub, demanding that the
facility be handed over to the University. On 6 April 2021, approximately 1,000
El Fasher University students and internally displaced persons fro m the neighbouring
camps demonstrated again in front of the El Fasher logistics hub, with the same demands.
Incidents involving United Nations personnel and installations
14. On 2 March 2021, the Sudanese Armed Forces fired at a local vehicle for not
stopping at the checkpoint in Thabit, North Darfur. As a result, a UNAMID bus
transporting formed police unit personnel was struck by a bullet, resulting in minor
injuries to a unit member, who was hit by glass fragments.
15. Crime continued to have an impact on United Nations personnel and assets, with
incidents of armed robbery, intrusion into facilities, stone -throwing and theft. On

26/28

21-06085

S/2021/470

24 February 2021, United Nations-owned equipment was stolen when two sea
containers at the Zalingei super camp were broken into. On 22 March, vehicle spare
parts were stolen from the El Fasher logistics hub. On 27 March, the residence of a
UNAMID national staff member in Zalingei was burglarized. On 29 March, a
UNAMID national staff member was threatened by an unknown call er for alleged
involvement in the intercommunal conflict in El Geneina.
Guard unit
16. As authorized by the Security Council in its resolution 2559 (2020), the Mission,
in coordination with the Secretariat, is in the process of finalizing the establishment
of a guard unit consisting of 363 formed police unit personnel (360 guard unit
personnel and 3 command and control headquarters officers). Guard unit tasks will
include protecting UNAMID personnel, facilities and assets, mainly inside the
El Fasher logistics hub perimeter, and providing limited escorts. Sudanese security
forces will protect the external perimeter, consistent with their primary responsibility
to protect UNAMID personnel, premises and assets. Two formed police units from
the Mission’s existing footprint have been retained as the guard unit and have already
relocated to El Fasher after the handover of their respective team sites. They have
started sharing the responsibilities for protecting the El Fasher logistics base with the
military and the United Nations civilian security team. They will have full
responsibility for security inside the perimeter of the logistics base, as all other troops
and police will be withdrawn by 30 June 2021. The Mission and United Nations
Headquarters have developed a Statement of Unit Requirements for the guard unit
based upon memorandums of understanding to be signed with the relevant
contributing countries.

D.

Transition of tasks to the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan
17. During the reporting period, UNAMID completed or handed over to other
partners residual activities that it had initiated in 2020 but could not complete prior
to the end of its mandate. These residual activities included core programmatic
activities in the areas of rule of law, community policing, gender-based violence and
community stabilization, as well as the activities of the State liaison functions which
were established jointly with the United Nations country team. To date, 7 of the
28 core programmatic residual activities have been completed, with the remaining
21 expected to be finalized by 31 May 2021. Of the original 103 State liaison function
residual activities, United Nations country team entities have completed 81, with the
remaining 22 to be completed by 31 May 2021. UNAMID has also handed over to the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) some uncompleted activities that
it started in 2020 in partnership with UNDP and the World Health Organization in
support of the transitional Government’s response efforts related to the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19). An integrated team comprising representatives of UNAMID,
UNITAMS and the United Nations country team is overseeing the conclusio n, by
31 May 2021, of a major project implemented by the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations to prevent and mitigate recurrent conflicts
between farmers and herders.
18. UNAMID continues to coordinate knowledge transfer to UNITAMS and the
United Nations country team, particularly on common strategic objectives and
priorities in Darfur. In partnership with UNITAMS, the Operation has organized
13 online brown bag lunch seminars examining best practices, lessons learned and
potential challenges. Moreover, UNAMID has facilitated the direct access of
UNITAMS staff to existing UNAMID Joint Mission Analysis Cell data sets.

21-06085

27/28

S/2021/470

III. Financial aspects
19. The General Assembly, in its resolutions 74/261 C of 30 June 2020 and decision
74/571 of 3 September 2020, as well as in its resolution 75/251 of 31 December 2020,
authorized the Secretary-General to enter into commitments for the Operation in
amounts not exceeding $240.2 million for the period from 1 July to 31 December
2020 and $198.8 million for the period from 1 January to 30 June 2021, respectively.
20. As at 20 April 2021, unpaid assessed contributions to the special account for
UNAMID amounted to $175.5 million. Total outstanding assessed contributions for
all peacekeeping operations at that date amounted to approximately $2,668,100,000.
21. Reimbursement of troop and formed police costs has been made for the period
up to 30 September 2020, while reimbursement of the costs of contingent -owned
equipment has been made for the period up to 31 March 2020, in accordance with the
quarterly payment schedule.

IV. Observations
22. Despite some challenges, the drawdown of UNAMID is continuing apace, with
the closure of team sites even being accelerated to allow for unforeseen contingencies
and ensure that the deadline is met for the completion of the drawdown. I commend
our partners in the transitional Government and the Darfur State capitals for the role
they are playing.
23. I welcome the signature of the framework agreement between the transitional
Government and the Secretariat on the handover of team sites and assets exclusively
for civilian use. Among other measures, this will help to cement the positive legacy
of UNAMID of providing direct benefit to Darfuri civilians. I encourage the Sudanese
authorities to sustain their vigilance to minimize the threat of looting at former
UNAMID team sites.
24. Nevertheless, significant challenges await us, both in completing the drawdown
and in the liquidation phase that will continue after 30 June. In this regard, the
continued support and partnership of the Sudanese authorities will be critical. In
particular, I look forward to the transitional Government’s swift cooperation to enable
the full and effective deployment of the guard unit for the El Fasher logistics hub,
noting the need to ensure that appropriate measures are in place as the last few
uniformed units depart from Darfur.
25. While the intercommunal violence in West Darfur in April is a major concern,
UNAMID was able to lend support, including by helping to facilitate the temporary
relocation of United Nations country team and non-governmental organization
personnel, and by conducting medical evacuations of injured civilians. However, it is
apparent that with the uniformed personnel repatriations and closure of team sites
scheduled in the near term, the Operation will very soon no longer be in a po sition to
offer such support.
26. I want to express my sincere appreciation to M’Baye Babacar Cissé, who has
stepped in as officer-in-charge for the Operation ad interim, for his valuable
leadership. I also extend my sincere gratitude to UNAMID civilian an d uniformed
personnel, both those who have already departed and those who are still in Darfur,
the troop- and police-contributing countries, the United Nations country team and the
humanitarian community, as well as UNITAMS, for their invaluable support fo r peace
in Darfur.

28/28

21-06085
