S/2013/758

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 December 2013
English
Original: French

Letter dated 23 December 2013 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 1996 (2011)
establishing the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), in which the
Council, inter alia, authorized me to take the necessary steps to ensure inter-mission
cooperation, as appropriate, and subject to the conditions stated therein.
As you are aware, and as stated in my press briefings of 19 and 23 December
2013, and in our briefings to the Security Council on 17 and 20 December 2013, I
am deeply concerned about the growing violence, human rights abuses and killings
fuelled by ethnic tensions in many parts of South Sudan. The displacement of
civilians is growing and spreading. Efforts to facilitate a political solution to the
crisis are ongoing but have yet to gain traction.
UNMISS is doing everything it can, within its means and in a very fluid
situation, to protect civilians, as well as United Nations and international personnel
on the ground. In the light of the deteriorating security situation in South Sudan, I
have taken steps to urgently strengthen the protection capabilities of UNMISS.
Accordingly, in the light of the urgent priority requirements of UNMISS for
the protection of civilians and the protection of United Nations personnel and assets,
I have decided to pursue, through inter-mission cooperation, the following transfers
to UNMISS from other missions, in particular the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), the United
Nations Interim Security Force in Abyei (UNISFA), the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) and the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL): five
infantry battalions, three attack helicopters, three utility helicopters, one C130
military transport aircraft and other enablers (5,500 all strengths) and three formed
police units, totalling 423 personnel.
The human rights investigation capacity of UNMISS is being urgently
strengthened with the support of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.
The Secretariat is in the process of obtaining the consent of the troop- and
police-contributing countries concerned and is coordinating closely with the
peacekeeping operations concerned to ensure that the timing and duration of this
proposed temporary redeployment does not prejudice the implementation of their
respective mandates.

13-63106 (E) 231213

*1363107*

S/2013/758

I would be grateful if the Security Council would approve the transfer of the
relevant personnel and assets to UNMISS on an urgent basis in order to help ensure
the protection of civilians and the protection of United Nations personnel and assets.
Given the extraordinary time constraints placed upon the Secretariat, the
assistance of Member States, including members of the Security Council, is
requested for air and other transportation in order to ensure the timely deployment
of United Nations personnel. With regard to potential financial implications, the
Secretariat will need to request additional funding through the established channels.
I would be grateful if you could bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council at the earliest opportunity.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

2/2

13-63106
