S/PRST/2000/9*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 March 2000
English
Original: English/Russian

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4116th meeting of the Security Council, held on 21 March 2000 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Tajikistan and along the Tajik-Afghan border”, the President of the Security Council
made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council has considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the situation in Tajikistan of 14 March 2000 (S/2000/214), submitted
pursuant to paragraph 12 of its resolution 1274 (1999) of 12 November 1999.
“The Security Council welcomes decisive progress in the implementation
of the General Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and National Accord
in Tajikistan (S/1997/510) achieved due to sequential and persistent efforts of
the President of the Republic of Tajikistan and the leadership of the
Commission on National Reconciliation.
“The Security Council welcomes, in particular, the holding on 27
February 2000 of the first multi-party and pluralistic parliamentary election in
Tajikistan, in spite of serious problems and shortcomings, as noted by the Joint
Electoral Observation Mission for Tajikistan. It notes that with the holding of
this election the transition period envisaged in the General Agreement is
coming to a close. The Council acknowledges a significant achievement of the
Tajik parties, which have managed to overcome many obstacles and to put
their country on the path to peace, national reconciliation and democracy. It
urges the Government and the Parliament of Tajikistan to work towards
elections in the future that meet fully acceptable standards as a means to
consolidate peace.
“The Security Council notes with satisfaction that the United Nations has
played an important role in this success. It welcomes the United Nations
Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT), supported by the Contact Group
of Guarantor States and International Organizations, the Mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Collective
Peacekeeping Forces of the Commonwealth of Independent States, being
instrumental in assisting the parties in the implementation of the General
Agreement.

* Reissued for technical reasons.

00-35613 (E) 220300
`````````

S/PRST/2000/9

“The Security Council supports the intention of the Secretary-General to
withdraw UNMOT when its mandate expires on 15 May 2000. It expects that
the Secretary-General will inform the Council about the outcome of his current
consultations with the Government of Tajikistan on a role for the United
Nations in the period of post-conflict peace-building and consolidation.”

2
