S/PV.7384

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7384th meeting

Tuesday, 17 February 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Haniff
Mr. McLay
Mr. Laro
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Letter dated 13 April 2014 from the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/264)

15-04331 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1504331*

Ukraine

S/PV.7384

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.

left the conflict zone, the vast majority of whom have
sought shelter on Russian territory.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 13 April 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2014/264)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Germany and
Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2015/117, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the Russian Federation.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President (spoke in Chinese): There were
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2202 (2015).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
adoption of the resolution.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the members of the Council
for the unanimous adoption of the Russian Federation’s
draft resolution in support of the arrangements to settle
the Ukrainian crisis reached in Minsk on 12 February.
The events that have taken place during the
yearlong conflict in the territory of that country have
been truly tragic. Thousands of people have died and
many towns and villages in eastern Ukraine have been
nearly destroyed. More than a million civilians have

2/15

17/02/2015

We believe that now, following the unprecedented
diplomatic efforts undertaken in Minsk on 12 February
by the highest authorities of Russia, France, Germany
and Ukraine, there is a genuine opportunity for Ukraine
to turn this tragic page in its history. We support
the high assessment of the adoption on 12 February
of the package of measures for the implementation
of the Minsk agreements and the declaration of the
four leaders. We are fully prepared to facilitate the
implementation of those agreements.
All sides must fully comply with the Minsk
agreements. We must avoid the adoption of unilateral
measures that would clearly contravene the letter
and the spirit of the documents adopted in Minsk on
12 February.
Since the very start of the crisis, Russia has actively
called for its peaceful settlement through inclusive and
transparent dialogue between the sides in the internal
Ukrainian conflict and has done its utmost to ensure
that an open dialogue is established on fundamental
political and constitutional issues. We will adhere to
this principled approach in future also.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom voted in favour of resolution 2202
(2015) because of the importance of providing full
Security Council backing for the agreements reached in
Minsk on 5 and 19 September 2014 and of 12 February
this year. These agreements must now be implemented
comprehensively and according to the agreed timelines
in order to secure a sustainable and peaceful resolution
of the crisis in eastern Ukraine.
Over 5,400 people have lost their lives in this
conflict and over 1.5 million have been displaced. The
parties must commit to and invest in this opportunity
for peace. We welcome the intensive diplomatic efforts
that have brought us to this point, but agreements
have been reached before. This time, we must see
commitments translated into action and full delivery of
the obligations that have been undertaken.
The ceasefire has now been in place for two and a
half days. Reporting from the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) suggests that it has
been respected in the majority of the Donbas. However,
intense fighting continues around Debaltseve, where
heavy shelling and street-by-street fighting have

15-04331

17/02/2015

Ukraine

resulted in scores of casualties. This flagrant disregard
of the ceasefire is deeply concerning and risks
undermining the Minsk package in its entirety. The
fighting for Debaltseve must stop, and any detained
soldier must be treated humanely.
It is totally unacceptable that separatist leaders
have made statements claiming that the ceasefire
did not apply to Debaltseve, where they were clearly
intent on making further territorial gains, and it is
deeply concerning that the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission has not been given access to the town. The
press statement that the Council has just agreed
(SC/11784) makes clear our collective, grave concern
over Debaltseve and our unified call for OSCE access.
The actions in and around Debaltseve are not the
actions of a party interested in peace. We recall how a
Russian-backed separatist offensive brought to an end
the ceasefire agreed in September — a cynical effort
to undermine the September Minsk agreements and
create new realities on the ground. We therefore call on
Russia to use its influence on the separatists to cease
their onslaught against that town and abide by their
commitments. It is vital that the ceasefire be respected
in full and upheld across all of eastern Ukraine.
But the ceasefire is only the first step in a series
of obligations set out in the Minsk package. We also
expect to see the withdrawal of heavy weapons by both
sides over the next two weeks in order to create an
effective security zone. As the Minsk package makes
clear, this process should be facilitated, monitored and
verified by the OSCE. It is welcome that the Ukrainian
armed forces have already set out their withdrawal plan
to the Monitoring Mission. We call on the separatists
to show the same commitment to that crucial element
of the Minsk package. In parallel, we look forward to
progress being made towards local elections, special
status legislation, the release of all hostages, and the
urgent distribution of humanitarian assistance on the
basis of an international mechanism.
The resolution we have adopted today reaffirms
resolution 2166 (2014) on the downing of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17, in which the Council demanded
that those responsible be held to account and that
all States cooperate with the efforts to establish
accountability. Let me be clear that the amnesty
provided for in the Minsk package does not apply to
those who may be found responsible for that dreadful
crime.

S/PV.7384

The Council must scrutinize closely the
implementation of the Minsk package and use its
influence to prevent any repetition of what we saw last
autumn. We call on Russia to deliver on the promises it
has made. Russia has committed to the implementation
of the Minsk agreements at the highest level. That
commitment needs to be reflected in actions on the
ground. We also call on Russia to use its undoubted
influence over the separatists to ensure that they meet
their commitments in full. Until we see such actions,
international pressure must remain on Russia and
its separatist proxies. The Council must play its full
role in ensuring that there is complete compliance
so that stability can be restored and to guarantee
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Ukraine. That must include regular and
close monitoring of the ceasefire and a willingness to
take further steps in the event that it is not implemented.
Finally, it will be recalled that this crisis began with
Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea. As we approach
the first anniversary, we must not let events in eastern
Ukraine distract us from Russia’s blatant disregard for
the Charter of the United Nations through its illegal
annexation of Crimea.
Ms. Power (United States of America): We have
gotten used to living in an upside-down world with
respect to Ukraine. Russia speaks of peace and then
fuels conflict. Russia signs agreements and then does
everything within its power to undermine them. Russia
champions the sovereignty of nations and then acts as if
its neighbours’ borders do not exist.
Yet even for those of us growing accustomed to living
in an upside-down world, the idea that Russia — which
manufactured and continues to escalate the violence
in Ukraine — has submitted a resolution today calling
for the conflict’s peaceful solution is ironic, to say the
least. It is bitterly ironic, given that the Council has
dedicated some 30 meetings to calling on Russia to stop
escalating the very same conflict, and given the human
consequences that are growing daily.
Even as Russia put forward resolution 2202 (2015),
separatists that Russia has trained and armed and whom
it fights alongside are laying ruthless and deadly siege
to the Ukrainian-held city of Debaltseve, approximately
30 to 40 kilometres beyond lines established by the
September Minsk agreements. Throughout the day, we
have heard conflicting reports as to whether Debaltseve
has fallen. According to press reports, the so-called

15-043313/15

S/PV.7384

Ukraine

road of life leading out of Debaltseve has become a road
of death, littered with the bodies of Ukrainian soldiers.
At the same time that the Council is calling for the
ceasefire that was supposed to take effect at midnight
on Saturday, Russia is backing an all-out assault.
We do not know how many civilians are left
in Debaltseve because Russia and the separatists
it supports have refused to guarantee the safety of
impartial monitors from the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, who have been trying for
days to enter the area — a commitment that, in this
upside-down world, Russia and the separatists made on
12 February at Minsk. But we know from credible press
reports that thousands of civilians in Debaltseve and
neighbouring villages have been sheltering from heavy
shelling in dank basements, often without running
water, food, electricity or basic medical supplies. We
know that many of the civilians left, who are enduring
the terror of this relentless assault, are the elderly and
small children — people who could not evacuate on
their own.
Even with such limited information, we know with
certainty that at the same time that Russia signs on to yet
another agreement committing itself to de-escalation
and peace, forces that Russia trains, equips and joins
on the battlefield have only escalated this fighting,
grabbing more territory and killing the Ukrainian
soldiers who stand in their way. We are caught in a
deadly feedback loop. International leaders engage
in rigorous, exhaustive negotiations to get Russia to
commit to peace — in Geneva, in Normandy, in Minsk
in September, in Berlin in February, again in Minsk on
12 February when the implementations were signed,
and now in New York — yet Russia’s commitments
have no bearing on the actions of its soldiers and the
separatists they back on the ground.
The United States has maintained the same position
across 30 meetings of the Security Council with respect
to Ukraine. Let me reiterate that position. We are for
peace in Ukraine. We are for Ukraine’s sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and unity. We are
for ending the violence in eastern Ukraine that has
taken more than 5,600 lives since last April and already
displaced approximately 1 million people. We are for all
of the signatories to the agreements signed in Minsk in
September 2014, particularly Russia and the separatists
they back, fulfilling the commitments that they have
made, and we are for the package of measures for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements of 5 and

4/15

17/02/2015

19 September, and the package of measures endorsed
last week by the leaders of Ukraine, Russia, Germany
and France.
To be clear, the 12 February implementation
package is a road map to fulfilling the commitments
made by the same signatories in the September Minsk
agreements. President Hollande, President Poroshenko,
Chancellor Merkel and President Putin each made
that clear when they endorsed the implementation
package on 12 February and issued their joint
declaration, in which they “remained committed to the
implementation of the Minsk agreements”. The Minsk
agreements in the title — plural — refer to those signed
on 5 and 19 September by the same signatories, while
the measures for implementation in the title made clear
that the 12 February package was designed to begin
carrying out the September agreements and not to
supplant them, as Russia has now begun to argue.
The United States rejects any interpretation of
resolution 2202 (2015) that would abrogate the parties’
earlier commitments. All parties must implement all
of the commitments made in the September Minsk
agreements. The implementation steps agreed upon
in the 12 February package include a comprehensive
ceasefire, the withdrawal of heavy weapons from the
September line of contact, the release of all hostages
and the eventual restoration of Ukraine’s territorial
sovereignty and control of its international border.
Too often debates in the Council occur in a
vacuum, removed from the real world. In the real world
a man named Aleksey Kravchenko, a 73-year-old in the
Ukrainian-held town of Svitlodarsk, near Debaltseve,
recently told a reporter that he had spent nights huddled
together with his grandchildren in a bomb shelter on
his property as shelling continued throughout the night.
Aleksey told the reporter that his grandchildren said
to him in the shelter “Grandpa, I don’t want to die
young.” He said, “I held my grandchildren and they
were shaking, and I looked in their eyes and they were
afraid”. “With the 12 February agreement, now we are
hoping”, he also said. The fighting, unfortunately, has
in fact increased dramatically near Aleksey’s home. But
we call on Russia to translate hope into real action, to
translate hope into real results — and to do so urgently.
Today’s Council meeting is an effort to throw
the Council’s weight behind an agreement already
jeopardized by statements by the separatists dismissing
the full ceasefire, by their continued attacks on

15-04331

17/02/2015

Ukraine

S/PV.7384

Debaltseve and by their refusal, together with Russia’s,
to allow access to the Special Monitoring Mission
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. We look to Russia, which manufactured and
fuelled this conflict, to leave the upside-down world it
has created and to honour the resolution it introduced
today in support of efforts to end it.

weapons must be withdrawn within two weeks. This
element is an important step towards peace, and it must
take concrete form in reality. It is up to the signatory
parties to the agreements, including Russia, to give
substance to the commitments they have undertaken by
their actions. I repeat it here on behalf of France: only
actions will count.

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): The
urgency of the situation in Ukraine calls for action.
The conflict has resulted in more than 5,000 deaths in
10 months, including the victims of Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17, for which those responsible must answer
for their acts, as called for in resolution 2166 (2014).
Given a security and humanitarian situation that
remains of great concern, our collective responsibility
as members of the Security Council is to do everything
possible to silence the guns and arrive at an agreement.
That is the aim of the courageous and determined
approach that the President of France and the German
Chancellor have taken in the past two weeks.

By the resolution we have adopted today, the
Security Council has endorsed its commitments as did
the Heads of State under the Normandy format. Those
commitments have thus become obligations undertaken
by the signatories to the Minsk agreements before the
international community. These are commitments
whose scrupulous observance the Council will follow
with the utmost diligence. Along with its Council
partners, therefore, France calls upon all the parties to
lastingly and fully assume their responsibilities to move
forward along this demanding path towards peace.

We have always believed that the path to peace
includes diplomacy. We have always said that the
solution to the Ukrainian conflict can only be a
political one. With today’s resolution 2202 (2015), the
Council is putting all its weight and all its authority
to silence the guns and chart a course towards peace.
As its title indicates, the text concluded in Minsk on
12 February consists of a set of sequential steps intended
to implement the Minsk protocol and memorandum,
which were agreed, respectively, on 5 and 19 September
2014. They provide in particular for what was and
continues to be the absolute priority: the establishment
of a ceasefire — which entered into force at midnight
on Saturday-Sunday. Full and sustained respect for the
ceasefire is the cornerstone for an exit from the crisis.
The speech made by President Poroshenko on
Saturday night, in which he gave orders to the whole of
the Ukrainian forces to cease fire, confirms Ukraine’s
commitment to seeking peace. While the ceasefire
is universally respected, fighting unfortunately
continues, especially in Debaltseve. The fighting must
stop immediately, as the Council just demanded in its
statement to the press adopted an hour ago (SC/11784).
The Minsk package also calls for the retreat of the
warring parties and of heavy weapons, which will make
it possible to establish an expanded buffer zone — from
50 to 70 kilometres, in fact larger than the area called for
by the Minsk agreements of September 2014. All heavy

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
We find ourselves at a crucial moment in the evolution
of the conflict in Ukraine. Spain voted in favour of
resolution 2202 (2015) not just because we fully agree
with its contents, but because we believe that the
Security Council, which has very closely followed the
conflict, could not remain on the sidelines, especially
now.
Since the Minsk protocol of 5 September, there
have been thousands of victims — 5,000, in fact, many
of them innocent civilians — owing to breakdowns
in the ceasefire. The human tragedy in Ukraine is
unsustainable, and it is essential to put an end to it.
Spain therefore appreciates and welcomes the step
taken by France and Germany, an initiative we firmly
support.
Last Thursday in Minsk, all the parties agreed
to give dialogue a new chance, aware of the fact that
the military option was not a solution to the crisis in
Ukraine. They therefore committed themselves in this
new agreement to put in place a ceasefire, along with
the other aspects of the peace process agreed in Minsk
last September — which have gone systematically
unfulfilled and violated.
As set out in the press statement made public a few
minutes ago (SC/11784), we also note with concern that,
having entered into force on 15 February, as agreed in
Minsk, the ceasefire is not being respected overall. We
are concerned in particular about the ongoing fighting
in Debaltseve. The parties must fully implement

15-043315/15

S/PV.7384

Ukraine

the agreement reached last week, beginning with an
immediate ceasefire in line with the terms agreed. Of
course, the success of this new agreement will continue
in large measure to depend upon the willingness of the
parties. If we want peace, it must be implemented in
good faith and completely.
There is no need to recall the gravity of the conflict
to peace and stability in Europe. In that regard, I would
like to conclude by reiterating that the host of measures
agreed in Minsk on 12 February give a very important
role both to the European Union and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe. As a member
of both organizations, Spain agrees that both bodies
have much to contribute to this process. Of course, we
will work responsibly and with determination to ensure
that happens.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
joined the international community’s recognition of the
contact group’s diplomatic efforts, which have led to
the agreement on a ceasefire in eastern Ukraine. We are
confident that it will contribute to ending the violence
and the humanitarian crisis in the country by providing
assistance through an international mechanism.
Resolution 2202 (2015), which we have just
adopted, is clear sign of consensus in support of those
diplomatic efforts and of the ceasefire for the benefit
of the protection of civilians. We view very positively
the inclusion of the reference to resolution 2166 (2014)
in the adopted text. We are confident that the measures
set forth in the 13 points of the agreement reached at the
Minsk summit on 12 February will be implemented by
all parties for the benefit of the population that has been
affected by the crisis.
We emphasize the need to respect the independence,
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine. We
call on all parties to fully comply with the provisions
of the ceasefire in order to guarantee that a sustainable
political solution is agreed that ensures peaceful
coexistence based on the principles of international law
and the Charter of the United Nations, thereby building
lasting peace.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I have the honour to make
this statement on behalf of the delegations of Australia,
Belgium, Canada, Indonesia, the Netherlands, New
Zealand and the Philippines, as well as on behalf of my
own delegation, Malaysia.

6/15

17/02/2015

We join other Security Council members in
welcoming the adoption of resolution 2202 (2015), on
the situation in Ukraine. We believe that the adoption
of the resolution will convey the Council’s — and by
extension the international community’s — strong
support for the steps taken by the parties concerned
to implement the ceasefire arrangements agreed
on 12 February. We reiterate our full support for all
peaceful efforts aimed at resolving the conflict in
Ukraine.
The recent developments in eastern Ukraine prove
that a diplomatic and political solution is more urgent
than ever. In that regard, we particularly commend
the diplomatic initiatives that yielded the package
of measures for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements last week.
The conflict in eastern Ukraine has gone on
for far too long and has claimed the lives of far too
many innocent civilians, including the 298 souls
aboard Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17, which was
tragically shot down over the conflict area on 17 July
2014. In the aftermath of the tragedy, the Council
responded by adopting resolution 2166 (2014), which,
inter alia, emphasizes the need for a full, thorough
and independent international investigation into the
incident and demands that those responsible for the
incident be held to account and that all States cooperate
fully with efforts to establish accountability. It also
clearly outlines the obligations incumbent upon all
States Members of the United Nations to cooperate in
that regard to bring those responsible to justice.
The resolution adopted today is unambiguous in
reaffirming the Council’s demand in resolution 2166
(2014) for accountability for those responsible for
the downing of Flight MH-17. We reiterate that this
demand remains the international standard with respect
to accountability and applies to all States Members of
the United Nations, particularly set against the Minsk
agreements and the package of measures. In that regard,
our delegations welcome the reaffirmation of resolution
2166 (2014) in the present resolution.
In conclusion, we call upon the conflicting parties
to fully adhere to and implement the Minsk agreements
in line with the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations as well as the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, independence and unity of Ukraine. We wish
to see an immediate and full implementation of the
ceasefire agreement, which could ultimately pave the

15-04331

17/02/2015

Ukraine

way for a sustained political solution and restore peace
and stability to the affected areas.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand associates
itself with the statement just made by the representative
of Malaysia, and we compliment his country on that
particular initiative.
It is no secret that over the past four days the
Security Council has struggled to negotiate a mutually
acceptable text for resolution 2202 (2015). Given the
history of the matter, given the bitterness of the conflict
and given the active support of troops and materiel that
continues to be provided to the separatists, that struggle
was hardly surprising. However, those problems should
not obscure the very simple truth: that above all
our combined objective must be to see an end to the
fighting in eastern Ukraine and a genuine and holding
ceasefire with lives saved as a result, to see respect for
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and to
see an end to external support for the separatists. That
is the standard by which we have judged this resolution
and voted accordingly.
New Zealand really does appreciate the fact that
Europeans have at last been able to come together and
act together to address this crisis, and, as a result of this
resolution, can now be seen to do so with the unequivocal
support of the Council. That is what we understand in
what negotiating parties sought to achieve in Minsk last
week, and indeed in that same city in September 2014.
We have therefore supported the outcome they agreed.
We might not like the compromises. We might
identify shortcomings. We know that ceasefires do
not always hold and, certainly, as events right now in
Debaltseve clearly demonstrate, they do not always
hold with consistency at all times and in all places. But
it has been agreed by those most directly affected. We
have now sent a signal of the Council’s support for a
ceasefire, which is another step towards the long-needed
political settlement. We have done so unanimously as
the Security Council.
Along with fellow Council member Malaysia,
New Zealand has a direct interest in respect of the
downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 — a
victim of the Ukrainian conflict — an interest we share
with non-Council members Australia, Belgium,
Canada, Germany, Indonesia, the Netherlands and the
Philippines, with whom both countries have actively
consulted over the past few days. The Council’s previous
decisions on Flight MH-17 are absolutely clear, so we

S/PV.7384

welcome the reaffirmation of resolution 2166 (2014),
which is the primary statement of the Council regarding
the accountability of those who illegally launched a
surface-to-air missile at a civilian passenger aircraft,
murdering 298 people on board.
We thank the primary sponsors of the resolution
for taking up and incorporating the language proposed
by Malaysia and New Zealand during the negotiations,
thus ensuring that the victims are not forgotten and that
those responsible may be ultimately held to account.
New Zealand agrees with the United Kingdom that the
amnesty agreed in Minsk does not and cannot apply to
those responsible for that crime.
The adoption of resolution 2202 (2015) does not
take place in a vacuum, which is a point that is implicit
in the press statement issued by the Council only an
hour or so ago (SC/11784). The Council is keenly aware
of the fragility of the present ceasefire, of instances
where it is only partly observed and of places like
Debaltseve where right now it is being outright ignored
so that one side can secure a territorial advantage on
the ground, after which they might presumably then
make as though they are observing what has previously
been agreed. That can only be deplored, but it does not
alter the fact that the parties have solemnly agreed and
committed to a ceasefire and that it is holding in most
places, and that is saving lives.
All of us must therefore continue to urge compliance
with the agreement and with resolution 2202 (2015),
particularly Russia, as a party to the Minsk agreements,
which agreed the ceasefire. It is in that capacity that we
call upon Russia to use its undoubted and considerable
influence on the separatists to require them to honour
that which has been agreed. If that happens, more lives
will be saved as a result.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): Nigeria would like to thank the
Russian delegation for the effort it has put into drafting
resolution 2202 (2015), which the Council has just
adopted. We were pleased to see it receive the support
of all Council members. Nigeria believes it is important
for the Council to send a timely and unequivocal
message in support of the efforts of the leaders of
Ukraine, Russia, France and Germany to find a lasting
political solution to the conflict in eastern Ukraine.
We urge all the parties to implement a comprehensive
ceasefire in line with the Minsk agreements. That is a
necessary first step in the search for peace. We stress
that there can be no military solution to the conflict

15-043317/15

S/PV.7384

Ukraine

in eastern Ukraine. The parties should pursue a
political solution through dialogue. It is important
that the separatists’ concerns be addressed within
the framework of a political settlement that does not
compromise the independence, unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Ms. Murmokaité (Lithuania): It is with a heavy
heart that we voted for today’s resolution 2202 (2015),
and with a clear understanding of the terrible toll that
this uninvited war has imposed on Ukraine. More than
20,000 people have been internally displaced owing
to the illegal annexation of Crimea; at least 5,665
people have been killed, some 2,000 of them since the
announcement of the ceasefire in September; nearly
14,000 have been wounded and some 1.5 million have
been forced to flee their homes. The Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has
warned that further escalation will prove catastrophic
for the 5.2 million people living in the midst of the
conflict in eastern Ukraine.
Since the announcement of the Minsk ceasefire in
September 2014, the militants have grabbed at least 550
square kilometres of Ukraine’s territory, and they keep
on grabbing more. Their advances have been buttressed
by an ongoing influx of Russian arms and sophisticated
weaponry, including that brought in under the pretext of
humanitarian convoys. In the past few weeks leading to
the latest ceasefire, the militant attacks have expanded
in the direction of the cities of Mariupol, Kramatorsk,
Artemivsk, Shchastya and others. Even as the package
of measures for implementing the Minsk agreements
was being drafted, reports were coming in of Russian
tanks rolling on Ukrainian soil and of more casualties,
including among children.
The Ukrainian city of Debaltseve is under siege
even as we speak. Ukraine is holding on, trying to
defend a piece of its own land, away from the ceasefire
lines established in the Minsk agreements. Heavily
armed criminals are continuing their onslaught against
Debaltseve and are threatening to continue their deadly
march up to Kharkiv and further. Yes, the Council
must speak out in support of the ceasefire. But we
know full well that previous ceasefires, whether
declared unilaterally by the Ukrainian Government
or established by the Minsk agreements in September,
have been repeatedly violated. Even the most recent
agreement is already being violated as we speak by
Russian-sponsored militants.

8/15

17/02/2015

Russian tanks, armoured personnel carriers,
howitzers and Grad and Tornado multiple-launch rocket
systems in the hands of the militants are holding the
eastern part of Ukraine captive. Only the most naïve
could imagine that the militants could have waged an
ever-expanding war without external help. Without
Russia’s direct support the so-called separatists would
have fizzled out, dwindled into non-existence many
months ago. Peace would have been restored and
thousands of lives would have been saved. Instead,
Russia has chosen to sponsor, arm and protect the
militants. It is a direct party to the hostilities and bears
the primary responsibility for the conflict that is tearing
into Ukraine’s flesh.
The package that today’s resolution endorses is
undoubtedly flawed, but it is the only thing we have.
For it to work, all the parties involved, including
Russia, must honour their commitments, including
the Minsk agreements of September 2014, in full and
in their entirety. Those agreements cannot be swept
under the carpet. The package of measures agreed
on as of 12 February is not and cannot be interpreted
as a replacement of, or substitute for, the September
2014 accords, only as a set of measures aimed at their
implementation.
We know well what needs to be done. Russian troops
and armaments must be withdrawn from Ukraine’s
territory. A viable mechanism monitored by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) must be established to monitor the ceasefire,
and militants must stop blocking the OSCE’s access.
Russia must stop supporting illegal militias operating
in the eastern part of Ukraine. Ukraine must be able to
re-establish control of its international border without
any preconditions. Humanitarian access must be
secured and respect for international human-rights and
humanitarian law must be restored. All hostages and
unlawfully detained persons — including Ukrainian
pilot Nadiya Savchenko, a former peacekeeper and the
only Ukrainian female soldier who has served with
peacekeeping troops in Iraq, now being illegally held in
the Russian Federation — must be released, as per the
package of measures agreed on 12 February in Minsk.
Peace cannot be achieved without accountability.
We have witnessed multiple times elsewhere how
impunity breeds more impunity, eventually provoking
new cycles of violence. The reports of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights have repeatedly pointed to the extent of the

15-04331

17/02/2015

Ukraine

serious crimes and abysmal state of lawlessness in the
militant-held areas. Only this past weekend, photos
were circulating of the self-proclaimed militant
chief Zakharchenko with beaten prisoners of war,
another reminder of the militants’ many violations of
international humanitarian law. We want to put on record
our firm conviction that justice and accountability must
be part and parcel of the path out of this devastating,
unprovoked war against Ukraine. The perpetrators of
the most serious crimes — and to find them we have
only to look at the reports of the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, which describe many
of them — including those responsible for the downing
of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17, must be held to
account. In that regard, we reiterate our call on Ukraine
to complete its accession to the Rome Statute.
After the devastating horrors of the Second World
War, Europe has shown remarkable will and ability
to pursue the path of reconciliation and peace. What
started with Franco-German reconciliation — the
European Coal and Steel Community — became a
unique model of reconciliation and integration that over
time evolved into the European Union of today, a model
for democracy, peace, prosperity and human rights
whose appeal continues to draw European nations
eager to join its ranks. It is reckless and profoundly
dangerous to seek to turn the clock back on that spirit of
reconciliation, solidarity and cooperation, which gave
Europe and the world its longest-ever period of peace.
Russia’s continued violations of the Charter of the
United Nations, the Helsinki Final Act and numerous
other agreements to which it is a signatory, as well as its
attempts to redraw internationally recognized borders
by force, threaten that peace.
In Minsk, the Presidents of Russia, Ukraine,
France and Germany recommitted to the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of
Ukraine — although some of those words somehow
managed to slip out of today’s resolution. We expect
that commitment to be respected unconditionally by
all, and by Russia in particular. We ask the United
Nations to continue its active engagement in seeking
a durable solution to this conflict through its good
offices, mediation, monitoring of human rights and
provision of humanitarian assistance.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): We
would like to commend the Russian Federation for
initiating today’s resolution 2202 (2015), as well as all
the countries that made positive contributions to its

S/PV.7384

final draft. Chad welcomes its unanimous adoption by
the members of the Security Council, who once again
demonstrated their unity and responsibility in the face
of the gravity of the situation in Ukraine, particularly
in its eastern region. We appreciate the measures
being taken to implement the Minsk agreements, and
in that regard we urge all the parties to begin working
immediately to put the resolution’s provisions into
practice in order to arrive at a lasting political solution
to the crisis in Ukraine.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela fully supports today’s resolution
2022 (2015) because we consider it a very important
and fundamental contribution to an agreement on
a political and peaceful solution to this conflict. My
country supports a peaceful resolution to conflicts in
accordance with the principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations. Venezuela emphasize’s that the
mediation of the countries in the region and active
diplomacy are the path to a negotiated resolution of the
conflict. In that connection, we support the fact that
the Security Council endorses through this resolution
the statement adopted at Minsk on 12 February by
the Presidents of the Russian Federation, Ukraine and
France and the Chancellor of Germany in support of
the package of measures for the implementation of the
Minsk agreements. Those agreements should have all
the necessary political support for their implementation.
We trust in the political will of the Heads of State that
made that possible.
Moreover, Venezuela welcomes the fact that this
resolution reaffirms resolution 2166 (2014) with respect
to carrying out a transparent, full, exhaustive and
independent international investigation, in conformity
with international civil aviation guidelines, that makes it
possible to determine responsibility for the downing of
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 so as to bring to justice
those responsible for that heinous act. We call on the
parties to adhere strictly to the obligations pertaining
to the protection of civilians, including the need to
guarantee humanitarian access to provide assistance
to internally displaced persons, refugees and other
persons residing in the areas affected by the conflict,
in accordance with the package of measures for the
implementation of the 12 February Minsk agreements.
In conclusion, we do not believe that this is a time
for hate, fear or war propaganda. This is a time for
peace, political dialogue and diplomacy.

15-043319/15

S/PV.7384

Ukraine

Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Jordan
voted in support of resolution 2202 (2015) because
we believe that a political solution is the right way to
achieve peace and security and to help Ukraine regain
stability. We call on the parties to fully implement
the provisions of the September Minsk agreement in
accordance with the specified time frame. The Minsk
agreement is the main reference point upon which all
successive agreements are based. Furthermore, we
believe that the package of measures does not in any
way alter the provisions of the Minsk agreement.
We call upon all parties to observe the agreements
and to implement the measures set out therein. We also
call upon them to take the necessary measures to declare
a ceasefire and to withdraw heavy weaponry. In that
connection, we would like to express our concern about
the failure over the last two days to respect the ceasefire
in Debaltseve. We also call on the secessionists to put
an end to violations of the agreements.
In conclusion, we call on the parties concerned
to show the seriousness required to reach a peaceful
political solution that allows Ukraine to regain its
territorial integrity and independence.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
China supports resolution 2202 (2015), which
the Security Council just adopted. The meeting of
the leaders of Russia, Germany, France and Ukraine
in Minsk resulted in an agreement on a series of
important issues pertaining to the Ukrainian crisis.
China welcomes that fact and views it positively. The
agreement reached by the four leaders in Minsk helps
to ease tensions in eastern Ukraine and to promote the
process of a political solution to the Ukrainian crisis.
The agreement was hard-won and we hope that it will
be valued and effectively implemented by all parties.
The Council should also scale up its support so that
this agreement can be an important watershed moment
in the efforts to de-escalate tensions in eastern Ukraine
and help restore peace and stability in the country at an
early date. Resolution 2202 (2015), which was adopted
unanimously, is an illustration of the international
community’s support for the fruitful diplomatic efforts
of the four leaders and for a political solution to the
Ukrainian issue.

10/15

17/02/2015

In addressing the Ukraine issue, we must stay the
course of a political solution. The problem of Ukraine
has historical complexities and present realities. A
fundamental and long-term solution of this issue must
both accommodate the legitimate interests and concerns
of all all regions and all ethnic groups throughout
Ukraine and address the legitimate concerns of all
the relevant parties so that a balance of interests can
be achieved. We hope that all parties will make joint
efforts to implement the agreement and search for a
political solution that is comprehensive, balanced and
long-lasting in order to achieve peace, security, stability
and development in Ukraine and the region as a whole.
China stands ready to continue to play an active
and constructive role in promoting a political solution
to the issue.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): Let me start with our
thanks to you personally, Mr. President, and to the
members of the Security Council for today’s strong
statement on the situation in Debaltseve. I will speak
on that issue later.
We are grateful to the members of the Security
Council for their continued support of the Minsk
process since the first agreements on a peaceful
settlement were adopted, on 5 and 19 September.
Ukraine welcomes the Council’s support for the recent
12 February agreements, which do not substitute for
but, rather, reinforce those adopted last Semptember.
The Russian side quite obviously positions itself
as a devoted proponent of the peace process and a
guarantor of the effective implementation of the Minsk
agreements. It even proposed resolution 2203 (2015),
which has just been adopted. Yet that is all on paper;
what happens in reality is quite the opposite.
Ukraine has demonstrated a responsible attitude to
fulfilling the international obligations it has undertaken.
The arrangement on ensuring the ceasefire regime
starting 15 February has been fulfilled as stipulated in
the documents adopted in Minsk and in the Normandy
format with the participation of the Presidents of
Ukraine, France and Russia and the Chancellor of
Germany. Withdrawing heavy weaponry after ensuring
an unconditional, comprehensive and sustainable
ceasefire — with the assistance and monitoring of

15-04331

17/02/2015

Ukraine

S/PV.7384

the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and the support of the trilateral contact
group — was to be the next step.

ammunition broke into Ukraine through the Izvaryne
border checkpoint, which the Ukrainian Government
currently does not control.

Unfortunately, despite hopes for a responsible
position on the part of all the parties that adopted the
12 February declaration in support of the package of
measures on the fulfilment of the Minsk agreements and
the signatories to that set of measures — including the
Russian Federation and the so-called Donetsk People’s
Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic — there has
been a failure to comply with the agreements, and the
hope for peace has virtually been ruined. Instead, at the
moment there are attempts to return everyone to war
and an escalation of the situation.

The situation in Debaltseve is incredibly tense.
Again with the support of Russian forces and heavy
weapons, the militants are incessantly and violently
attacking Ukrainian positions in and around the town.
Taking advantage of the situation of the Ukrainian
military refraining from taking action, in line with
the ceasefire, the militants and Russian forces have
done their best to surround the town. The militants’
ringleader blatantly threatened to kill every defender
of Debaltseve unless they laid down their weapons.
He also threatened to move westward and seize the
city of Kharkiv. Civilians are also falling victim to the
indiscriminate shelling of the town by the terrorists.

Yesterday, after telephone negotiations with the
President of Russia, the Chancellor of Germany and
the President of France, there was an agreement to hold
negotiations at the level of the representatives of the
general staff of the armed forces of Ukraine, the general
staff of the armed forces of the Russian Federation and
representatives of Luhansk and Donetsk. Negotiations
were held this morning via video teleconference. While
restoring the access of the OSCE mission to Debaltseve
was to be the outcome of the negotiations, the Russian
party blocked the opportunity. Militants in control of
Debaltseve have declared the continuation of offensive
operations, thereby flagrantly violating all of the
previous arrangements and the entire package of the
Minsk agreements.
From midnight on 15 February until this morning,
Ukrainian positions were shelled more than 160
times — not with small arms, but with mortars, artillery
systems, rocket systems and tanks. Eleven servicemen
were killed and 36 wounded as a result of those attacks
by the terrorists. Yet the Ukrainian military has kept its
weapons silent, unless it was under direct attack.
On the very first day of the ceasefire, the Russian side
illegally brought the fourteenth so-called humanitarian
convoy into the east of Ukraine. As before, that was
done without the consent of the Ukrainian side and
without activating the international mechanism that the
12 February arrangements clearly envisaged.
I have not mentioned that the number of trucks, as
well as their contents, does not match what was declared
in the documents. I think it will not be a surprise to any
member of the Council to hear that heavy weapons and
equipment continue to be shipped to the east of Ukraine.
Today at least 12 armoured vehicles and 54 trucks with

The cruel assaults on Debaltseve and many other
locations essentially make a mockery of the ceasefire
concept and undermine the very essence of the peace
process. Against that backdrop, we call on the countries
participating in the Minsk negotiations — Germany,
France and Russia — to make every possible effort to
ensure the fulfilment of the Minsk plan based on the
5 September Minsk protocol, the Minsk memorandum
of 19 September and the documents adopted on
12 February in Minsk.
We call on the countries Members of the United
Nations to express a decisive protest against the
blocking of the work of the OSCE special monitoring
mission. We also call on the permanent members of
the Security Council to prevent further violation of the
fundamental principles and rules of the United Nations
and avert the unleashing of full-scale warfare in the
very centre of Europe.
To become a real contributor to a peaceful settlement
of the conflict, the Russian Federation needs to
withdraw all of its armed forces from the territory of
Ukraine and to secure the Russian-Ukrainian border, as
well as to force Russian-backed separatists to fulfil the
provisions of the Minsk agreements.
The chance for peace must be used. The unity of
the entire civilized world in solidarity with Ukraine
gives hope for the restoration of peace.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Braun (Germany): Germany welcomes
resolution 2202 (2015), just adopted by the Security

15-0433111/15

S/PV.7384

Ukraine

Council, which endorses the 12 February package
of measures for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements of September 2014. The Security Council
has thus sent a clear signal that it is ready to assume
its responsibility at this crucial juncture in the conflict
in and around Ukraine to ensure the comprehensive
implementation of the package of measures for
implementation of the Minsk protocol of 5 September
and the Minsk memorandum of 19 September 2014,
which remain, in their entirety, the unalterable legal
and political basis for the conflict settlement process.
We hope that the endorsement of the Minsk agreements
by the Council will have a strong stabilizing effect on
the situation on the ground and contribute to the strict
and full implementation of the ceasefire and to the
follow-on political process.
According to current reporting by the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, thus far the
ceasefire has been largely holding, with the most
deplorable exception of Debaltseve, as outlined in the
Council’s press statement (SC/11784). The continuing
attacks threaten not only the ceasefire, they also
undermine the political settlement process as agreed
upon in the framework of the trilateral contact group
and as endorsed by the Normandy format Heads of
State and Government in Minsk.
Against that background, today’s resolution is
of the utmost importance. The resolution conveys a
stern message to those who violate the ceasefire. The
ceasefire spoilers must know that they are opposing the
resolve of the international community.
Germany reiterates its commitment to the sovereignty,
political independence, unity and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders,
in accordance with General Assembly resolution
68/262, on the situation in Ukraine. I would also like
to reiterate our condemnation of the illegal annexation
of Crimea, which we will not recognize. It is our clear
understanding, in the context of this resolution, that
the territorial integrity of Ukraine means territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Churkin (spoke in Russian): We had hoped
that the unanimous adoption of resolution 2202 (2015)
and today’s discussion in the Security Council, the first
since reaching the Minsk agreements of 12 February,

12/15

17/02/2015

would send a unifying signal and pave the way for
greater harmony in the Council’s work than before on
the issue of the Ukraine crisis. Our hopes were partly
realized. We continue to hope that this clear, concise
resolution will guide the parties towards implementing
the decisions adopted in Minsk.
However, we were disappointed by the discussion,
because some colleagues decided to begin with their
usual rhetoric, which was often offensive. Particularly
offensive were the attempts to rewrite the Minsk
agreements in these conditions. Some delegations
picked out certain parts of the agreement to interpret the
Minsk agreements. The situation now is very simple:
we need to look at the provisions of the resolution and
implement the document as it was adopted, as is the
usual fashion.
I should also mention the expression used by
Ms. Power in referring to an “upside-down world”. She
accused Russia of starting the crisis, but did we topple
the legally elected President? Throughout all of the
events that took place in Ukraine a year ago, Russia
continually called for a bloodless political solution. We
supported the 21 February agreement. We then insisted
on its implementation, even after the lawfully elected
President had been toppled.
We supported the 17 April communiqué that called
for constitutional dialogue. We supported the initiative
by the Chair of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). What was the impetus
for the armed conflict that we are seeing? The impetus
was the support by certain Western countries of the
decision of the Kyiv leadership to militarily suppress the
dissatisfaction of the people in the east. They set fire to
them in Odesa and burned them alive in Mariupol. They
launched a military operation in Donbas and started to
send in heavy guns. What is war? War is when there is
an attack and there is a defence. That is what we have
been seeing in recent times. That is what happened in
Debaltseve.
Kyiv could have acted nobly after reaching the
12 February agreement. They could have allowed their
soldiers surrounded in Debaltseve to save their lives.
Instead, they first denied that they were surrounded,
and then they began issuing orders not to lay down
weapons. There are certain rules to the game; you
cannot let heavy equipment out of a surrounded area
because that would simply qualify as regrouping. What
we are seeing is a regrouping of Ukrainian armed

15-04331

17/02/2015

Ukraine

forces after the September agreements in Minsk. Such a
courageous decision by the Ukrainian authorities could
have saved the lives of civilians. Instead, Kyiv preferred
to get carried away by patriotic rhetoric and called for
actions that have led to the most tragic consequences.
Ms. Power spoke of the difficult situation for
civilians in Debaltseve. What about the citizens in
Debaltseve who could not leave the city? One’s heart
bleeds for them. And are the people in Donetsk any
better off? Why did she say nothing about them?
Ukrainian security forces have been shelling Donetsk
for months, but no one seems to be bothered about that.
Many other villages and towns have been razed to the
ground as a result of the actions of Ukrainian security
forces. Why did no one in the West say anything about
those situations? We have been flagging those situations
all along. For some reason, however, there has been no
reaction from our Western colleagues. The September
Minsk agreements have not been upheld as we initially
hoped because the shelling of towns has continued.
The OSCE monitors therefore need to do their work,
including in and around Debaltseve. For that to happen,
however, safe conditions must be established. We all
must recall that these are unarmed people. Yes, they
are in armoured cars, but without certain minimum
security conditions they cannot effectively control or
monitor anything.
To be honest, I am surprised that our Ukrainian
colleague today returned to the issue of the
14 humanitarian convoys. Convoys have saved hundreds
of civilian lives in Donbas and Luhansk under shelling,
while being surrounded and subject to the active
blockade established by the Ukrainian authorities
against the people of those cities. We have always
Kyiv to cooperate with us in organizing the convoys.
Each and every time they have refused to cooperate; I
believe that the Ukrainian customs officers inspected
the convoys only once. We will not allow anyone to
play games with these issues. Kyiv needs to help us
save people’s lives. People need to get through the
winter. Russia has been providing aid, and we are very
satisfied and pleased with the assistance we have been
able to offer.
Two colleagues mentioned Crimea. I have just
one word to those statements: 93. Recently, a German
public opinion group conducted a poll among Crimean
residents and came to the conclusion that 93 per cent of
the people in Crimea supported unification with Russia.
In addition, 82 per cent said that outright; 11 per cent

S/PV.7384

said they would prefer it; 4 per cent were against it. That
is even slightly more than the percentage in favour in the
referendum on Crimea’s unification with Russia. With
regard to territorial integrity, resolution 2202 (2015)
confirms the territorial integrity of Ukraine — and this
in February 2015.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The representative
of the United States has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I just want
to be clear in response to my Russian colleague that the
United States wholeheartedly welcomes the agreement.
We will do all we can to support it. But if Russia is
committed to peace, it does not need a Security Council
resolution to prove it. There are actually easier ways
to prove it. Russia could stop arming the separatists;
stop sending hundreds of heavy weapons across the
border, in addition to Russian troops; stop pretending
that it is not doing what it is doing; and start calling on
and insisting that the separatists observe the ceasefire
around Debaltseve. Resolution or no resolution, what
matters is fulfilling the commitments that have been
made now multiple times. I assure him that we will be
the first to take notice, and it will actually be very easy
to see whether or not the commitments are being met.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I am glad to hear that the United States is
not going to prevent the implementation of the Minsk
agreements. With regard to the implementation of the
Minsk agreements and the statement about Russia
repeating certain previous arguments, we are not
pretending anything. We proposed a certain course
of action. No one listened to us. We warned about the
consequences. Sadly, those consequences are what they
have been. This has all been happening on our borders.
We made our choice, as set out in the Minsk agreements.
I hope that those agreements will be duly delivered on.
I hope that peace can be restored in Ukraine and that
there can be social consensus in the country — which has
not existed for a very long time now, not even before the
past year when the President was toppled. That is what
we need to work on, which Kyiv, for some reason, has
not wanted to do. For instance, one can see the disgust
over the new national holiday, which was declared
on the same date that they established collaboration

15-0433113/15

S/PV.7384

Ukraine

with the pro-Nazi army. They have said nothing about
setting up a new Constitution — a genuine pity. That is
what Russia had already warned about. Let us look at
the situation clearly and objectively.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The representative
of Ukraine has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine) (spoke in Russian): What
has been called the unification of Crimea should really
be called occupation and annexation following an
aggressive attack. We shall discuss that further.
What was said about humanitarian convoys
is a challenge to international law, which defines
arrangements for supplies of humanitarian assistance
to a second country. In today’s statement by the
representative of Russia, international law was once
again trampled all over. They have their law and they
know how to use it.
As to a constitution, we reject anything that smacks
of Russian interference. Russia has been trying to tell
us how we should develop and what our constitutional
order should be — what the next Constitution should
look like. Everything was clearly stated to our people.
With regard to the eastern regions, as well as
elsewhere, work is under way on decentralization and
expanding the powers of local authorities.
Therefore, once again, I ask that Russia not interfere
in our affairs. We will decide for ourselves how to live,
what to build and how to establish dialogue with our
own people.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): If Ukraine needs to find a way for dialogue it
should do so at last. But they are unable to do so. That
is why we keep saying, let us establish dialogue with
the people in the east. But Ukraine says that we are
interfering. They are asking us: What do the people in
the east want? We say that the people in the east want
federalization. They should therefore go and find that
dialogue.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The representative
of Lithuania has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.

14/15

17/02/2015

Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): There is a pattern in
this repeated taking of the floor, and usually there is one
delegation that ends by taking the floor three or four
times. We rarely do that, but this time I have a couple
of comments. First, it is not easy for any country, be it
Ukraine or any other country, to work on a constitution
in conflict or at gunpoint, where there are so-called
self-defenders, which is the way Russia has consistently
referred to the illegal bands of militants and criminals
who are better armed than many European armies.
Lithuania has no tanks — not a single one. Estonia,
Latvia and so many other countries in Europe have not
a single tank. How is it, then, that there are hundreds of
tanks in the hands of the militants? There are hundreds
of Tornados, howitzers, or whatever they are. This does
not make any sense. Those things do not drop out of
the sky, so somebody is supplying them. In looking at
the geography, those things can come only from one
direction, where the borders are completely porous and
far from international eyes.
We do believe, and in our national capacity we have
been telling and will continue to tell Ukraine, that it
has to continue with the reforms, that it has to combat
corruption and that it has to do a lot of things in order
to restore the trust that had been lost over the decades,
prior to this Government. But it is very difficult to take
care of a constitution when guns are pointed at your
head.
The other thing that struck me was basically a
phrase about how Kyiv could have nobly capitulated
and allowed the troops to leave. I wonder how many
countries represented in this Chamber would be happy
to capitulate their own city, surrounded by illegal
militants, bandits and insurgents — whoever they
are — far from any ceasefire zone, and to just give up
part of their territory and leave, nobly?
I think it is very cynical to talk of the noble potential
of the Kyiv authorities to leave and withdraw their
soldiers, and of Kyiv having missed that opportunity. It
is their territory and they are defending their territory.
That territory is excluded from any ceasefire agreement
reached at either of the Minsk negotiations. It is their
own territory, and I think that any country represented
at this table would do exactly the same. Any country
represented here would defend its own territory to the
last, and Kyiv is no exception.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor again.

15-04331

17/02/2015

Ukraine

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would very much like to have left the last
word to my Lithuanian colleague; I would have loved
to, if I could. I am probably abusing my speaking time,
but after what she said I cannot help but respond with
a couple of words. “Capitulate one’s territory.” Has the
full meaning of the Minsk agreements been understood?
Everything that we are talking about concerns the
reintegration of Ukraine. How significant is it where
the line is drawn in such conditions?
In recent months, the problem has been that the
Ukrainian security forces have been shelling towns.
They had to be pushed back from Donetsk so that they
could not shell the cities. But with all that bloodshed, if
Ukraine is to be reintegrated, is there a desire to draw
a new State borderline? In that case, let us draw a new
State borderline and then we can address that issue.
Now, as to the issue of weapons, Lithuania is, I
believe, the only State that has sincerely and officially
stated that it is supplying weapons to Kyiv. Perhaps
the militia could also be provided with some of those
Lithuanian weapons?
The President (spoke in Chinese): Our meeting
today is not an open debate. With that, I now give the
floor to the representative of Lithuania.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): We have a tiny
army and very small reserves of weapons. It is not
exactly right to suggest that Lithuania is providing
armaments to Ukraine. We have provided medical
assistance; we have taken wounded Ukrainian soldiers
into Lithuanian hospitals. That is true. However, it has
nothing to do with all of the heavy weaponry that has

S/PV.7384

been provided — we know from which side. So let us
not compare forces, because Lithuanian forces — and
we can revisit statistics next time — certainly have
nothing to do with that. Even if we did provide some
armaments, it would be a drop in the ocean. It would
not make a difference.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The representative
of Ukraine has asked for the floor again. I give him the
floor.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): I am sorry, Mr. President,
but what we have heard from our colleague is
unacceptable. Our leaders met in Minsk and they
made very clear statements. They supported very clear
provisions, and we cannot agree with the interpretation
of the Minsk agreements that has been heard from the
Russian side. I am so sorry, but we are not here to launch
a third round of Minsk negotiations and reinterpret
what our leaders agreed upon.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the floor
to the representative of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The members of the Council have continued
to provoke me. We are not interpreting anything. We
are taking the Minsk agreements and interpreting them
word by word, and we think that everyone should read
the document word by word and implement it.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

15-0433115/15
