General Assembly-Tbirtieth Session

8

to Colonial Countries and Peoples and poses a serious

threat to intemational peace and security;
3. Afjirms its determination to cootinue to take all
necessary steps with a view to the complete and speedy
eradication of colonialism and to the faithful and strict
observance by all States of the relevant provisions of
the Charter, the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the
guiding principies of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights;
4. Appraves the report of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the lmplementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples covering its work during
1975 27 including the programme of work envisaged
for 1976;2 ª
5. Calls upan all States, in particular the administering Powers, and the specialized agencies and other
organizations within the United Nations system to give
effect to the rooommendations contained in the report
of the Special Committee for the speedy implementation of thc Declaration and the relevant resolutions of
the United Nations;
6. Reaffirms its recognition of the legitimacy of the
struggle of the peoples under colonial and alien domination to exercise their right to self-determi-nation and
independence by all the necessary means at their
disposal;
7. Candemns the continued influx of foreign immigrants into the colonial T erritories in southern Africa
and the eviction and displacement of the indigenous
inhabitants of those Territories, as weU as the intensified activities of foreign economic and other interests
which are impeding the implementation of the Declaration with respect to the Territories;
8. Requests all States, directly and through their
action in the specialized agencies and other organizatioos within the United Nations system,, to withhold
or continue to withhold assistance of any kind from the
Government of South Africa and from the illegal racist
minority régime in Southem Rhodesia until they restore
to the peoples of Namibia and Zimbabwe their inalienable right to self-determination and independence and
to refrain from taking any action which might imply
reoognition of the legitimacy of the domination of the
Territories by those régimes;
9. Calls upan the colonial Powers to withdraw immediately and unconditionally their military bases and
installations from colonial Territories and to refrain
from establishing new ones;
10. Urges ali States, directly and through their action in the specialized agencies and other organizations
within thc United Nations system, to provide all moral
and material assistance to thc oppressed peoples of
Namibia and Zimbabwe and, with respect to thc, other
Territories, requests the administering Powers, in consultation with the Governments of the Territories under
their administration, to take steps to enlist and make
effective use of ali possible assistance, both bilaterally
and on a multilateral basis, in the strengthening of the
economies of these Territories;
11. Requests the Special Committee to continuc to
seek suitable means for the immediate and full implementation of resolution 1514 (XV) in ali Territories
which have not yet attained independence and in
~&~;
'
28 Jbid., chap. I, paras. 172--183.

(a) To formulate specific proposals for the elimination of the remaining manifestations of colonialism and
to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirtyfirst session;
( b) To make concrete suggestions whioh could assist the Security Council in considering appropriate
measures under the Charter with regard to developments
in colonial Territories that are likely to threaten international peace and security;
(e) To oontinue to examine the compliance of Member States with the Declaration and with other relevant
resolutions on decolonization, particularly those relating to Namibia and Southern Rhodesia;
( d) To continue to pay particular attention to the
small T erritories, including the sending of visiting missions thereto, as appropriate, and to recommend to the
General Assembly the most suitable steps to be taken
to enable the populations of these Territories to exercise their right to self-determination, freedom and
independence;
(e) To continue to enlist the support of national and
intemational organizations having a special interest in
the field of decolonization in the achievement of the
objectives of the Declaration and in the implementation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
12. Calls upon the administering Powers to cooperate, or continue to co-operate, with the Special
Committee in the discharge of its mandate and, in
particular, to participate in the work of the Comrnittee
relating to the Territories under their administration
and to permit the access of visiting missions to the
Territories in order to secure first-hand information and
ascertain the wishes and aspirations of their inhabitants;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with the facilities and services required for the implementation of the present resolution,
as well as of the various resolutions and decisions on
decolonization adopted by the General Assembly and
the Special Committee.
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975

3482 (XXX).

Dissemination of information
on decolonization

The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the question of publicity for the work of the
United Nations in the fidd of decolonization, 29
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence t? Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resoluttons and decisions of the United Nations
concerning the dissemination of information on decolonization, including in particular General Assembly resolution 3329 (XXIX) of 16 December 1974,
,
Reiterating the importance of publicity as an instrume_nt for furt~ering the aims and purposes of the Declaratio!1 and mmdful of _the pressing need for taking all
poss1ble steps to acquamt world public opinion with all
aspe~ts of the problems of decolonization with a view
to assisting effectively the peoples of the colonial
Territories to achieve self-determination, freedom and
independence,
29 lbid., chap. 111.

Resolutions adopted without reterence to a Main Committee

Bearing in mind the increasingly impc,rtant role being
playc<l in the widespread dissemination of relevant
information by a number of non-governmental organizations having a special interest in the field of
decolonization,
Expressing its appreciation of the continued efforts
of the Special Committee in the field of the dissemination of information on decolonization,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the question of publicity for the work of the United
Nations in the field of deoolonization;
2. Reaffirms the importance of effecting the widest
possible dissemination of information on the evils and
dangers of colonialism, on the determined efforts of
the colonial pooples to achieve self-determination, freedom and independence and on the assistance being
provided by the international community towards the
elimination of the remaining vestiges of colonialism
in all its forms;
-.
3. Requests the Secretary-General, having regard to
the suggestions of the Special Committee, to continue
to take concrete measures through all the media at bis
disposal, including publications, radio and television,
to give widespread and continuous publicity to the work
of the United Nations in the field of decolonization and,
inter alía:
(a) To continue, in consultation with the Special
Committee, to oollect, prepare and disserninate basic
material, studies and articles relating to the problems of
decolonization through the Office of Public Information
of the Secretariat and the unit on information relating to decolonization established in pursuance of General Assembly resolution 3164 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973 and, in particular, to continue to publish the
peri-odical Objective: Justice and other publications,
special articles and studies of the Office of Public Information and to select from among them appropriate
material far wider dissemination by means of reprints
in various Ianguages;
( b) To seek the full co-operation of the administcring Powers concerned in the discharge of the tasks
referred to above;
(e) To intensify the activities of ali information
centres, particularly those located in western Europe;
(d) To maintain a close working relationship with
the Organization of African Unity by holding periodic
consultations and by systematically exchanging relevant
information with that organization;
(e) To enlist the support of non-governmental organizations having a special interest in the field of
decolonization in the dissemination of the relevant
information;
(f) To report to the Special Committee on the
measures taken in the implementation of the prescnt
resolution;
4. Invites all States, the specialized arencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
and non-governmental organizations having a special
interest in the field of decolonization to undertake or
intensify, in co-operation with the Secretary-General
and within their respective spheres of competence, the
large-scale dissemination of the information referred
to in paragraph 2 above;

5. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek suitable means for the effective dissemination of
information on decolonization and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its thirty-first session.
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975

3483 (XXX).

Third United Nations Conference
on the Law of the Sea

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3067 (XXVIII) of 16 November 1973 and 3334 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974,
Noting the letter dated 19 May 1975 from the President of the Third United Nations Conference on the
Law of the Sea •to the President of the General Assembly30 regarding the decisions reached at the third session of the Conference, heild at Geneva from 17 March
to 9 May 1975,
Having considered the decision of the Confcrence,
as conveyed in the letter from its President, that its
next session should be hcld in New York from 29 March
to 21 May 1976 and that a decision regarding a fifth
scssion in 1976 should be left to its fourth session.,
Noting further that the Committee on Confcrences
has recommended to the General Assembly that the
fourth session of the Conference should be held in
New York from 15 March to 7 May 1976,31
1. Approves the convening of the fourth session of
the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the
Sea for the period from 15 March to 7 May 1976 in
New York and the convening of a fifth session in 1976
if such decision is taken by the Conference;
2 .. Decides to acoord priority to the Conference in
relation to other United Nations activities, except those
.A org&,1s established :.,y the Charte1 of .he Unite..i
Nations;
3. A uthorizes the Secretary-General to continue to
make the necessary arrangements onginaHy provided
under paragraph 9 of General Assembly resolution
3067 (XXVIII) for the efficient and oontinuous servicing of the Conference in 1976 and of subsequent activities as may be decided upon by the Conference;
4. Recalls, in this con-nexion, that it noted in paragraph 4 of its resolution 3334 (XXIX) the decision
of the Conference to accept the invitation of the Gove1:1ment of Venezuela to meet _at _Caracas at an appropnate date for the purpose of s1grung the Final Act and
related instruments adopted by the Conference and
authorized the Secretary-General to make the necessary
arrangements to that end.
·
2439th plenary meeting
12 December 1975

3530 (XXX).

Report of the Security Council

The General Assembly
Takes note of the report of the Security Council
coverin 5 the period fll'.,m 16 J une 1:17 4 10 15 J une
1975. 32
2442nd plenary meeting
16 December 1975
30
lbid., Thirtieth Session, Annexes, agenda ítem 30, document A/10121.
81 Jbid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 32 (A/10032 and
Corr.1), para. 34.
82 Ibid., Supplement No. 2 (A/10002).
