102

General Assemhly-Thirty-second Session

3. Decides that there must be a sustained and dctermined effort, on the part of all organizations most
closely connccted with human settlements, at both the
regional and global levels, to concert their planncd
programmes and projects;
4. Decides further that the existing mechanisms of
the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination must
be strengthened to ensure that co-ordination in the field
of human settlements is effective throughout thc wholc
United Nations system;

VII
WORKING RELATIONS WITH FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

I. Recommends that the Centre and the secretariats
of the regional commissions should establish working
relations, as regards the question of human settlements,
with the principal financia! institutions at the regional
and global levels;
2. Recommends that special co-operation should
exist at the global, regional and national levels between
the United Nations Development Programme and the
Centre;

VIII
CO-OPERATION WITH ORGANIZATIONS OUTSIDE THE
UNITED NATIONS SYSTEM

Recommends that, at the global and regional levels,
co-operation should be sought with universities, research and scientific institutes, non-governmental organizations and voluntary groups, in order to make ful!
use of their knowledge and experience in the field of
human settlements; at the intergovernmentaI leve!, this
co-operation should be formalized and at the secretariat
leve! it should be brought about by the establishment
of appropriate working relations.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977

32/163.

Strengthening of operational activities
in the field of industrial development
in the least developed among the developing countries

The General Assembly,
Taking note with satisfaction of the report of the
Industrial Development Board on the work of its
eleventh session, s1
Taking note of the report of the Executive Director
of ~he United Nations I1:dustrial Development Organizatlon on the strengthenmg of operational activities in
the field of industrial development, 82
Recalling the Programme of Action on thc Establishment of a New Intemational Economic Order contained in its resolution 3202 (S-VI) of I May 1974.
Bearing in mind the Lima Declaration and Plan of
Action on Industrial Development and Co-operation,sz
adopted by the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization at its Second General Conference held
at Lima from 12 to 26 March 1975,
'
81
Official Records of the General Assembly Thirty-second
Session, Supp/ement No. 16 (A/32/16).
'
82 A/32/118.
83See A/10112, chap. IV.

Recognizing that further steps should be taken to
implement without delay the decision to convert the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
into a specializcd agency,
1. Commends the United Nations Industrial Development Organization for its efforts in favour of the
lcast developed countries and requests it to intensify
its activities in connexion with the implementation of
the special measures adopted in their favour and to
devote the maximum resources possible to mcet their
needs and requirements;
2. W elcomes the establishment of a section within
the secretariat of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization to deal with the needs and requirements of the least developed countries;
3. Urges the Industrial Development Board to allocate a sizable sum from the United Nations Industrial Development Fund to the needs and requirements
of the least developed countries, taking into consideration General Assembly resolution 31 /202 of 22 December 1976;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Executive Director of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session on the
implementation of the provisions of the present resolution.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977

32/164.

Third General Conference of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization84

The General Assembly,
Recalling the recommendation contained in the Lima
Declaration and Plan of Action on Industrial Development and Co-operation, 83 adopted by the United Nations Industrial Development Organization at its Second General Conference, held at Lima from 12 to
26 March 197 5, and in General Assembly resolution 31/164 of 21 December 1976 to the effect that
the Third General Conference of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization should be convened in 1979,
Reca_lling further the offer made by the Government
of India to act as host to the Third General Conference/"
Noting the recommendations of the Industrial Development Board at its eleventh session in its capacity as
the Preparatory Committee for the Third General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization, 8 ll
l. Decides that the Third General Conference of
t~e United Nations Industrial Development Organizat1on should be held far a period of three weeks in
January/February 1980 at New Delhi;
2. A ccepts with appreciation the offer of the Government of India to act as host to the Third General
Conference.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977
84

See also sect. VIII, resolution 32/212 sect. VIII
A/32/232.
'
·
.
_Offic[al Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
.\esswn, Supplement No. 16 (A/32/16), para. 139.
85 See
86
