UNITED NATIONS

I

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FOURTH

COUNCIL
RECORDS

YEAR

2122nd

MEETING:

NEW

Am 2 2 @I92
8 MARCH

1979

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (WAgendaI2122) .’ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 28 February 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Equatorial
Guinea to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13121) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*..........................

1
1

1

I .
WPV.2122

L

;

’

:

&

,

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters comb&d
‘.
with figures;~ Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
r
document:
,_..
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/...) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the Oflcial Records of the Secur@ Council. The date of the document&
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
* ..
The resoiutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
1
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security CounciI. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1%5, became fully operative on that date.
<*r
. .
8

2122nd MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 8 March 1979, at 1030 a.m.
Resident:

Mr. Leslie 0. HARRIMAN

(Portugal): Once again I
4. Mr. FUTSCHER’PEREIRA
have asked to speak in the course of the present debate, and
I hope I shall be forgiven for doing so.

(Nigeria).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, .Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

5. In my previous statement, on Friday last,[tlNth meetbd, I wished first and foremost to express the solidarity of
my Government with the countries of southern Africanamely, Angola, Botswana, Mozambique and Kambiawhich have been for many. years, but still more so in the
mcent past, the target of intolerable and murderous aggressions by the forces of the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia. I then said that I reserved the right to return, at a later
date, to the substance of the problem with which we are
confronted today.

Provlsiolial agenda (S/Age!ndd2122)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 28 February 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Equatorial Guinea to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13121)

b. Now is the time to do, so, before we vote on the draft
resolution before us, which my delegation has considered
with the utmost attention. I shall limit myself to a few
remarks, but first I should like to state and underline once
more the basic position of my Government on the question
of Southern Rhodesia.

The meeting was called to order at 12.10 p.m

7. For more than a decade now, Southern Rhodesia has
been one of the constant concerns of the United Nations
and, in particular, of the Security Council, as well as of the
countries more directly affected by the development of its
international situations.

AdoptIon of the agenda
The age&t was adopted
Quest&a eommhg the situation in Southern Rhode&
Letterdated~Febmry1979fromtbePemaneat
RepWve
of Equatorial Gulnea to the United
Natlom addressed to the president of the Security
copndl (s/13121)

8. As long ago as 1%8, the Security Council declared that
the situation in Southern Rhodesia did indeed constitute a
threat to international peace and security. Since then more
than a decade has gone by, during which, year after year,
debate after debate, more than 20 resolutions have been
adopted by the Council. They all bear witness to the growing apprehension and indignation of the world in the t&e of
the continuation of a situation of rebellion and of abuse of
power. Some will say that the United Nations has done all
that was in its power. But others might also think, and
rightly so, that whatever we did has been disappointing, if
we are to judge the value of our action by the meagre results
that have been achieved so far.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the,decisions
taken at the preceding meetings, I invite the representatives
of Angola, Benin, Botswana, Cuba, Ethiopia, Ghana, Sri
Lanka and Yugoslavia to take the places reserved for them
at the side of the Council chamber.
At tk invitation of the Presfclnt. Mr. a% Figueltedo
(Angola). Mr. Houngavou (Benin), Mr. Modisi (Botswana),
Mr. Rua Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Setfk (Ethiopiq), Mr. Sekyi
(Ghatw), Mr. Fernando (Sri Lanka) and Mr. Komatina
p;&m;Jz
places reservedfor tkm at tk side of
.

9. My Government also considers illegal the regime in
Southern Rhodesia. We also deem it a duty of the international community to support the fight of the Patriotic
Front for a free and independent Zimbabwe. Likewise, the
Government of Portugal is fully conscious of the need to
comply, in the strictest form, with the sanctions decreed
against the Southern Rhodesian regime. Nor are we less
conscious of the imperative of denouncing-in the United
Nations and in any other international forums-its illegality, its injustice, its racism and repressive policies, its intolerable lack of respect for the most elementary human rights,
as well as for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
neighbouring States.

2. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them the revised text of the draft resolution sponsored by Bangladesh, Bolivia, Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait,
Nigeria and Zambia, contained in documentS/13140 &ted
7 March. It is my understanding that members of the Council are ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution.
3. The representative of Portugal has asked to speak
before the vote, and I now call on him.
1

10. That being our unequivocal position regarding the
present regime in Southern Rhodesia, we are bound to give
full support to the initiative of the Council of Ministers of
the Organization of African Unity to request, through the
African Group, the present meeting of the Security Council.
We think this meeting totally justified not only by the recent
acts of aggression committed by Southern Rhodesia against
its neighbours but also by the urgent need to denounce once
again the so-called internal settlement of Southern
Rhodesia-all
the more so on the eve of developments
aimed at confusing or misguiding the less informed settors of world opinion.

it. What the world and the many victims of the tragedy of
Zimbabwe have the right to expect from us is more than
condemnations and expressions of indignation and solidarity, no matter how justified they may be.

11. The Portuguese Government indeed cannot consider as valid the elections scheduled to take place next
April in Southern Rhodesia, in which the Patriotic Front
will not be allowed to participate, which will take place.
under martial law, and which will be promoted under a
constututionai law devised to continue to ensure all sorts
of unjustified priviledges to a small minority-the
same
minority that 14 years ago seized power and has since
used all kinds of unacceptable means to retain it, against
the wil! of the very peoples upon whom it imposed its
rule, and totally indifferent to its condemnation by the
world.

18. The Council should not, in our view, condone violence, and we feel that it would even betray the very ideals of
the Charter of the United Nations were it to encourage the
use of force to achieve the restoration oflegality in Southern
Rhodesia. Force might indeed overthrow the illegal Smith
regime. But this-achievement, although the first and basic
condition for the self-determination and independence of
Zimbabwe, will not by itself ensure the lasting solution
I
which it remains our duty to seek.

17. For its part, my delegation fully shares the point of
view expressed here last Monday by the representative of
Bangladesh [ZlZOth meeting,f, when he said that the Council
should once again press forward towards new efforts and
new initiatives at the diplomatic level, not only to preserve
human lives but also with a view to achieving a lasting and
peaceful settlement of, this question.

19. With deep dismay, we heard the representative of the
United Kingdom declare here that, following his visit to
southern Africa and various African States, Mr. Cledwyn
Hughes, special representative of the British Prime Minister, had come to the conclusion that at. the present stage
there seemed to be not prospect of convening a successful
meeting of all the parties to the conflict to. negotiate a new
settlement. It might well be so. But that can,never serve any
one of us or the Council as an excuse to give up.

12. From the exnerience of a not too distant past, we
know well enough in Portugal-without
needing other
countries as examples-what .value to attribute to elections in which only a single political force can participate,
where censorship makes impossible the free expression of
opinion and the aim of which is only to consecrate and
maintain a state of affairs, dictated by a political minority, transformed into absolute master of a collective
destiny.

20. The best way to prevent the present escalation of
violence and to try to ensure an independent Zimbabwe;
where all its nationals will be able to live freely and peacefully, is, in our view, the one referred to by the representative of the United Kingdom in the same statement and I
<
quote:
/
” . .’ j
6‘. . . the best prospect of ending the.conllictand of
achieving a return to legality and a peaceful settlement in
Rhodesia lies in an attempt to find a wider agreement
involving both sides in the conflict and incorporating
such essential features of the Anglo-American proposals
as a cease-tire and a neutral administration for the conduct of free and fair elections under. United Nations
supervision. Such elections, held under.impartial control, should determine the wishes of thepeople of Rhodesia as a whole and be conducted in a manner which
would command the acceptance of’ the international
community.” [Ibid.. para. 19.1
’ I,‘,
21. We are well.aware of the dif%ultie&such
a task. But
it seems to us to .be the duty of the ‘,Council to appeal
endlessly to the parties and to exert uponthem whatever‘
Pressure might prove necessary to mak$ them come to an
agreement on those bases.
I

13. From all that I have already said, it can of course be
righty inferred that we shall vote in favour of the draft
resolution submitted by Bangladesh, Bolivia, Gabon,
Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria and Zambia [S/23140].
14. Portugal will not accord any kind of recognition to the
forthcoming elections to be held- in Southern Rhodesia.
However, I should like to point out that, although we do not
know of any Portuguese entity that might intend to send
observers to follow those elections, there is no law in my
country preventing anyone-from doing so. My Government
will not fail to make it known that, should such an action be
envisaged, it would meet with its strongest disapproval, but
can hardly go further.
15. We hope that the draft resolution on which we are
about to vote will be adopted by a significant majority,
whatever difficulties some countries might encounter in its
formulation.
16. We shall then be entitled to say that we have performed our duty. But have we really performed it to the very
end7 Have we indeed exhausted all the possibilities available
to us in trying to contribute in a positive way to finding a
lasting solution for the tragedy of Zimbabwe? Once again
we have denounced the regime ofIan ‘Smith as illegal and
his so-called internal settlement as null and void. Once
again we have condemned all its evil aspects and actions and
expressed our,indignation at them. Is there anyone around
this table who might sincerely believe that. what we have
achieved does correspond to what the world at large
expected from us? Let us not delude ourselves by believing

22. The PRESIDENT: I shall now put ,the draft resolution
in document S/l3140 to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands. .
In favour:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zambia
Against: None
2

Abstaining France, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
The dqft resolirtion wasadopted by I2 votes to none, with 3
abstens~ons.’
23. The PRESIDENT: A number of representatives have
asked to be allowed to speak following the vote, and I shall
now call on them.
24. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): We abstained in
the vote on this draft resolution although there are some
parts with which we are in agreement. But, regrettably, the
text. contains features which make it impossible for us to
vote for it. Indeed, had it not been for the fact that some
changes had been made to make it less objectionable, we
should have had to vote against it.
25. The United Kingdom’s position on the matters dealt
with in the resolution is clear. In the first palce,’ as I stressed
in my ‘statement of 5 March 12220th meeting,?, we wholly
condemn the attacks made by the illegal regime on the
territory of neighbouring States, just as we condemn all
violence within Rhodesia, which has such tragic effects on
the civilian population, both African and European. We
deplore both the shooting down of civil aircraft and the
threats which have been made to do so outside Rhodesia.
26. We share the view expressed in the resolution on the
resumption of executions by the illegal r&me. These are, in
our view, abhorrent to all civilized opinion. We condemn
such executions in the strongest terms and have made this
clear to the Salisbury regime. Although so long as that
regime exists there are no practicai steps which the United
Kingdom Government can take to prevent them, we join
with other members of the Council and with the whole
international community in expressing our utter condemnation.
j
27. In my last statement I also set out the British Govemment’s views ‘on how best to continue trying to achieve a
settlement incorporating such essential features of the
Angl+American proposals as a cease-fire and a neutral
administration for the conduct of free and fair elections
under international supervision. It is a major defect of the
resolution that it does not include a renewed call for a
settlement along these lines. The absence of such a call
leaves the resolution ‘wholly unbalanced, and this is one of
the reasons why we’ have not been able to support it.
. li,.
28. Certainly the’. elections which the Salisbury regime
proposes to hold in April are unlikely to bring a peaceful
solution. It is hard to seehow it is possible to talk of holding
free and fair elections in present circumstances in Rhodesia.
We have made clear-and I reiterate it-that we have no
intention of being oflicially involved as a Government in
sending observers’ to .monitor the elections. The British
Government has not accepted that the internal settlement
holds out any real prospect of peace and the orderly and
genuine transfer of power in Rhodesia. The fighting is likely
to continue and the need for negotiations will remain. The
British Council believes that after any elections are held
there will be a need to bring the internal and external leaders
together around a negotiating table. We intend to continue
our work with all the parties for real peace.
’ See resolution

A5

(1979).

29. But it is a matter of principle for us that we cannot
accept language such as the resolution contains which seeks
to circumscribe the functioning of our parliamentary democracy. We cannot and will not accept that the British Parliament can be fettered in any way as to how it may decide to
inform itself about the situation in Rhodesia. We cannot
and will not accept that we should prevent or discourage
any United Kingdom citizens, whether Members of Parliament or whatever their status, from visiting Rhodesia to.
inform themselves about the situation in that country. Nor,
although we deplore the existence of press censorship ‘in
Rhodesia, do we think it right to try to dissuade journalists
or television commentators from informing themselves or
our public about the situation in Rhodesia. In this context
we reject any implication in the eleventh preambular paragraph that we are already subject to any obligation in that
sense,whether deriving from resolution 423 (1978) or otherwise, and, with reference both to that paragraph and the
tenth prearnbular paragraph, I remind the Council of the
limited scope of that resolution, as I made perfectly clear in
my explanation of vote when it was adopted f2067th meeting,?. I would also remind the Council that, as resolutions
adopted by the Council have stated time and time again,
Britian has a specific responsibility in relation to Rhodesia
and, therefore, the British parliament must be able freely to
exercise its judgement.
30. In these circumstances we must make it absolutely
clear that we do not intqrpret or accept the operative paragraphs of this resolution as precluding visits to Rhodesia by
private persons or Members of Parliament to observe the
elections, ‘or by anyone to inform themselves about the
situation in that country: or as in any way circumscribing
the rights of the United Kingdom Parliament freely to
exercise its responsibilities in relation to Rhodesia, having
regard to its own judgement of the wishes of the people of
Rhodesia as a whole.
.
31. It remains my Government’s overriding concern to
continue to work for a settlement on lines which could end
the war and command the acceptance and support of the
international community, and which would offer hope for
the stability and the economic and social prosperity of an
independent Zimbabwe. We will do nothing which is counter to this broad objective or which in any way represents a
concession to racism, violence or illegality.
32. Mr. ALGARD (Norway): Norway voted in favour of
the draft resolution just adopted by the Council. I should
like, however, to emphasize in relation to paragraph 3 that
the Norwegian Government, is accordance with its longstanding policy, will continue to provide only humanitarian
and economic assistance.
33. Mr. YOUNG (United States of America): In a few
moments the United States delegation will be making available to members of the Council copies of testimony provided yesterday by the United States Assistant Secretary of
State for African Affairs to the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee. That testimony contains a full explanation of
our views on the issues discussed in the resolution just
adopted.
34; However, the position of the United States on the
question of Zimbabwe has been stated and restated. The
United States, together with the United Kingdom, has participated in a sustained effort, spanning several years, to
bring about a negotiated settlement leading to genuine inde-

pendence for Zimbabwe. The Anglo-American proposals,
which call for free and fair elections under United Nations
supervision, are familiar to the Council. Those proposals
still embody the fairest, most comprehensive approach to
the question of Zimbabwe and my Government continues
to stand by them.

40. Nevertheless, the drafting of the eleventh preambular
paragraph, which immediately follows the one reaflirming
resolution 423 (1978), introduces, regrettably in our view,
some confusion between resolutions and decisions of the
Council. My delegation cannot approve such an assimilation.
41. Finally, and above all, the call made on all States in
paragraph 7 ‘to take appropriate action to discourage
organizations and institutions within their respective areas
of jurisdiction” is contrary to the freedoms expressly guaranteed by the Constitution of the French Republic.

35. The internal elections scheduled to take place in
Rhodesia in April will not end the conflict or provide a just
and lasting solution, nor will they meet the test of intemational acceptability. These elections will take place on the
basis of a constitution on which recognized political groups
were in no way consulted and which has been approved
only by a white minority that has sought to preserve a
disproportionate share of power and influence. The April
elections are the result of a process in which prmcipal
political groups have not been allowed to participate on an
equal basis. The United States will not give its support to the
Salisbury parties in their efforts to institute arrangements
which do not appear to meet the criteria for a genuine
transfer of power to majority rule and from which recognized political groups are effectively excluded.

42: In those circumstances, my cot&y was regretfully
unable to vote in favour of the draft resolution, although we
approved of its spirit and motivations. i
43. Mr. SIKAULU (Zambia): I have the honour-and, I
might say, the unpleasant duty-of speaking after the vote
to try to make the situation clear. I am speaking on behalf of
the delegations of Bangladesh, Bolivia, Jamaica, Kuwait
and Nigeria, as well as on behalfof my own delegation. All
these delegations are among the sponsors ,of the draft resolution just adopted.

36. Turning to the resolution. the United States SUDDO~~S
its over-all thrust and in particular its condemnationof the
raids into Zambia and Angola. However, there are various
aspects of the resolution regarding which my Government
has reservations, and the United States therefore abstained
in the vote. We recognize that the majority of the Council
are interested in expressing a point of view regarding the
important issues involved with which in the main we
sympathize.
37. I wish to make it clear that, in the view of the United
States, this is not a mandatory resolution; it does not give
rise to binding obligations. The resolution’s references to
the responsibilities of Member States refer, in my Govemment’s view, to the enforcement measures decided upon by
the Council in the past. Those provisions of the resolution
having to do with observers must be considered in the light
of the arrangements, limitations and responsibilities defined
by the Constitution and the public and legal practice of each
Member State.

44. We are disappointed that in these extremely critical
times in the situation in Southern Rhodesia such a mild
draft resolution has not commended itself to unanimous
adoption by the Security Council. We note in particular
that two of the countries that abstained on the draft resolution are the proponents of what are called the AngloAmerican proposals, proposals that have been on the table
for a long time and are rapidly losing, if they have not
already lost, their relevance because they have not been
pursued with the necessary vigour and determination.
45. I listened to the explanations of vote. Three points
were stressed: one was the absence of a reference to the
Anglo-American proposals, the second wasthe condemnation of all violence in Southern Rhodesia; the third was the
need for certain countries and their publics to inform themselves of the situation in Southern Rhodesia.
46. Let me take the last point. The situation in Rhodesiais
not a new one. What is involved is obvious. There is an
illegal regime that has, for the last 14 years, entrenched itself
in power. No other information can be required. All that is
required is for us to address ourselves to the reality that the
problem of Southern Rhodesia can be solved only through
the removal of the illegal regime and the return of Rhodesia
to legality, or, indeed the granting of genuine independence
to Southern Rhodesia.

38. We do not believe that this resolution is intended to
raise obstacles or barriers to the negotiation of a peaceful
and just settlement of the Rhodesian problem. The United
States does not interpret this resolution as endorsing the use
of force from any quarter or approving measures that sup
port the use of force. This resolution must be interpreted in
the light of Charter obligations to settle international disputes by peaceful means and to ensure that armed force
shall not be used save in the common interest.

47. It is therefore amazing that now, in the light of specific
Anglo-American proposals that are on the table, emphasii
should be placed on the need for people to inform themselves, when theyknow that the Anglo-American proposals
have not gone anywhere because of the intransigence of the
Ian Smith regime.

39. Mr. LEPRE’ITE (France) (intetprez&onfimFrencA):
As I emphasixed in my statement on 5 March [212Oth
meeringj, France unreservedly condemns the raids carried
out by Southern Rhodesian forces against the neighbouring
States. Hence, the provisions regarding those actions that
are contained in the draft resolution submitted to the Council today meet with our full approval. Similarly, France
considers that the consultation envisaged by Ian Smith for
20 April is ‘not truly democratic-and
only a democratic
consultation could transfer power to the majority inRhodesia. Therefore, we cannot approve the sending of observers
to those elections.

48. One would have wanted and expected the draft resolution that has been adopted by the Council to be cosponsored by the very proponents of the Angl+American
proposals. That is an initiative that they, not we in the
Group of Non-Aligned States, should have taken, because
the events in Southern Rhodesia, the so-called elections that
are to take place next month and the violence that is going
on are contrary to the Anglo-American proposals.
4

49. Regarding the violence in Southern Rhodesia, it is, in
the view of the sponsors, an over-simplification to talk
purely in terms of violence in Rhodesia. The violence there
is being caused by ,the existence of the illegal r6gime. It is
Smith who is committing wanton murders, wanton killings
of the people of Zimbabwe. And the people of Zimbabwe
are reacting. So I think it is not justified to equate the people
of Zimbabwe engaged in a struggle for liberation with the
actions that Smith is taking against them.
50. We hope that the delegations that abstained on this
resolution will still, nevertheless, take seriously the important elements contained in it, especially the need for
Member States to refrain from sending observers to Southem Rhodesia to observe the so-called elections, because the
Security Council has already taken a position on the fact
that the so-called elections are contrary to the very purposes
of the United Nations and the genuine aspirations of the
people of Zimbabwe.
51. It should be borne in mind that the war in Southern
Rhodesia is escalating. The front-line countries, and my
country is one of them, have exercised much restraint in the
situation, but it is quite clear that the Smith @me is
seeking to general& the conflict in southern Africa and to
involve the front-line countries in the conflict directly. The
question is for how long the front-lime countries can allow
their people to be maimed, to be bombed and to be killed.
For how long can the front-line countries allow their sovereignty and their territorial integrity to be violated with
impunity by the Smith r&me?
I.,
:
.,‘,(I’
‘.
.
_‘.
. .‘.
.,‘.,
‘.
:
,a.
; .b
,.
’ _‘.
. . .,
* ‘,
1

.
.. ‘.,
.. ”

-<

52. I leave it to those who have abstained seriously to
ponder these questions. I hope that, as the situation in
Southern Rhodesia progresses, those who have taken action
which does not help the international community to achieve
its desire of resolving the conflict in Southern Rhodesia will
not escape responsibility.
53. Mr. YOUNG (United States of America): It. really
should not be necessaryto add this, but I think that what we
tried to say in our explanation of vote was that our objection wasessentially to the idea that the Council could decide
for citizens of the United States where and when they should
travel. ,I .&ink that one of the things that my country has
always stood for-and we get into trouble when we depart
from thii-is that we should not restrict the rights of our
citizens to go anywhere in the world they want, to see
anything in the world they want to see. We usually find that
the democratic process works for us. This does not influence policy negatively. In fact, 1 think it creates what is an
enlightened and progressive policy. So it is one thing for the
Council to take decisions that would advise and govern the
travel of our citizens and another for us, in the debate,
within our form of government, to decide what our policy
is. Our abstention is essentially related to protecting those
elements of our national sovereignty and our democratic
process which we feel to be very important and is in no way
a determination of the legality or illegality of the regime in
Rhodesia.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

Unite 1 Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
Section, Neti York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

from

or write

LES PUBLICATIONS

bookstores
and disttibutors
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES NATIONS

UNIES

L.es publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
do monde entier. Informez-vous
aupr&s de votre iibraire
ou adressex-vous
a : Nations Unies. Section des ventes. New York ou Geneve.
KAK

IfOJIYVHTb

H3fiAHKR

OPI-AHK3AlUiK

OIi-bElUfHEHHhIX

HAWfR

amfax
*amen
Hauxg.

ODraHHsaqm
06’bemiHeAHblx
HaqnR
~omxo
KynHrb
a KHH~~KH~IX MaraH arenmmax
so acex pafionax
raspa. HasonxTe
cnpaaxa
06 xwamixx
a
x~xxwo~
narasxxe
mm nkmmfe
no axpecy : Oprami3aurix
OtVbenxxexxbrx
Cexuun no npoxame
xsnanxfi.
Hbm-Hopx
xxx )KeHeBa.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

H3naHHn

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estan en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Cons&e
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Section de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Lftho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

SU.S. 1.50

79-70002-December

1981-2.250
