UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/746
2 July 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 2 JULY 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ADDRESSED
TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Pursuant to paragraph 9 of Security Council resolution 1242 (1999) of
21 May 1999, I have the honour to submit a detailed list of parts and equipment
necessary for the purpose described in paragraph 1 of resolution 1175 (1998).
In order to help prepare the above-mentioned list, I dispatched a group of
five experts to Iraq. The experts were provided by Saybolt Nederland BV, which,
under a contract with the United Nations, has been providing independent oil
inspection agents since the beginning of the humanitarian programme in Iraq
pursuant to resolution 986 (1995). The group visited Iraq from 6 to
12 June 1999 to review the situation on the ground and, in consultation with the
Government of Iraq, to prepare the list of spare parts and equipment necessary
to enable Iraq to increase the export of petroleum and petroleum products, in
quantities sufficient to produce the sum established in paragraph 2 of
resolution 1153 (1998). The report of the group is attached for your
information (see annex).
As stated in my previous reports to the Security Council, including the
most recent one submitted on 18 May 1999 (S/1999/573 and Corr.1 and 2), the oil
industry of Iraq continues to be in a lamentable state. It may be recalled that
the group of experts had stated then that the productivity of existing oil
fields in Iraq had been seriously reduced, some irreparably, during the past two
decades. They had also stated that a sharp increase in production without
concurrent expenditure on spare parts and equipment would severely damage
oil-containing rocks and pipeline systems, and would be against accepted
principles of "good oil field husbandry".
According to the group of experts, Iraq has been continuing the practice of
overproduction of crude oil from wells without sufficient well pressure
maintenance. Consequently, there have been high levels of production decline
from a significant number of producing wells. As reported previously
(S/1998/1233), owing to the lack of water removal facilities, a significant
number of wells have ceased production, in both the north and the south.
According to the group of experts, approximately 20 per cent of those wells are
irreparably damaged.

99-19779 (E)

060799

/...

S/1999/746
English
Page 2

Nevertheless, the water injection programme in the south, assisted by
treatment chemicals and the initiation of new production, has allowed for an
increase in production at a level greater than the losses incurred, resulting in
an overall increase, as referred to in paragraph 11 of the report of the group
of experts. According to the group of experts, refinery throughput reductions
have released, albeit in the short term, additional crude oil for export.
The current rise in the export volume of Iraqi crude oil of an average of
approximately 300,000 barrels per day from phase IV to phase V (which includes
100,000 barrels per day owing to reduced refining throughput), should not create
complacency regarding the urgent need for spare parts and equipment for the oil
industry. As pointed out by the group of experts, the current incremental
production rates may indeed briefly reach a plateau of 200,000 barrels per day,
but they will be achieved with serious environmental consequences, as well as
damage to oil wells. Furthermore, the higher production rates will begin to
decline unless much-needed chemicals for drilling mud and perforating and other
equipment and spare parts - some of which have been placed on hold by the
Security Council Committee established by resolution 661 (1990) - are delivered
to Iraq in a timely manner. The absence of a single spare part or item of
equipment, as small as it may be, could be sufficient to prevent the completion
of an entire water injection project or well completion programme. I welcome,
therefore, the new format in the approved distribution plan for phase VI,
indicating the interrelationship of the spare parts and equipment requested,
which should assist in the consideration and approval of applications.
At 29 June 1999, a total of 958 applications, with a value of over
$508 million, for spare parts and equipment for the Iraqi oil industry had been
received by the Office of the Iraq Programme, of which 785, with a total value
of $392 million, were circulated. Of the total number of applications
circulated, 561, with a total value of $287 million, have been approved by the
Security Council Committee and 201, with a total value of $95 million, have been
placed on hold. There remain 73 applications, with a total value of
$82 million, which have not yet been circulated because of insufficient
information provided by the applicants.
The group of experts, in reviewing the submission of the Government of
Iraq, has stated that the distribution plan for oil spare parts and equipment
under phase VI aims to stabilize and, where possible, to increase crude oil
production while undertaking prudent repair and maintenance; to enhance
operational efficiency; and to undertake projects to improve product quality and
to address environmental and safety issues.
The total value of the spare parts and equipment, as listed, exceeds the
$300 million provided for under resolution 1242 (1999). As indicated in the
distribution plan for phase VI, the Government of Iraq will enter into contracts
for spare parts and equipment up to a value of $300 million during the initial
period of phase VI and, if oil revenues generated during phase VI are likely to
exceed the total of the $3,004 million required for the implementation of the
approved distribution plan, the Government intends to enter into additional
contracts up to the value of $300 million (S/1999/671, annex II, enclosure).
Any additional amount requested for the purchase of oil spare parts and
equipment would require authorization by the Council. I intend to keep under
/...

S/1999/746
English
Page 3

constant review the revenues received during the current phase and address the
matter within the context of the 90-day report to be submitted to the Council
pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 1242 (1999).
As indicated by the group of experts, while the estimated value of the list
of spare parts and equipment submitted by the Government of Iraq is twice the
amount approved by the Council in resolution 1242 (1999), the amount indicated
by the Government of Iraq is considered to be commensurate with the production
levels achieved and predicted, particularly given the emphasis placed on major
projects and investment in safety, control of pollution and environmental
damage.
The stated crude oil production targets of the Government of Iraq are:
3 million barrels per day by December 1999; 3.2 million per day by March 2000;
and 3.5 million per day by December 2000. According to the group of experts,
the production targets could be met, subject to the continued arrival and
distribution of spare parts, materials and equipment in a timely manner. Any
technical problems encountered with the transport infrastructure and loading
facilities, however, would inevitably negate the advantages of recent increases
in the production and export of oil. It is essential, therefore, to resolve
urgently the deficiencies in the areas of production and transportation
infrastructure, power supply, intermediary storage capacity, communications and
safety measures. As pointed out by the group of experts, the operations in
Mina al-Bakr are not carried out in an operationally safe manner. Currently,
control of transportation systems of crude oil from Iraq’s southern oil fields
is carried out in a manual mode and, actually, owing to the lack of intermediary
storage capacity, a large percentage of crude oil is transferred almost directly
from the producing fields to Mina al-Bakr. This operation involves a length of
180 kilometres of the pipeline, without efficient communications and operations
control. A particular concern is the control of any situation that might be
caused by an emergency shut-down of a loading procedure at Mina al-Bakr, which
could result in major and disastrous oil spillage.
It would be most helpful, therefore, if the Council could request the
Security Council Committee to proceed as expeditiously as possible in its
consideration and approval of applications for oil spare parts and equipment
submitted under phases IV and V, as well as under phase VI, and to review
further all applications placed on hold. The Office of the Iraq Programme
stands ready to assist the Committee in providing any additional information, as
well as technical advice, that may be required.

(Signed)

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1999/746
English
Page 4

Annex
Report of the group of experts established pursuant to paragraph 9
of Security Council resolution 1242 (1999)

A.

Terms of reference

1.
In paragraph 9 of its resolution 1242 (1999) of 21 May 1999, the Security
Council requested "the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Government of
Iraq, to submit to the Council, by 30 June 1999, a detailed list of parts and
equipment necessary for the purposes described in paragraph 1 of resolution
1175 (1999)". The terms of reference for the group of experts included:
preparation of an independent report on Iraq’s current oil production and
transportation capacity, a forecast of the oil production capacity increase of
Iraq, based on the receipt and installation of oil spare parts and equipment; a
review of the list of oil spare parts and equipment submitted by the Government
of Iraq under the distribution plan for phase VI; and a review of the
arrangements for the monitoring of oil spare parts and equipment in Iraq.

B.

Introduction

2.
At the request of the Secretary-General, a group of experts visited Iraq to
ascertain the current requirements for spare parts and equipment in relation to
Iraq’s ability to sustain current export capacity of crude oil and also to
review and further assess the potential for increased exports.
3.
The group of experts visited Iraq from 6 to 12 June 1999 and met with the
relevant authorities, in particular the Ministry of Oil, and representatives
from all the operating companies in the oil sector in order to finalize the list
of oil spare parts and equipment.

C.

Distribution plan for phase VI

4.
The distribution plan for phase VI as it relates to oil spare parts and
equipment, as provided by the Government of Iraq, aims to stabilize and, where
possible, to increase crude oil production while undertaking prudent repair and
maintenance; to enhance operational efficiency; to undertake projects to improve
product quality; and to address environmental and safety issues.
5.

The distribution plan of the Government of Iraq has four main sections.

Crude oil production
6.
The stated crude oil production aims of the Government of Iraq are:
3 million barrels per day by December 1999; 3.2 million per day by March 2000;
and 3.5 million per day by December 2000.

/...

S/1999/746
English
Page 5

Oil refining
7.
The objectives of the Government in oil refining are: to increase
lubrication oil production to meet overall local demand; to improve the quality
of refined products by reducing sulphur contents in gas oil and kerosene and the
necessity for lead compounds in gasoline; to improve safety standards and firefighting capabilities; to improve environmental protection by enhanced treatment
to effluent water and gas emissions; and to increase operating efficiency in
general. Improved control and increased efficiency of the refining process and
improved product quality (especially lubricating oil production) are required to
support the increased production levels envisaged.
Gas processing
8.
The repair and maintenance of degassing plants and utilities is also
envisaged to increase crude oil production more efficiently and, as a result, to
provide more gas to be used as fuel. Oil field production fluids are
multi-phasic and over the life of the field will vary in both flow rate and
composition. It is necessary to separate these phases to obtain disposable
quality water and to export quality hydrocarbon phases, namely gas and oil.
Three-phase separators are units that separate the gas, oil and water phases of
the production fluids.
Oil product distribution
9.
In the area of oil product distribution, the Government of Iraq intends to
improve safety standards through the provision of new equipment; to improve
environmental protection through the provision of tank cleaning and sewage
disposal equipment; and to increase overall operational efficiency through the
provision of better equipment, such as storage tanks and transportation. This
will enhance flexibility in distributing the mineral oil products (gasoline and
gas oil) to domestic users in the country.

D.

Production estimates

10. The scale of production capacity from indigenous oil fields in Iraq,
especially in the south, is often misinterpreted. The impact of the recent
low-key start to the water injection programmes in the North and South Rumaila
and Zubair fields has distorted the timing of earlier predictions of the "daily
oil production versus time" graph. During previous expert missions it had not
become clear that Iraq was considering the commencement of water injection
programmes in the manner currently being undertaken.
11. These fields are now contributing an additional 160,000 barrels per day to
the total production figure, compared with capacity at the end of phase IV.
This apparent leap forward was triggered by the arrival of bactericide to treat
the injected water. It should be noted that the injection wells were drilled
before 1994 and all necessary in-field equipment (such as flow lines) was in
place to start a programme of water injection and pressure maintenance. As the
North Rumaila field was in critical need of a wet oil treatment plant to

/...

S/1999/746
English
Page 6

complement the rest of the programme, in the absence of incoming spares, various
other plants were cannibalized.
12. Starting in August 1998, the injection programmes in the South Rumaila and
Zubair fields were cautiously implemented (on a limited number of wells). The
response of the reservoirs (eventually including North Rumaila) provided an
increment of 160,000 barrels per day by May 1999. Previous estimates of the
Ministry of Oil with regard to the contribution of these water injection
projects were based on reservoir engineering predictions made by foreign
consultants, using computer models, which err demonstrably on the conservative
side. Higher production rates than expected are now being achieved, and may
briefly reach a plateau of perhaps an incremental 200,000 barrels per day in the
next few months. After that they would be expected to begin declining, unless
much-needed chemicals for drilling mud, perforating equipment and other
completion technologies are delivered. Some of these items are still "on hold"
by the Security Council Committee established by resolution 661 (1990), although
they are essential for the operation of drilling new wells and/or well
completion.
13. The extent and timing of the gain from the southern water injection
programmes suggest that the "line water drive" technique is being applied, where
injection wells are located to produce a linear flood front, sweeping through
sections of the oil-containing reservoir rocks. This produces a short-term jump
in the rate of production of oil, but a long-term deterioration in the total
volume recovered. There are many technical issues involved, the effects of
which can be summarized as a sudden fall-off in production at some point in the
future. Depending on the rate of introduction of further projects using the
same technique, it is conceivable that the projections of the Ministry of Oil
will be met, possibly exceeded, for the next six months to one year, with a
legacy of water-damaged reservoirs.
14. Good oil field practice dictates a structured approach, requiring reservoir
stimulation, adequate pressure monitoring, pre-treatment of injected water and
modern well completion techniques, etc., which will dictate the optimum well
pattern for water flood. It is axiomatic that this good husbandry of Iraqi
hydrocarbon assets will rely on the timely distribution of oil spare parts and
equipment and related services, pursuant to resolutions 1175 (1998), 1210 (1998)
and 1242 (1999).
15. Perhaps of equal significance is the ongoing success with the pilot
development of the West Qurna field, with proven reserves of about 11 billion
barrels. Under the current equipment constraints, a mere 40,000 barrels per day
has been achieved, but despite the fairly heavy crude, i.e., 23 degrees by
American Petroleum Institute (API) gravity standards, this field will play a
pivotal role in the export projections for the next 18 months. The effect of
bringing heavier crudes on stream in the south of Iraq can be seen in the
continual decline in the API gravity of Basra light crude, from an initial level
of over 34 degrees in phase I, to a level well below 32 degrees on recent
shipments in phase VI. This decline will continue until it becomes possible to
separate grades in the south, and to market separate grades as in the past
(Basra medium and heavy). This will require significantly increased shore-side
storage facilities, such as have been proposed for Fao under phase VI.
/...

S/1999/746
English
Page 7

16. Ultimately, the Luhais field will also come on stream to boost capacity
figures. However, oil field managers in Iraq recognize that they are causing
irreparable damage to the older fields using current production practices.
Annual rates of decline on these assets are difficult to define, because of the
lack of pressure monitoring equipment, but estimates range from 2 per cent in
the newer fields to perhaps 15 per cent for significant contributors like
Kirkuk. A total of 54 wells have watered-out in the south since mid-1998 and
are unlikely to be revived, unless they are found suitable for conversion to
water injectors. This would mean that former crude oil producing wells would be
used as water injection points for the purpose of maintaining pressure in the
reservoir.
17. Future contributions from those projects, assisted by the arrival of oil
spare parts and equipment, would help to offset the expected steep declines in
other areas, but significant incremental steps in production (i.e., 500,000
barrels per day) would require major new reserves to come on stream. To this
end, the Government of Iraq has initiated discussions with foreign companies to
set up projects for developing new fields, as well as to discuss projects to
further develop already producing fields, using modern technologies.
18. It is now possible to analyse the net impact of the recent history of the
Iraqi oil industry, based on the following finite set of facts, some of which
are corroborated by the group of experts and others are based on recent
experience in Iraq:
(a)
per day;

The net dry oil export volume for phase IV averaged 1,712,000 barrels

(b)
per day;

The net dry oil export volume for phase V averaged 2,009,000 barrels

(c) During phase V, the minimum oil volume exported (averaged over one
week) was 1,283,000 barrels per day, and the maximum, recently attained export
figure was 2,603,000 barrels per day, which illustrates the typically erratic
nature of production.
19. It is also relevant to ask why production rose by 297,000 barrels per day
on average during a period when the initiative to procure spare parts and
equipment was still in its infancy. There are four main explanations:
(a) Owing to the lack of spare parts, refinery throughput for internal
consumption and exports to Jordan fell by an average of 110,000 barrels per day;
(b) As detailed above, the effect of the water injection projects has been
an incremental 160,000 barrels per day above the production levels in the North
and South Rumaila and Zubair fields, compared with the second half of 1998;
(c) The preliminary rate of production from the poorly resourced
development of West Qurna is close to 40,000 barrels per day;

/...

S/1999/746
English
Page 8

(d) The natural decline of producing reservoirs without pressure
maintenance can thus be inferred to be minus 13,000 barrels per day in averaged
effect.
20. The response of the fields in the south to the water injection programmes
has been better than expected and is currently on an upward trend (which could
stop suddenly because the injected water is not being filtered for fine solids).
The recent high levels of export are probably the result of the concurrent
effects of reduced refinery capacity coupled with rising incremental production
from the North and South Rumaila and Zubair fields, and West Qurna in the south.
Very little incremental change in northern production levels has occurred,
declines being offset by improvements in oil separation owing to the arrival of,
for example, dewatering chemicals, and small increases in contributions from
such fields as Saddam.
21. The inferred average decline rate does not match expectations and, in the
opinion of the group of experts, demonstrates that the incremental contribution
from the southern water injection projects and new fields is not 200,000 barrels
per day (160,000 barrels per day from North and South Rumaila and Zubair, plus
40,000 barrels per day from West Qurna), but potentially closer to 250,000
barrels per day (200,000 barrels per day from North and South Rumaila and
Zubair, plus 50,000 barrels per day from West Qurna). Additionally, refinery
throughput has been curtailed (by changes in local demand, non-arrival of key
spare parts or later than expected arrival) and redirected to export.
22. Total Iraqi oil production and consumption figures are normally quoted by
the producers as averages for the last month or quarter, and any inferences
drawn from comparisons made with export figures based on the last few days or
weeks should be viewed with caution.

E.

Transportation capacity

23. In accordance with Security Council resolution 986 (1996), paragraph 6, the
crude oil originating from Iraq is exported through the Iraq-Turkey pipeline to
Ceyhan in Turkey, and the loading platform, Mina al-Bakr, located in the Persian
Gulf.
24. The demonstrated capacity of the Iraq-Turkey pipeline is presently limited
to a maximum of 1.05 million barrels per day. The actual throughput, however,
fluctuates, influenced by power and communication failures, as well as the
infrastructural limitations as described in the earlier reports of the group of
experts. The average operation throughput during phase V was approximately
845,000 barrels per day. It is envisaged that after completion of the repairs
to the infrastructure in the north, the capacity will increase to a figure
approaching 1.6 million barrels per day. However, these repairs will not be
completed before April 2000.
25. The export capacity through Mina al-Bakr is erratic and influenced by
numerous deficiencies in the production and transportation infrastructure, power
supply, intermediary storage capacity and communications in the southern part of
Iraq. The average throughput during the last months of phase V was
/...

S/1999/746
English
Page 9

approximately 1.3 million barrels per day. Although the sum of both locations
exceeds Iraq’s present export capacity, the group of experts strongly recommends
that priority should be given to resolving the deficiencies mentioned,
especially as it is the opinion of the group that operations at Mina al-Bakr are
not carried out in an operationally safe manner. In December 1996, operations
at Mina al-Bakr were resumed after completion of provisional repairs. It should
be noted that the average loading rate was approximately 280,000 barrels
per day. The present throughput is five times more than the throughput at the
start of the oil-for-food programme; this increase has clearly accelerated the
deterioration of this facility.

F.

Monitoring of oil spare parts and equipment

26. All spare parts and equipment arriving in Iraq are monitored at storagedesignated sites and for utilization for the purpose for which they were
authorized. At present, three monitors carry out this task; arrangements have
been made for an additional three. However, in view of the increased number of
locations where the spare parts and equipment are stored, this team might need
to be enlarged in the future.
27. In carrying out their tasks, the monitoring team has received full
cooperation from the relevant authorities in Iraq.

G.

Spare parts and equipment for phase VI

28. The list of oil spare parts and equipment for phase VI is again submitted
in 13 sections, subdivided by operating companies, each with an allocation of
funds determined by the Government of Iraq. Again there is no allocation for
the Iraqi State Organization for the Marketing of Oil.
29. The Government of Iraq has included a number of "projects" in its oil spare
parts and equipment submission to the phase VI distribution plan. Where these
occur, the line item numbering system has been refined to identify such
stand-alone projects. The completion of these projects, and subsequent impact
on production, is dependent on the concurrent arrival of all of the line items
identified.
30. The total value of the spare parts and equipment as listed exceeds the
$300 million provided for under Security Council resolution 1242 (1999). The
Government of Iraq has indicated that it will enter into contracts for spare
parts and equipment up to the value of $300 million during the initial period of
phase VI. During the latter part of phase VI, estimated to be late September or
early October 1999, should the accrued value of crude oil sales be approaching
the ceiling of $5.2 billion and, given a stable oil price from that time, should
it be likely to exceed that target, the Government of Iraq has indicated that it
would request additional spare parts and equipment.

/...

S/1999/746
English
Page 10

H.

Budget per operating company

North Oil Company - $65 million
31. The spare parts and equipment submission for the North Oil Company covers
normal repairs and maintenance, as well as the following:
(a)

The drilling and completion of 125 new wells;

(b) The work on and completion of 37 wells and connection of
53 pre-drilled dual purpose wells;
(c) The provision of three phase separators at Bai Hassan South,
Bai Hassan North and Bai Hassan Dawood, to handle increased production of wet
crude;
(d)

Maintenance of the Sufaya field;

(e) Mechanical, electrical and instrumentation spare parts for process
plants, degassing and compressor stations.
South Oil Company - $135 million
32. By far the largest individual operating company application, the South Oil
Company has itemized an extensive range of spare parts and equipment, plus a
number of specific projects, as follows:
(a) The completion of 25 wells (10 in Zubair, 5 in North Rumaila, 5 in
South Rumaila and 5 in Missan);
(b) The completion and perforation of 100 wells in the DG6 region of the
West Qurna oil field;
(c) The completion and perforation of 40 wells in the DG7 and DG8 regions
of the West Qurna oil field;
(d)

The completion and perforation of 80 wells in the North Rumaila field;

(e) The construction of eight storage tanks, each with a capacity of
58,000 cubic metres, for the rehabilitation of the Fao tank farm;
(f) The upgrading of the industrial water supply for North and South
Rumaila, Zubair and Garmat Ali.
Iraqi Drilling Company - $7.5 million
33. The parts and equipment listed for the Iraqi Drilling Company cover the
repair and maintenance of 12 rigs.

/...

S/1999/746
English
Page 11

Oil Projects Company - $2.5 million
34. Much of the allocation for phase VI is a repetition of phase V, owing to
reallocation of overall funds within that phase. The requirements address
construction, engineering design work, maintenance, testing of new and repaired
structures and non-destructive testing (x-ray).
Oil Exploration Company - $5 million
35. Again, this allocation addresses field rehabilitation and development
programmes and, as pointed out in the previous report (S/1998/1223), was
probably under-funded in phase V at $5 million.
North Refineries Company - $15 million
36. At the Baiji Refinery, under phase VI, the Government of Iraq plans to
undertake five major projects (replacing the proposed hydro cracker unit slated
under phase V, which has now been cancelled). These include the following:
(a) Repair of the non-operational blown asphalt bagging unit. In this
process, hot air is blown into the asphalt, causing a chemical reaction. Either
the oxygen bonds to the asphalt or hydrogen combines with the oxygen to make
water, which evaporates. A harder, more rubbery asphalt results. An
alternative to producing asphalt via high temperature flashing is to chemically
change the consistency of the softer grades in a blower;
(b) Installation of one isomerization unit to increase gasoline quality
and reduce the requirements to add tetra ethyl lead to motor gasoline. Tetra
ethyl lead was added to gasoline to greatly simplify blending for octane
improvement, as it increases the octane number of gasoline without affecting any
other properties. It is a very toxic chemical, however, and in low
concentration in the vapour form can induce violent illness or death. The
reduction of lead in the industry has been essential for the reduction of
environmental pollution;
(c)

Repair of three hydro-desulphurization units;

(d) Repair of the hydrogen sulphide recovery unit. Hydrogen sulphide is
exceedingly poisonous and, when burned in furnaces, sulphur dioxide is formed.
Air quality regulations in most countries now limit sulphur dioxide emissions to
the extent that most of the hydrogen sulphide must be kept out of fuel systems;
(e) Repair of one lubrication oil complex to produce 125,000 tons per
annum of higher quality lubricating oil. Iraq is currently rationing
lubricants, which has led to the illegal sales of substandard lubricating oil,
spiked with uncontrolled additives, resulting in engine damage and increased
pollution.

/...

S/1999/746
English
Page 12

Midland Refineries Company - $10 million
37. The Midland Refineries Company operates the Daura Refinery near Baghdad.
This section includes a contract to survey the efficiency of the 42 boilers
operating in the refinery, and to carry out the relevant work when specified.
The remaining items are for general repair and maintenance, particularly of
crude oil desalting units to deal with the high salt content of incoming crude,
and additional water treatment equipment.
South Refineries Company - $12.5 million
38. The South Refineries Company operates the Basra Refinery, for which two
major projects are included under phase VI by the Government of Iraq. The first
covers materials to redesignate the existing light gas oil desulphurization unit
as an isomerization unit or, if not possible after engineering studies, to
install an isomerization unit. This will allow the production of much higher
quality lead-free gasoline. The second project is to replace an existing highly
inefficient steam boiler unit with a new unit.
North Gas Company - $5 million
39. This submission is for equipment to improve the quality of fuel gas by
reducing and/or removing the high levels of hydrogen sulphide. This requires
five new amine pumps to rehabilitate the hydrogen sulphide recovery unit and
spare parts for reparable units. Gas monitors for field use and spare parts for
existing units, both safety-related, are also included.
South Gas Company - $7.5 million
40. In addition to spare parts and equipment for general maintenance in the
southern area, materials for the repair and rehabilitation of the Khor-Zubair
natural gas liquefied plant, located near the Zubair fields, the Khor-Zubair
liquefied petroleum gas plant and the North Rumaila sour gas treatment plant are
included. Repairs to the North Rumaila sour gas plant will allow extraction of
hydrogen sulphide. The North Rumaila gas plant has received no repairs or
maintenance for the past 11 years and is in deplorable condition.
Oil Products Distribution Company - $16 million
41. The Oil Products Distribution Company is responsible for the distribution
of oil products by road within Iraq. Damage to the pipeline distribution
network and the large geographical area covered requires considerable vehicular
distribution capability. As in phase V, considerable emphasis is placed on
repairs to and replacement of damaged and worn equipment and on fire-fighting
capabilities.
Oil Pipelines Company - $5.5 million
42. The Oil Pipelines Company is responsible for all the pipeline
transportation of oil products within Iraq. The total length of pipeline under
the company’s responsibility exceeds 7,000 kilometres and there are currently
perceived bottlenecks in the measurement of oil within the system, severe
/...

S/1999/746
English
Page 13

communication problems and a general lack of safety. The list of spare parts
and equipment as submitted seeks to address these problem areas with a view to
improving overall efficiency.
Gas Filling Company - $13.5 million
43. The submission for spare parts and equipment for the Gas Filling Company
aims both to increase the efficiency of the gas filling plants under its
responsibility and to enhance safety conditions in these plants.
44. The Government of Iraq also intends to import 500,000 new gas cylinders
with valves but, concurrent with this, will recommence the local construction of
gas cylinders to the maximum capacity of the local plant (500 new cylinders per
day). Six new automatic filling lines for gas bottling are included, along with
replacement spare parts for the existing, manually operated plants.

I.

Conclusion

45. In previous reports, the group of experts highlighted the deleterious
effect of over-producing crude oil from wells without sufficient well pressure
maintenance. This practice continues, with apparently high levels of production
decline from a significant number of producing wells.
46. Notwithstanding this, water injection in the south, assisted by treatment
chemicals and the initiation of new production, has allowed for an increase in
production at a level greater than the losses incurred, resulting in an overall
increase. Refinery throughput reductions have released, albeit in the short
term, additional crude oil for export.
47. The targets advised by the Government of Iraq, through to the end of the
year 2000, are therefore considered to be attainable, subject to the continued
arrival and distribution of spare parts, materials and equipment now arriving in
the country.
48. The estimated value of the list of oil spare parts and equipment submitted
by the Government of Iraq in the distribution plan for phase VI is $600 million,
twice the amount approved by the Security Council in resolution 1242 (1999).
This amount, however, is considered to be commensurate with the production
levels achieved and predicted, given in particular the emphasis placed on major
projects and investment in safety, control of pollution and environmental
damage.
49. Any production figures, and resulting exports, higher than the Government
of Iraq estimates up to the end of 1999 and early 2000, would stretch the
current export capabilities of the ports of Ceyhan and Mina al-Bakr. Any
technical problems encountered with the transport infrastructure and loading
facilities at either port would inevitably negate the advantages of recent
increases in production.

/...

S/1999/746
English
Page 14

-----
