S/2021/474

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 May 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 14 May 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by
Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, as well as the
statements delivered by the representatives of China, Estonia, France, India, Ireland,
Kenya, Mexico, the Niger, Norway, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United States of America and Viet Nam, in connection with the video-teleconference
on “The situation concerning Iraq” convened on Tuesday, 11 May 2021. A statement
was also delivered by the representative of Iraq.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
the briefing and these statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Zhang Jun
President of the Security Council

21-06463 (E) 170521 160821

*2106463*

S/2021/474

Annex I
Briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq, Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert
We are now five months away from the all-important national elections, which
are scheduled to take place on 10 October. These elections were a central demand of
the protest movement. However, many of members of the protest movement continue
to be persecuted with rampant impunity. The assassination of prominent activist
Ihab Jawad Al-Wazni just two days ago, by unidentified gunmen in front of his
house in Karbala, is yet another tragic example of this.
Now, they may think they have silenced a voice. The truth is that they have
only amplified it. Our hearts go out to his loved ones and all of those who have lost
friends and family in the fight to have their voices heard.
The promise of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) recovery is in sight, with the
beginnings of a vaccination campaign. At the same time, like many other countries,
Iraq is struggling, with a recent large spike in cases nationwide. An increase in oil
prices has provided some budgetary breathing room, yet the economy remains in dire
need of structural reform. And while Iraqi leaders call for stability as a prerequisite
for progress, violent attacks against both civilian and military targets continue with
troubling regularity. These are but a few examples of the daily struggle in Iraq.
As we speak, and for the second year in a row, Iraqis have had to mark
Ramadan, and will soon celebrate Eid, while observing safety measures that are as
restrictive as they are necessary.
I would like to take this opportunity to again express my sincere condolences
to those who lost friends and family members in the tragic fire at Ibn al-Khatib
hospital in Baghdad last month.
With regard to economics and finance, on 31 March, after months of intense
political negotiations, the Council of Representatives approved — at long last — the
federal budget law for 2021. While any budget is a work involving compromise, we
do note that efforts to control public spending and invest in the private sector were
thwarted as the budget law underwent parliamentary revision.
It is also a matter of concern that the budget remains heavily reliant on the oil
sector, which accounts for roughly 80 per cent of Government revenues under the
2021 projections. Although oil prices have since risen, volatility in 2020 wreaked
havoc on the country’s gross domestic product, turning surpluses into deficits and
putting pressure on public debt and foreign currency reserves.
Looking beyond COVID-19, the economic outlook will depend on both
structural reform and the oil markets. Needless to say, only one of these elements is
in Iraq’s control. Simply put, a continued dependency on oil is not a solid strategy;
in fact, such a strategy is far from solid.
On this note, modest — indeed, minimal — progress can be reported on the
implementation of Iraq’s recent economic white paper. The Ministry of Finance
has been disbursing quick loans to small- and medium-sized enterprises, and some
private sector investment is taking place in the infrastructure, health-care, education
and tourism sectors.
But one cannot overemphasize the importance of tangible results for the
population. Further, one cannot overstate the need for transparency, good governance
and integrity in achieving these results. In other words, the return on investment
must benefit the Iraqi people and not illicitly flow into private pockets.
Turning to the vital relationship between Baghdad and Erbil, as Council
members have heard me say before, we remain in ad hoc compromise mode. Despite
2/35

21-06463

S/2021/474

some intermittent successes in the form of one or two specific agreements, we are
still in dire need of a long-term, constitutional way forward.
Parties continue to express their willingness to come to the table, but in the
absence of institutionalized, regular, structured dialogue, sustainable progress will
remain elusive. As a case in point, the budget I was just referring to includes a deal
on revenue-sharing between the federal Government and the Kurdistan Regional
Government, which was reached following lengthy negotiations. However, as
elsewhere, the devil is in the details, given that ambiguous wording opens the door
to divergent interpretations and mutual accusations of non-compliance.
That bodes ill for the future of Baghdad-Erbil relations. It is also worrisome in
the context of the upcoming elections, since disagreements could easily be exploited
to amplify divisions.
It is my hope that the Kurdish calls for stepped-up United Nations mediation
will bear fruit. However, for that to happen, the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq needs the buy-in of the federal authorities as well. One thing is clear: the allimportant Baghdad-Erbil relationship urgently requires sustained, strategic dialogue
as well as clear-cut implementation mechanisms. I have to admit that my experiences
thus far do not lend themselves to optimism in this regard.
On a separate note, the recent efforts of the Kurdish presidency aimed at
seeking to build greater Kurdish unity are encouraging. A federation is only as
strong as the bonds between its components, and these bonds are strengthened by
community reconciliation and cohesion.
Turning to elections, as I mentioned at the outset of my briefing, we are mere
months away from a milestone in the brief history of Iraq’s young democracy. I am
pleased to note that all necessary laws have now been adopted, including the Federal
Supreme Court law. Our technical support for the Independent High Electoral
Commission, is ongoing, and we remain committed to assisting Iraq in delivering
these elections.
Having said that, I reiterate my call to all Iraqi stakeholders to uphold the
integrity of the electoral process. The world is watching. Political pressure or
interference, intimidation and illicit financial flows are all extremely harmful to the
credibility of elections, and therefore to turnout. And as I also said before, candidates,
campaigners, the media and voters must be free to exercise their democratic rights
before, during and after the election.
For elections to be trusted, disinformation must be combated with facts, and
intimidation must be replaced with accountability. The people of Iraq spoke loudly
and clearly when they demanded these elections; too many of them had to pay the
ultimate price. Now is therefore not the time to let them down.
The failure to hold credible elections would cause significant, lasting,
widespread anger and disillusionment, which in turn could further destabilize the
country at a time when strength and unity are desperately needed. Furthermore, to
avoid any misunderstanding, let me underline once again that the October elections
are and will remain at all times Iraqi-owned and Iraqi-led, which means that the
Iraqi authorities and stakeholders bear the full and ultimate responsibility.
As I have stated many times, accountability for serious crimes and human
rights violations remains limited — very, very limited. Despite public statements
expressing intent to ensure accountability and the establishment of investigative
committees, there have been few prosecutions for the killing and serious injury
of protestors. No information has been made public on the patterns of violent
attacks against demonstrators and critics, attributed to so-called “unidentified
armed actors”.
21-064633/35

S/2021/474

Now, this climate of continued impunity for serious crimes and human rights
violations, such as targeted killings, abductions and intimidation, can only embolden
perpetrators, further eroding trust in the State and raising serious concerns ahead of
the October elections.
Different, but also worrisome, are the developments in the Kurdistan
region over the past year. These developments give rise to concern about the
active curtailment of free expression. Critics of public authorities have risked
not only intimidation, movement restrictions and arbitrary arrest, but some were
also charged with defamation, and others, more recently, were prosecuted under
national security laws.
Let me say some words on Kirkuk and Sinjar. With regard to Kirkuk, I note
that, for two years now, we have been facilitating dialogue between representatives
of the components of Kirkuk. An agreement, however, has still not been reached. I
would like to use this opportunity to urge all stakeholders to spare no effort and to
conclude a fair agreement without further delay. The people of Kirkuk deserve to
live in stable and prosperous conditions.
With regard to Sinjar, representatives of the federal and Kurdistan Regional
Governments are engaged in discussions around the security provisions in the
agreement reached last October. These provisions have not yet been implemented,
hindering progress on administration and reconstruction. Here too, the absence of
an institutionalized dialogue and implementation mechanism between Baghdad and
Erbil is being negatively felt, fuelling misperceptions and distrust.
One brighter development is the passing of the Yazidi Female Survivors Law.
The provision of reparations to survivors and the legal recognition of the atrocities
against women and girls of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) as crimes
of genocide and crimes against humanity further underscore the need to hold the
perpetrators accountable for the crimes they committed.
With regard to security, progress is being made in combatting the remnants
of ISIL, with international support at the request of Iraq, but terrorism continues to
claim far too many innocent lives.
Also of grave concern is the fact that rockets and improvised explosive devices
remain a constant in Iraqi life. Cynical and callous armed entities continue to seek
to destabilize the country. And despite the Government’s objective of bringing all
arms under State control, we are witnessing the use of new capabilities by non-State
actors, with potentially devastating effects.
Now, on the regional/international front, as I have said many times, the Iraqi
Government is deeply committed to playing a constructive regional role rather than
falling victim to external tensions. We are seeing early signs that this commitment
is paying off.
And yes, Iraq has great potential to operate as an honest broker, promoting
peace and stability in the region. But to truly succeed, and at the risk of repeating
myself, this should go hand in hand with concrete actions focused on bringing all
arms under State control.
More broadly, I would like to call, once again, for all parties to respect the
principles of State sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Turning to the humanitarian situation, over the past seven months, 16 camps
have been closed or reclassified, affecting around 50,000 Iraqis. These closures,
often carried out at short notice, did not always permit the necessary preparations
for families to safely return to areas of origin.
4/35

21-06463

S/2021/474

Needless to say, when camps are closed before return conditions are
appropriate, Iraqis face dire consequences. Families are rejected by home
communities, denied protection by local authorities, stranded by security escorts en
route, and even physically attacked. This is certainly not the path towards recovered
and stabilized communities.
The position of the United Nations remains unchanged. We fully understand
and support the goal of the Iraqi authorities to end displacement. However, durable
solutions must be in place to succeed in doing so. In other words, the focus must be
on solving displacement rather than closing camps.
On the issue of missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and missing
Kuwaiti property, including the national archives, the human remains of an
additional eight Kuwaiti missing persons and one third-country national were
identified since I last briefed this Council (see S/2021/152). Additionally, the
remains of an Iraqi soldier were handed over by Kuwait to Iraq, in the first transfer
of its kind since 2013.
I extend my heartfelt condolences to all the families of the missing persons,
who have long awaited information about the fate of their loved ones.
Despite coronavirus disease-related challenges, the persistent efforts by the
Governments of Iraq and Kuwait, the International Committee of the Red Cross and
the Tripartite Commission have collectively yielded progress. And it is my sincere
hope that this cooperation will yield further positive advancements in the months
to come.
Allow me, in closing, to emphasize once again the importance of credible
elections. At this critical juncture, transparency and the rule of law must prevail. A
trusted electoral process, with free and wide-ranging participation, can help steer the
country towards the safe and prosperous future Iraqis deserve. The way to express
one’s voice, to make one’s choice, is at the ballot box.
This essential democratic exercise requires every voter, candidate, journalist
and activist to play her part. Boycotting elections, and thus staying outside the
electoral process, is risky business and potentially comes at a high cost.
Now, as the holy month of Ramadan draws to a close, I would like to end by
conveying my best wishes to all those celebrating despite the restrictions.

21-064635/35

S/2021/474

Annex II
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
[Original: Chinese and English]
China thanks Special Representative of the Secretary-General HennisPlasschaert for her briefing and welcomes the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Iraq at today’s meeting.
Let me begin by conveying to Ambassador Aluloom, and through him to the
people of Iraq, our heartfelt sympathies and condolences over the heavy casualties
sustained in last month’s fire in Baghdad.
In the context of the Secretary-General’s reports (S/2021/395 and S/2021/426)
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General’s briefing, I would like to
make the following points.
First, Iraq remains in the grip of a grim security situation, which compels
us to keep up our unwavering support for the country’s counter-terrorism efforts.
Remnants of the Islamic States in Iraq and the Levant continue to launch attacks
in Iraq, which have caused civilian casualties in the hundreds so far this year. The
international community should assist Iraq in effectively tackling the problem of
foreign terrorist fighters and securing the hard-won gains in counter-terrorism.
Provided that Iraq’s judicial sovereignty be fully respected, it is necessary to give
play to the role of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and support
Iraq in bringing the terrorists to justice.
A peaceful Iraq is contingent upon a favourable regional setting. China
encourages the parties concerned to respond positively to the Secretary-General’s
appeal, uphold the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of States, fully
respect Iraq’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, and join in a collective effort to
build a secure and stable future for Iraq. Any military operations to take place on the
soil of Iraq must have the prior consent of the Iraqi Government. Iraq should not fall
victim to geopolitical manoeuvres. We commend and support the close cooperation
between Iraq and Kuwait on the issue of missing persons and property.
Secondly, it is necessary to support Iraq in completing this year’s important
political agenda, namely, the upcoming general elections. Iraq has taken active steps
to move forward with the preparations and has made significant progress, which
China welcomes. We encourage the Iraqi Government to continue its efforts to
ensure peaceful and smooth elections that fully reflect the views of the Iraqi people.
Iraq has twice written to the President of the Security Council on electionrelated issues (see S/2020/1130 and S/2021/135). The United Nations should take
into account the Iraqi side’s request and established practice and play a positive and
constructive role in the smooth conduct of the Iraqi elections. China has provided
Iraq’s Independent High Electoral Commission with a video-teleconferencing system
and office computers. We will soon be delivering the second batch of materials for
the elections as part of our aid package.
Thirdly, greater unity is vital to maintaining stability in Iraq. China welcomes
the agreement reached between the Iraqi central Government and the Kurdistan
Regional Government on the 2021 budget law through dialogue and consultation.
We support maintaining the current positive momentum between the two sides in
their continued pursuit of lasting solutions to issues of mutual concern.
China commends Prime Minister Mustafa Al-Kadhimi’s call for a national
dialogue and hopes that all parties in Iraq will participate in the dialogue actively and
6/35

21-06463

S/2021/474

constructively so as to enhance unity and friendship, achieve inclusive reconciliation
and accelerate integration and development.
Fourthly, we should support Iraq in addressing the challenges related to the
coronavirus disease pandemic. The recent resurgence of the pandemic in Iraq is a
cause for great concern. The international community should continue to provide
support to Iraq in its fight against the disease, focusing on the equitable distribution
of vaccines. We call on countries in a position to do so to actively provide assistance
to Iraq.
Since the outbreak of the pandemic, China has dispatched a medical expert
team and provided a number of shipments of supplies to help Iraq combat the disease.
We have also assisted in building a nucleic acid testing laboratory and sent two
consecutive batches of vaccines to help Iraq tide over the crisis.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Hennis-Plasschaert and her team for their work. China’s supports
the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq. China
will continue to work with the international community to support Iraq in achieving
lasting peace, development and prosperity.

21-064637/35

S/2021/474

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I would like to thank Special Representative Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for
her briefing.
We reiterate our solidarity with, and support for, the Iraqi Government and
people, who continue to face political, economic and security challenges. We believe
that the solution to most of those challenges lies in dialogue, at both the national and
the regional levels.
We welcome Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi’s call for an Iraqi national dialogue.
An inclusive dialogue among all political forces, communities and groups of
society, including women and young people, will strengthen the social fabric and
promote reconciliation.
The planned parliamentary elections are a crucial element in the path
towards stability and restoring trust in Iraq’s political system. We call upon all
Iraqi stakeholders to contribute to a conducive environment for holding credible,
transparent and inclusive elections. The establishment of a higher committee to
promote and monitor women’s electoral participation and to prevent violence against
women candidates is a welcome step.
The continued role of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq in
supporting Iraq in the electoral preparations and processes is essential and contributes
to Iraq’s readiness for the elections. The Security Council must carefully consider
the most feasible way to respond to Iraq’s request for election observation.
We welcome the adoption of the Yazidi Female Survivors Law by the Iraqi
Parliament, as it is an important step towards reconciliation and accountability and
addresses the important issue of conflict-related sexual violence. We also urge the
Government of Iraq to take further steps to ensure accountability for violations against
protesters, civil society activists and journalists, while stressing the importance of
protecting the freedom of expression and peaceful assembly.
It is deeply worrisome that attacks against diplomatic missions and the
personnel of the Global Coalition against Da’esh continue. We strongly condemn
such attacks and reiterate our continued support for Iraq’s fight against Da’esh. We
also reiterate the need for all actors to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Iraq and to refrain from any military action, which would threaten the stability
of Iraq. We also call upon the Government of Iraq for additional measures to ensure
State control over all armed forces.
We fully support the steps by the Government of Iraq towards urgently needed
reforms to improve the socioeconomic situation and governance, and we reiterate
our call to implement the measures proposed in the white paper.
Finally, we welcome the agreement between the Government of Iraq and
the Kurdistan Regional Government on the Federal Budget Law, which is another
successful example of resolving disagreements through dialogue and will hopefully
contribute to increased economic and political stability for the whole country.

8/35

21-06463

S/2021/474

Annex IV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Nathalie Broadhurst Estival
[Original: French]
I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, for her briefing, and I wish to assure her of France’s full
support in the conduct of her duties. I would also like to welcome the presence of
the representative of Iraq among us today. Lastly, I would like to pay tribute to the
victims of the fire at the Ibn Al-Khatib hospital on 24 April and to reiterate France’s
solidarity with Iraq at this difficult time.
Our meeting falls on the eve of the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq. We have heard the Iraqi authorities’ request
for United Nations support for the elections. We hope that the Security Council
will respond positively to them, taking into account the constraints weighing on the
work of the United Nations in Iraq. The international community must be present to
enable the organization of a free and transparent election in which women can fully
participate. In that regard, the establishment of the high-level committee to monitor
women’s participation is a very positive development. Apart from the Council, we
encourage Iraq’s partners and regional organizations requested by Iraq to also assist
in monitoring the upcoming elections, in accordance with the Iraqi requests. In
addition to the elections, the international community must mobilize to support Iraq
in affirming its sovereignty.
On the domestic front, reforms have been announced to meet the legitimate
aspirations of the population. They must now be implemented so as to modernize
the economy and tackle corruption. It is also essential that the perpetrators of abuses
against protesters be brought to justice. We also call for those responsible for the
murder of the activist Ihab Al-Wazni, who was killed in Karbala on Saturday, to
be identified and brought to justice. The resumption of violence against Iraqi civil
society is a particularly worrisome development as the country prepares for elections
that are important to its future.
It is essential that Iraqis be able to exercise their constitutional freedoms
of expression and assembly. That is particularly necessary for the success of the
national dialogue that has been announced by the Prime Minister.
In terms of security, it is also crucial that Iraq remain free from regional
tensions and that its territorial integrity be respected. We are convinced that Iraq
can be the source of a positive regional dynamic, and we encourage the balanced
diplomacy promoted by the Iraqi Government. It can serve as an example of
coexistence for the whole region, as demonstrated by the recent visit of Pope Francis
to the country.
A sovereign Iraq also requires effective State control over all armed groups.
It is also essential to continue the fight against Da’esh. In the context of a threat that
has not disappeared but has changed, the assistance of the international coalition
at the request and in support of the Iraqi authorities remains indispensable. In that
regard, we call for the security of the coalition’s bases and forces to be ensured.
The stabilization and reconstruction of areas liberated from Da’esh are also
a priority, in particular to facilitate the return of displaced persons. To that end, the
Sinjar agreement must be fully implemented. We also welcome the projects launched
in Mosul as part of the Revive the Spirit of Mosul initiative, supported by the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. Finally, the fight against
21-064639/35

S/2021/474

impunity is essential in turning the page on Da’esh. In that respect, we welcome the
adoption of the Yazidi Female Survivors Law.
From a humanitarian and health perspective, ensuring equitable access to
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine is also critical. In that regard, the
COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility has a key role to play. We must ensure
that internally displaced persons (IDPs) continue to receive assistance when they
leave the camps, particularly with regard to health. I reiterate the need for the return
of IDPs to be voluntary and to be carried out in a safe and dignified manner.
The stability and prosperity of Iraq also depend on a relationship of trust
between Baghdad and Erbil. The adoption of the 2021 budget is a positive development.
We hope that the dialogue will continue in order to resolve all outstanding issues
between the two capitals.
Finally, I would like to conclude by welcoming the progress made on the issue
of missing Kuwaitis and third-country nationals. The identification of the remains of
eight Kuwaiti nationals and one Saudi national is a positive development. We hope
that cooperation between Iraq and Kuwait on that issue will continue.

10/35

21-06463

S/2021/474

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, T.S. Tirumurti
I thank Special Representative Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing.
I take this opportunity to congratulate her Deputy Special Representative,
Ms. Ingibjörg Sólrún Gísladóttir, who recently assumed office. I also welcome the
Permanent Representative of Iraq, Ambassador Mohammad Hussein Bahr Aluloom,
to this meeting.
Let me begin by reiterating India’s firm support for the Government of
Iraq’s efforts to achieve peace, stability, economic recovery through reform and
reconstruction and national reconciliation. India has always responded to the urgent
needs of Iraq. In the past, we supported the International Reconstruction Fund
Facility for Iraq and contributed through the World Food Programme. Our Indian
Technical and Economic Cooperation Programme continues and has grown from
strength to strength over the years.
With the passage of the First Amendment Law to the Federal Supreme Court
Law and the decision of the Parliament to dissolve itself ahead of the elections,
scheduled for 10 October, the main bottlenecks have been cleared for the holding of
early elections. I applaud the steps taken by the Iraqi authorities and the Independent
High Electoral Commission (IHEC) to ensure a free, fair and inclusive electoral
process despite the constraints of the pandemic. The support and technical assistance
extended by the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and the United Nations
Development Programme to the IHEC in its efforts to ensure full preparedness for
the elections is much appreciated.
High voter turnout in the upcoming elections will be key to ensuring a
Parliament and a Government that are representative of all Iraqis. It will also ensure
that the Government has the confidence of the people of Iraq. United Nations and
international observation of the elections, as requested by the Government of Iraq,
will help to build that confidence among the Iraqi people, and India therefore fully
supports that request. It is important for the Security Council to respond to Iraq’s
request positively.
The elections cannot be considered truly inclusive without the full and effective
participation of Iraqi women. In that regard, the steps taken by the Government to
promote women’s electoral participation and to prevent and address violence against
women candidates, including through the establishment of a higher committee, are
positive developments.
Successful post-conflict recovery and economic development in Iraq will
require stability and security in the country. We are concerned at the increasing
number of attacks by the Islamic State in Iraq. Our heartfelt condolences go to the
people of Iraq who have lost loved ones in those dastardly attacks. The tireless efforts
of the Iraqi authorities to combat terrorism in the country need to be complemented by
greater cooperation from the international community. We cannot afford to lower the
guard against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) or other terrorist groups
in Iraq. We must learn from past lessons regarding the consequences of misplaced
complacency against terrorism. Thirty-nine Indian nationals were brutally killed
by ISIL, and we hope to see a day when we do not lose the lives of more innocent
civilians to terrorism.
We welcome the adoption of the Yazidi Female Survivors Law. The
implementation of that key legislation and the recent Sinjar agreement will help Iraq
to move closer to achieving justice for the victims of the crimes perpetrated by ISIL.
21-0646311/35

S/2021/474

They will also contribute to restoring normalcy to the lives of survivors, enhance
their quality of life and pave the way for their safe return through the reconstruction
of areas ravaged by terrorism.
Despite the efforts of the Government of Iraq to provide protection to all
diplomatic missions, attacks against diplomatic establishments and the coalition
forces have continued. Such attacks threaten Iraq’s stability and risk escalating
tensions. The stability of Iraq should be of paramount importance to the region. We
hope that a long-term solution can also be found to the issue of the possession of
weapons by armed groups and other non-State actors.
The violations of Iraq’s sovereignty and territorial integrity in the pretext of
counter-terrorism operations must come to an end. Iraq’s neighbouring countries
need to work with the Iraqi authorities to address all the security challenges they face.
The recent visit of Pope Francis to Iraq highlighted the rich cultural diversity
and multireligious heritage of the country. The visit also contributed to a positive
debate on furthering religious tolerance, peaceful coexistence and ensuring that no
one is left behind. That is critical to achieving national reconciliation and sustaining
peace in Iraq. The call for an inclusive national dialogue by the Prime Minister is
also a step in the right direction.
The passage of the Federal Budget Law provides a positive beginning for
the resolution of differences between the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan
Regional Government. We encourage both sides to seize the momentum and conclude
a mutually satisfactory long-term sustainable agreement on all outstanding issues.
Such discussions can also be part of the proposed national dialogue.
We take note of the efforts made by the Iraqi Government to resolve the issue
of internally displaced persons in the country. The international community should
fully respect Iraq’s sovereignty and jurisdiction and support its efforts to address
this issue in accordance with its relevant domestic laws.
India takes positive note of the recent identification of Kuwaiti and thirdcountry nationals from the remains sent by Iraqi authorities last year and the return of
the remains of a missing Iraqi soldier from Kuwait. These efforts will provide solace
to the families of the deceased. With the excellent cooperation between the Iraqi and
Kuwaiti authorities and the support extended by the International Committee of the
Red Cross and other international partners, India is hopeful that further progress can
be achieved on this issue quickly, bringing a mutually satisfactory closure.
Let me conclude by reaffirming India’s steadfast support for Iraq’s unity,
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. India shares a civilizational
relationship with Iraq. We have always been supportive of a democratic, pluralistic,
federal, unified and prosperous Iraq fulfilling the aspirations of its citizens. As
a long-standing friend, India will remain a willing partner of Iraq in its nationbuilding endeavours to deliver prosperity to its people.

12/35

21-06463

S/2021/474

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
I want to thank Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for her really insightful briefing this morning. Also, I want to
welcome the representative of Iraq among us today.
I would like to begin by extending our deepest condolences to the people
of Iraq following the tragic fire at Ibn Al-Khatib hospital in April. That was a
terrible tragedy, and it came at a time when we know the Iraqi people are facing
the devastating effects of coronavirus disease. Our thoughts and our prayers are
certainly with the families of the victims and of all those affected by the tragedy.
Ireland welcomes the commitment of the Iraqi Government to free and fair
elections in October. We welcome the important preparatory steps we are seeing
now being taken by the Iraqi authorities to that end since our last discussion back in
February (see S/2021/152). This includes the passing of an amendment to the Federal
Supreme Court law, the appointment of members of the Court and the vote by the
Council of Representatives to dissolve itself in the days running up to the election,
which are important steps.
The establishment of a higher committee to promote and monitor women’s
electoral participation as well as introduce measures to prevent and address violence
against women is also welcome, and we see these as very positive steps.
The recommendation by the High Electoral Commission to register internally
displaced persons to vote is a significant one, and we encourage that it be enacted
without delay. Let me underline again today that it is absolutely critical that the
political and electoral process include all parts of Iraq’s diverse society in order to
be a successful process.
The international community of course has an important role to play in
constructively supporting peaceful, inclusive and democratic elections in October.
We commend the crucial work carried out by the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) in assisting with preparations to date. The Security Council should
work intensively and promptly to see how it can best assume its responsibilities to
Iraq and enhance and maximize its role as Iraq undertakes such a critical process for
the Iraqi people’s future.
Just yesterday, the Security Council was privileged to hear once more the
striking testimony of Nadia Murad (see S/2021/460). The passing of the Yazidi
Female Survivors Law represents a ground-breaking moment in efforts to redress
the immense suffering of her community and of women from other minority groups
at the hands of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, including conflict-related
sexual and gender-based violence. True accountability for survivors, through
prosecution and conviction for these heinous crimes, is now needed — and urgently.
In the words of Ms. Murad during yesterday’s briefing, “transforming evidence
into justice and accountability requires action”. We urge Iraq to put in place the
legislative framework necessary for this to happen.
Ireland remains concerned by reports of continued terrorist attacks across the
country. We once again reiterate our firm rejection of any attempts to destabilize
Iraq. The peace and stability of Iraq is not only essential for the prosperity of its own
people, but indeed for the entire region.
The rights to freedom of expression and assembly are already enshrined in
Iraq’s Constitution. However, we continue to witness violations of these rights and a
21-0646313/35

S/2021/474

lack of fair-trial guarantees. The assassination of a prominent activist in Karbala and
attacks against a journalist in Al-Diwaniyah are deeply troubling and unacceptable.
We urge federal and regional Governments to redouble efforts to protect and defend
these rights and to end impunity.
The adoption of the 2021 Federal Budget Law in March was an important
milestone, and a real demonstration of what constructive dialogue and compromise
between authorities in Baghdad and Erbil can achieve. We call on all parties
to continue this spirit of cooperation and to faithfully implement the budget
agreement. Furthermore, we welcome the efforts of the Government of Iraq to
combat corruption and to ensure that those found guilty of corruption be held
accountable for their crimes.
Like others, we were also pleased to see further progress on the identification
of missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals, as well as on the return of missing
Kuwaiti property, during the past months. We hope that progress on this important
legacy issue continues.
Finally, I would like to reiterate again Ireland’s strong support for the excellent
and critical work being carried out by the Special Representative and her team. We
look forward to the renewal of UNAMI’s mandate at the Security Council in the
coming weeks.

14/35

21-06463

S/2021/474

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Martin Kimani
I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Jeanine HennisPlasschaert for her briefing and take note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) (S/2021/426).
On the political situation, Kenya commends the preparations for elections,
which we urge should be inclusive, transparent, free and credible and lays a solid
foundation for social cohesion, political stability and State-building. The recent
establishment of a higher committee to promote and monitor women’s participation
in the electoral process is indeed a positive step on inclusivity. Kenya supports Iraq’s
request for the involvement of the United Nations in observing these elections.
We also welcome the European Union’s contribution to a United Nationsled project to support capacity-building within the Independent High Electoral
Commission in preparation for the October 2021 elections. We further welcome the
robust support for the elections highlighted by the United States of America.
Furthermore, Kenya takes note of other positive developments, including the
establishment of the Supreme Court, as well as progress on the Federal Budget Law
by the Council of Representatives on 31 March.
We recognize that progress was made after lengthy negotiations among
political parties and the federal and Kurdistan Regional Governments. We encourage
the parties to sustain this positive momentum by coordinating the implementation of
commitments and inclusive national dialogue. Such action will build much-needed
trust and ease political tensions ahead of the forthcoming elections.
Kenya also welcomes the enactment of the Yazidi Female Survivors Law as
major step towards addressing the needs of survivors of atrocities, committed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), particularly against the Yazidis,
Turkmens, Christians and Shabaks.
On the security situation, Kenya condemns the recent violent attacks in the
north. We call on UNAMI to work on the de-escalation of military operations that
are threatening the lives of the population, including the vulnerable, especially
women and children.
We further condemn the Da’esh/ISIL attacks in several governorates of Iraq,
including the recent attacks in Sadr city, east of Baghdad. We insist that terrorists
should be treated as such and should not be legitimized through classification as
political actors.
We must continue to support the role of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant in holding ISIL accountable for crimes committed in the country.
Moreover, it is paramount that Iraq be protected from becoming an international
arena for States and non-State actors to settle scores to the detriment of the security,
political stability, and socioeconomic progress of the people of Iraq.
Kenya takes note of the commendable progress made in the identification
of Kuwaiti missing persons, as well as Kuwaiti property. We encourage continued
dedicated cooperation and look forward to further progress on this file.
This finally leads me to the humanitarian situation. With the thousands of
Iraqis that reside in the Al-Hol camp in Syria, the repatriation of citizens from the
camps and the prioritization of disengagement capabilities, as well as capacitybuilding, is essential for the region.
21-0646315/35

S/2021/474

Furthermore, Kenya welcomes the United Nations and the Government of
Iraq’s 2021 humanitarian response plan to assist 1.5 million vulnerable people,
especially given that 4.1 million Iraqis remain in need of humanitarian and
protection assistance.
In closing, Kenya reiterates its call for all actors to uphold the political
independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Iraq. We reaffirm our
support for the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq in its assistance to the
Government and people of Iraq in advancing inclusive political dialogue, as well as
national and community-level reconciliation.
I have some questions for the Special Representative. What is the progress
of Iraq in combating terrorism? Can you, Madam, let us know at what stage the
prosecutions of ISIL fighters of Iraqi origin are in the national courts? What is your
assessment of the popular and political support for the work of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant?

16/35

21-06463

S/2021/474

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez
[Original: Spanish]
I thank Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert for her informative
briefing, I also thank the representative of Iraq.
Mexico expresses its grave concern over the fragile security situation in
Iraq and the numerous incidents of violence in various parts of the country. And
we condemn, once again, in the strongest terms, the rocket attacks that struck the
vicinity of Erbil airport and those against the Balad and Ayn Al-Asad airbases and
call on all armed groups in Iraq to cease all acts of violence.
Furthermore, we appreciate the strong support of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in the organization of the upcoming elections,
as we recognize the importance of holding regular, free and transparent elections in
the strengthening of any democratic State. We note the progress in the recruitment
and training of election officials, and we welcome efforts to ensure the full, equal
and substantive participation of women in the electoral process. We especially
commend the establishment of a committee to promote and monitor women’s
electoral participation and to prevent and address possible cases of violence against
women candidates.
In line with the same agenda, Mexico recognizes Iraq’s actions to implement
the women and peace and security agenda, including: first, the increase in the
number of female public officials in high-ranking positions; secondly, the second
national plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000); and, as mentioned
above, thirdly, the promotion of women’s active participation in elections. We also
welcome the recent approval by the Council of Representatives of the Yazidi Female
Survivors Law, which condemns crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity and
gender-based violence committed by the Islamic State/Da’esh against members of
the Yazidi, Turkmen, Christian and Shabak communities.
On the humanitarian front, we welcome the arrival of a batch of 336,000
vaccines for the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) through the COVID-19 Vaccine
Global Access Facility and the necessary organization required to receive and
distribute 20 million vaccines. We hope that the vaccination campaign will be
efficiently carried out as soon as possible.
On 3 March, authorities at the central prison of Nasiriyah executed three
people who had been sentenced to death for terrorism. Those three executions are
in addition to the 21 carried out last November. Mexico reiterates its rejection of the
death penalty. Capital punishment constitutes a serious violation of human rights, in
addition to reflecting degrading treatment with irreparable consequences. Mexico
calls on the Government of Iraq to promote actions aimed at a moratorium on the
application of the death penalty and its eventual abolition.
Finally, my country reiterates its commitment to the expeditious renewal of
the mandate of UNAMI, for which we will work closely and in coordination with the
members of the Security Council.

21-0646317/35

S/2021/474

Annex IX
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Niger to
the United Nations, Niandou Aougi
[Original: French]
At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her
briefing. I also welcome the representative of Iraq to this meeting.
My country commends the efforts of the Iraqi Government to address the
many crises facing the country and to steer it in a new direction.
My delegation supports the Prime Minister’s call of 8 March for an inclusive
national dialogue to restore Iraqi unity.
Iraq has suffered enormously from the wars, and its people aspire to a stable
and prosperous life. The international community must play an important role in the
country’s new march toward stability and hope.
The Iraqi authorities’ efforts to develop peaceful relations with neighbouring
countries and to expand their regional and global partnerships are commendable. As
the report of the Secretary General (S/2021/426) indicates, international cooperation
remains key to addressing the challenges posed by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
regional instability, climate change and many other issues.
However, with regard to the protection of human rights, my delegation
remains deeply concerned about reports of continued arrests and acts of violence and
intimidation against demonstrators, civil society activists, human rights defenders
and journalists. In particular, we condemn the recent killing of Ihab Al-Wazni, who
was shot dead last Sunday outside his home. That makes 30 human rights defenders
who have been murdered since 2019. Systematic attempts to threaten and prevent
people from exercising their fundamental right to peaceful assembly and freedom
of expression are unacceptable. We call on the Iraqi Government to protect and
guarantee the human rights of all peaceful protesters, civil society activists and
human rights defenders.
We also call on the Iraqi Government to take the necessary steps to fulfil its
commitment to make operational the body responsible for investigating the killing of
human rights activists and defenders and bringing the perpetrators to justice.
With regard to the electoral process, we reiterate our support for the efforts
of the Iraqi Government, the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and the
Independent High Electoral Commission in the preparations to ensure that the
upcoming elections are free, fair, inclusive and credible.
My delegation calls on the United Nations and all its Member States to ensure
that the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq has the necessary resources to
support Iraq in the organization and holding of credible, free and fair elections, while
fully respecting its sovereignty. The Security Council and all relevant United Nations
entities must respond to the Iraqi Government’s request to observe the elections.
The elections must also ensure the participation of all social strata of Iraqis.
That is why we reiterate the importance of including women, who play an informal
leadership role in their communities during conflicts, as well as youth, in the
political process.
On the issue of missing persons, property and archives from Kuwait and
third countries, my delegation encourages Iraq and Kuwait to strengthen their
cooperation in order to address all outstanding issues. The recent identification of
the human remains of eight Kuwaiti missing persons and one third-country national
18/35

21-06463

S/2021/474

are encouraging developments. Similarly, we also welcome Kuwait’s handover of the
remains of the Iraqi soldier to Iraq — the first of its kind since 2013.
In conclusion, the Niger would like to reiterate that as Iraq strives to recover
from the deep crisis it has experienced in recent years, we must not lose sight of the
fact that the victory over the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant is not synonymous
with its total eradication in this region of the world, as evidenced by the recent
attacks on the Global Coalition to Defeat Da’esh in Iraq. We therefore call on the
Iraqi authorities and the Global Coalition to Defeat Da’esh to remain vigilant and to
continue the fight against terrorism in order to thwart the resurgence of the activities
and machinations of those evil forces.

21-0646319/35

S/2021/474

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
At the outset, we thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), for her briefing. We greatly appreciate UNAMI’s work in Iraq and its
support for the Independent High Electoral Commission in the preparations for early
parliamentary elections in October.
We are pleased to see that following our most recent meeting in February
(see S/2021/152), the Government of Iraq has taken important steps to prepare for
the election, including the necessary amendment of the Federal Supreme Court law.
We also commend the establishment of a higher committee to promote and monitor
women’s participation and to propose measures to prevent and address violence
against women candidates.
We support the Iraqi request for United Nations election observation, and
we call for a solution to be found — and a decision to be made — in that regard
in the Council as soon as possible. Free, fair and transparent elections are vital
for the integrity of, and public trust in, the electoral process, as well as for the
stability of Iraq. Freedom of expression and assembly remain vital for the democratic
development of Iraq.
Norway condemns the recent violence in Iraq, including the assassination of
an activist, Ihab Al-Wazni, in Karbala last Sunday, and the shooting of a journalist in
Diwaniyah yesterday. We call on the Iraqi authorities to find and hold the perpetrators
accountable. As Iraq prepares for elections in October, the security and protection of
all Iraqi citizens is essential.
Long-term stability cannot be achieved without addressing the underlying
causes of conflict and instability. Economic, social and political reforms must be
initiated and greater emphasis must be put on reconciliation efforts. Norway fully
support Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi’s recent call for a comprehensive national
dialogue following the historic visit of Pope Francis to Iraq in March. We also
welcome progress on the federal budget law and the agreement between Baghdad
and Erbil. We urge Baghdad and the Kurdistan Region of Iraq to continue their
dialogue in order to resolve all outstanding issues and promote further cooperation.
The implementation of the Sinjar agreement also needs more attention. It is
critical that this be done through dialogue among the affected parties, and that the
process lead to rebuilding and the provision of basic services. Norway also welcomes
the adoption of the landmark Yazidi Female Survivors Law. Accountability and
justice for survivors is essential to move towards national healing and reconciliation.
However, even amid these positive developments, there is still cause for
concern and a need for concerted attention during this pivotal time for Iraq. The
security situation remains fragile and volatile. We remain deeply concerned about
the continued terrorist activity of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, as well as
the repeated attacks against coalition forces.
That said, the continued engagement between Iraq and its international
and regional partners — aimed at furthering peace and regional stability — is
encouraging. On this point, Norway would like to underline the additional need to
address the issue of climate change and water scarcity. As stated in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2021/426), joint challenges such as climate change require joint
solutions in order to ensure a stable and secure future.
20/35

21-06463

S/2021/474

Sustained attention must also be given to the impact of displacement. While
we welcome the Government’s pause on the closure of internally displaced persons
camps, we remain concerned by the overall grave humanitarian situation, and call
for durable solutions. Returns must be safe, voluntary, dignified and sustainable. The
coronavirus disease pandemic has also significantly burdened Iraq, compounding
these and other challenges. In that connection, we express our deepest sympathy to
victims of the tragic fire at Ibn Al-Khatib hospital in Baghdad.
On a final note, we welcome the progress made on the return of Kuwait
property and the repatriation of nationals of Kuwait and third countries, as well as
their remains. We commend Iraq and Kuwait for their cooperation in bringing this
humanitarian file to a close.

21-0646321/35

S/2021/474

Annex XI
Statement by the First Deputy Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation to the United Nations, Dmitry Polyanskiy
[Original: Russian]
At the outset, let me express our deep regret that we again have to convene
a meeting in an informal video-teleconference format, since nothing keeps us from
returning to in-person meetings in the Security Council Chamber that meet all socialdistancing requirements related to the coronavirus pandemic. The epidemiological
situation in New York is gradually improving and the city is getting back to normal.
Nevertheless, the hesitation of some of our colleagues to return to in-person
meetings puts at risk the Security Council’s. We request the Chinese presidency to
make efforts to ensure that the Council can get back to its traditional form of work
without further delay.
We thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq, for her briefing. We again reiterate our support for the
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) across all
aspects of its mandate.
We are concerned about the numerous challenges that friendly Iraq faces.
The deteriorating socioeconomic situation is inciting protests among the population.
The state of affairs is further exacerbated by decreasing State revenues caused
by plummeting oil prices and the spread of the coronavirus disease. Against that
backdrop, underground terrorist units continue conducting raids.
We support the efforts of the Iraqi Government, under the leadership of Prime
Minister Al-Kadhimi, to improve the situation in Iraq by ensuring safety and law and
order in the country. At the same time, we understand that the authorities are facing
problems that cannot be solved overnight. Socioeconomic and humanitarian aspects
of the situation in Iraq require the attention and assistance of the global community,
especially in the light of the pandemic and the need to restore areas devastated by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. We therefore welcome the adoption of
the 2021 budget, which will help resolve several pressing issues, among them the
organization of elections, the distribution of oil revenues and the implementation of
social projects.
Combating terrorism remains highly relevant. Despite Iraq’s progress in
counter-terrorism, the security situation in the country remains fragile, inter alia
due to a resurgence of underground terrorism. All those involved in the fight against
terrorism in Iraq must remain committed to sovereignty of the Iraqi State and
coordinate their actions with Baghdad.
One of priority tasks of Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi’s Cabinet is to prepare
for early parliamentary elections scheduled for October. We expect Iraq’s leading
political forces to achieve the much-needed unity on that issue. We welcome that
Iraqis addressed the Security Council with a request to engage UNAMI in monitoring
the parliamentary elections. In view of the extension of the UNAMI mandate, we are
ready to have a targeted discussion on that issue in the Council.
The commitment of Baghdad and Kuwait City to promptly resolve all the
outstanding issues in the Iraq-Kuwait file and the stable positive momentum of this
process deserve our special support.
We reaffirm our consistent position that Iraq must not turn into an arena for
regional confrontation. We call on all external stakeholders interested in stabilization
in Iraq to refrain from taking actions that might negatively affect the situation in that
22/35

21-06463

S/2021/474

country. We appreciate Baghdad’s efforts to build good relations with its neighbours.
Hopefully, Iraq and other regional actors will deliver on their diplomatic potential in
order to collectively promote peace and stability in the entire Middle East region on
the basis of resolution 598 (1987) and the corresponding Russian position.

21-0646323/35

S/2021/474

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
I too would like to thank Special Representative Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert
for her briefing and extend our gratitude to her and her team for their continued
efforts in Iraq. I also welcome our colleague, Ambassador Mohammed Hussein Bahr
Aluloom, Permanent Representative of Iraq.
We begin by recognizing the continued efforts of the Iraqi Government to
ensure the holding of free, fair and credible elections, including through the passage
of the First Amendment Law to the Federal Supreme Court law, which is necessary
for the certification of electoral results. The continued support of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to the Independent High Electoral Commission
to facilitate thorough and effective preparation is crucial in that regard. The need for
inclusive elections cannot be overstated. Accordingly, we welcome the Council of
Ministers’ focus on promoting and monitoring women’s participation, as well as the
General Secretariat’s proposed measures to prevent and address violence against
women candidates. This election is an opportunity to restore unity to Iraq. In that
context, we further recognize Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi’s call for a comprehensive
national dialogue geared towards enhancing mutual understanding among Iraqi
communities and rebuilding the social fabric of Iraq.
We also take this opportunity to welcome the Yazidi Female Survivors Law
passed by the Council of Representatives. This legislation is a milestone; it constitutes
the first legal recognition by the Government of the crimes committed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant against Yazidis, Turkmens, Christians and Shabaks as
war crimes. The assistance and reparations to be provided under that legislation, as
well as the exclusion of future amnesty for perpetrators of the crimes listed therein
is a significant, commendable step. Further efforts to ensure justice must continue.
Amid the efforts to prepare for elections, the Government has had to divert
attention to addressing the rise in coronavirus disease (COVID-19) cases. The
COVID-19 vaccines delivered to Iraq through the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access
(COVAX) Facility programme and donated by COVAX partners are crucial in the
fight against COVID-19. Furthermore, we welcome the efforts of the United Nations
Development Programme to rehabilitate health-care facilities, and we commend
the World Health Organization for its continued work with the Ministry of Health
to ensure that COVID-19 risk-mitigation measures are in place. These are positive
developments indeed, but we appeal to the international community to redouble
efforts to enhance the Government’s capacity to address the pandemic and its related
economic and humanitarian challenges. We also call on all Member States to support
the 2021 Humanitarian Response Plan for Iraq.
We cannot talk about the humanitarian situation without recognizing the
severe impact of climate change on Iraq — one of the most climate-vulnerable
countries in the world. Year after year, record-breaking heat threatens the health of
Iraqis, creates droughts and decimates agriculture and has turned water limitations
into a water crisis. The impact of years of conflict on the environment, as well as a
new kind of warfare — the disregard of major emitters far away, have turned this
ancient land filled with history into a modern epicentre of the climate crisis. We
welcome all efforts to address the climate emergency and vulnerabilities and call on
those most responsible for it to take urgent action accordingly. We call for sustained
support for the implementation of measures to build resilience to climate change and
address issues such as water scarcity, as underlying risk factors cannot be delinked
from the response to combat the challenges in the security landscape.
24/35

21-06463

S/2021/474

The identification and return of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and
property provides a level of closure to the victims’ families. We welcome further
progress towards identifying missing persons and property during the reporting
period. The constructive collaboration between the Republic of Iraq and the State
of Kuwait is essential to advance this humanitarian file. We recognize UNAMI’s
diligent efforts, as well as the role of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
in supporting and facilitating progress.
Finally, we affirm our support to Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Hennis-Plasschaert and UNAMI, and we stand in solidarity with the
Iraqi people.

21-0646325/35

S/2021/474

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Tunisia to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), for her valuable briefing.
My delegation lauds the various important reforms that have been under way
in Iraq for some time now. Those reforms deserve the full support and assistance
of the international community. In that context, Tunisia encourages preparations
for the October 2021 legislative elections to continue. In particular, the powers of
the Federal Supreme Court should be expanded and its members appointed, voters
should be registered, national observers should be appointed, and efforts to support
the capabilities of the Independent High Electoral Commission and promote the
participation of Iraqi women in the elections should continue. Those preparations
would lay the foundation for fair, transparent and credible elections, delivering the
security, peace and prosperity to which the Iraqi people aspire.
Tunisia endorses the Iraqi aspiration to strengthen the role of UNAMI in order
to receive further guidance, support, assistance and observation, so as to ensure
that these important elections are held successfully. We also appreciate Iraqi Prime
Minister Mustafa al-Kadhimi’s call for an inclusive national dialogue that will
contribute to promoting political stability and national unity in Iraq.
We also reiterate that the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq must be
respected, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and all international
instruments in order to spare the country the fate of being a theatre of regional
conflict between external forces.
In keeping with the theme of reform, Iraq continues to take all necessary measures
to tackle the difficult economic situation and implement the recommendations of the
White Paper for Economic and Financial Reform on the ground. We also applaud
the bold decisions to combat corruption and mismanagement, reflecting a forwardlooking vision for building a developed and thriving Iraqi economy.
My delegation praises the reconciliation that has been achieved between the
federal and Kurdistan Regional Governments. The enactment of the federal budget
law constitutes another positive step towards settling unresolved differences and
paving the way for peaceable and sustained relations for the good of Iraq.
Tunisia expresses its total solidarity with Iraq in the country’s battle against
the remnants of terrorist groups and continued attacks by Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant. Tunisia calls on the international community to support Iraq in that struggle.
With regard to Iraqi-Kuwaiti relations, we express our satisfaction with the
significant progress made on the humanitarian front and on the exchange of remains
of identified persons. We greatly value the cooperation between the two States and
their tireless efforts to consolidate it further, as well as the efforts by Iraq to uphold
its obligations and continue the search for missing persons and the Kuwaiti archives.
In closing, my delegation supports the renewal of the mandate of UNAMI and
appreciates the role of the Office and of United Nations agencies in supporting Iraqi
efforts and contributing to the development of Iraqi capabilities in many areas.

26/35

21-06463

S/2021/474

Annex XIV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, Jonathan Allen
Let me thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General HennisPlasschaert and her team in the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq for their
continued hard work in difficult circumstances.
Today I would like to focus my remarks on the elections, the economy,
and humanitarian and security issues. Let me therefore start with the crucial
question before us all — that of elections. Like the Permanent Representative of
the United States and others today, I want to underline that this is a pivotal year
for Iraq. The elections in October could be a defining moment and a step towards
increased stability. It is essential that those elections are seen by the Iraqi people as
delivering a representative result. To that end, I welcome the Government of Iraq’s
determination to hold free, fair and credible elections. The United Kingdom is fully
committed to Iraq’s democratic process, and we look forward to discussions on how
the United Nations can significantly enhance its support to the elections alongside
the ongoing package of technical assistance. While on the elections, let me also
welcome the establishment of a higher committee to promote and monitor women’s
electoral participation and propose measures to prevent and address violence against
women candidates.
Let me turn now to economics. Although it is welcome that Iraq’s Parliament
has approved the 2021 budget, we note that many of the more ambitious measures
aimed at economic reform were removed. This runs the risk of continued Iraqi
vulnerability to oil price fluctuations, which in turn undermines the country’s
achievement of sustainable and inclusive development and its ability to mitigate
poverty. We would therefore urge the Government to continue to pursue these muchneeded economic reforms.
In that context, let me welcome the Special Representative’s continued
engagement and support for the Government of Iraq’s anti-corruption efforts. As
the Iraqi Government has itself acknowledged, tackling corruption is vital to Iraq’s
economic development and to building stability in the country. It is important that
these efforts adhere to criminal procedures that include due process, fairness and
transparency reflective of Iraq as a democratic system.
We remain concerned by the humanitarian situation for the country’s 1.2 million
internally displaced people (IDPs) and the closure of camps established for them.
Since 2014, the United Kingdom has committed over $380 million in humanitarian
support to Iraq, providing a vital lifeline to millions with shelter, medical care and
clean water. We welcome the recent presentation by the Government of Iraq of its
national plan for returning IDPs, and we urge the Government to prioritize finding
sustainable and durable solutions for the country’s IDP population and to coordinate
closely with the United Nations to ensure that all returns are safe, dignified
and voluntary.
Let me also say that we were pleased to see the first delivery of vaccines to
Iraq from the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility on 25 March,
which was part of Iraq’s own plan to vaccinate its vulnerable people. The United
Kingdom has given $750 million to the COVAX Facility, and we are proud that the
Group of Seven countries overall have pledged over $7 billion.
On the security side, I want to condemn the recent attacks in the Iraqi Kurdistan
region and support the Government’s investigation to ensure that those responsible
21-0646327/35

S/2021/474

are held accountable. Continuing attacks across the country by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Shams (ISIS) undermine Iraq’s stability and also demonstrate the
importance of the ongoing work of the Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS, in close
partnership, of course, with the Iraqi security forces.
The Government of Iraq is striving to strengthen its relations with neighbours
in the region. We continue to support that approach and reiterate the importance of
dialogue and cooperation between Iraq and Turkey in combating terrorism, ensuring
regional security and protecting civilians. In the context of relations with the region,
let me commend the shared commitment of the Iraqi and Kuwaiti Governments
to making progress on the missing Kuwaiti persons and property file, pursuant to
resolution 2107 (2013), as demonstrated through Iraq’s recent transfer of Kuwaiti
property. The identification of the remains of an additional eight Kuwaiti missing
persons was a really positive step. as demonstrated through Iraq’s recent transfer of
Kuwaiti property. The identification of the remains of an additional eight Kuwaiti
missing persons was a really positive step.
Let me conclude by saying that the United Kingdom will continue to stand
with the Government and the people of Iraq over these coming vital months as they
work to advance the country’s stability with well-run elections, the implementation
of crucial economic reform and the effective combating of terrorism.

28/35

21-06463

S/2021/474

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Linda Thomas-Greenfield
Let me start by thanking the Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert for her
very informative briefing, and I look forward to hearing from the representative of
Iraq. We deeply appreciate the diligent and ongoing efforts of Special Representative
and her staff, even as the coronavirus disease and uncertain security complicates
their mission.
I would also like to start by expressing my heartfelt condolences to the people
of Iraq for the devastating Ibn Al-Khatib Hospital fire. As we announced last week
in Baghdad, the United States Agency for International Development is issuing
a $238,000 grant to completely refurbish and re-equip the hospital following this
terrible tragedy.
Today I would like to discuss progress on two issues vital to Iraq’s future —
first, its forthcoming elections, and secondly, its economy — both of which,
fundamentally, come down to trust. First, let me thank the Government of Iraq
for requesting additional United Nations support for their forthcoming elections.
Elections are the cornerstone of democracy, and, to build trust, they must be free
and fair. We therefore take Iraq’s request for United Nations support seriously. We
appreciate how, under Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi’s leadership, the Iraqi Government
is working diligently to fulfil its promise of credible early elections and to maximize
turnout at a critical moment in Iraq’s history. This is a top priority for us — for both
the United States and the United Nations — and we all want to ensure the maximum
possible support for Iraqi elections.
To that end, we aim to dramatically bolster provisions in the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to elevate the United Nations
role in the Iraqi elections. We aim to authorize a United Nations operation capable
of delivering the impact Iraq requested — a United Nations team sizable enough to
deter fraud, increase turnout and rebuild trust in Iraq’s democracy. That includes
calling for a robust and visible United Nations team to monitor Iraq’s election day
and report to the Secretary-General on the election process. UNAMI’s increased
technical electoral assistance team will be larger, more advanced and better equipped
than prior election teams — and it will be the largest United Nations technical
electoral assistance mission in the world. Combined, this enhanced electoral support
will eclipse the United Nations efforts in 2018.
The reason for this more robust team is clear: violence by armed actors against
citizens, security forces and journalists threatens to undermine the election. We are
very concerned by reports of militia harassment against activists, protesters and people
who openly express criticism of armed groups operating outside of State control. For
one, we absolutely condemn the May 9 assassination of protest leader Ihab Jawad
Al-Wazni in Karbala. This assassination is part of a disturbing and unacceptable
trend of attempting to silence independent voices in Iraq through violence.
Some of the perpetrators are militias aligned with Iran. They attack Iraqi
bases hosting forces of the Global Coalition to Defeat Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham as well as supply convoys — both of which are in Iraq at its invitation —
killing and injuring Iraqi citizens. Other violent groups also include Islamic State
remnants still terrorizing citizens and killing members of Iraqi security forces in the
liberated areas, including in the Kurdistan region. The United States will continue
to stand with those seeking a peaceful and prosperous future for Iraq. Iraqis must be
able to peacefully assemble and express their concerns.
For exactly the same reasons, Iraq deserves a thriving free press. World
Press Freedom Day was last week. That day, I was reminded of the murder of Iraqi
21-0646329/35

S/2021/474

journalist Ahmed Abdul Samad, who was gunned down in Basra last year. His brutal
killing did not just take a life: it attacked a fundamental freedom all Iraqis deserve,
namely, to have a free media that informs the public. Ahmed deserves accountability.
He deserves justice, as do so many others.
Given this violence, and the violations they cause, Iraqis have the right to
demand accountability from their Government. They deserve — and can demand —
full Government support for upholding their rights. And all Iraqis should be free to
express themselves or assemble peacefully, including journalists. Fighting for those
and other rights and freedoms, including fair trials, is necessary for building the
trust voters want and need.
Secondly, the United States remains committed to Iraq’s economic
development. We commend the passage of the 2021 federal budget law, and especially
the spirit of compromise between the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional
Government contained within it. Fully and promptly implementing the provisions
of the budget agreement will build economic reforms that will benefit all Iraqis.
Similarly, we support the Iraqi Government’s effort to implement the white paper for
economic reforms. These mechanisms need to be implemented as soon as possible.
Ultimately, like real elections, real economic recovery is about trust. The
corruption endemic to so much of Iraq undermines economic progress at every turn.
Robust reforms to end corruption are the key to restoring trust in Iraq’s political
bodies. We therefore commend the Government for its efforts to build a foundation
of trust — both for elections and for the economy — and we encourage continued,
committed actions.

30/35

21-06463

S/2021/474

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq and Head the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), for her valuable briefing. I also thank all United Nations personnel and
aid workers operating on the ground for their continued dedication to implementing
the mandate of the Mission under challenging circumstances.
I welcome Ambassador Mohammed Hussein Bahr Aluloom, Permanent
Representative of Iraq, to our meeting today.
In the face of current multiple and interlinked challenges in the country, we
reaffirm our full support for concerted efforts undertaken by the Government of Iraq
in continuing its preparation for the upcoming legislative elections in October. In
this regard, we support the request of the Government of Iraq to the Security Council
for election-related assistance. We continue to emphasize that the elections are of
Iraq and must be led by Iraq.
We wish to see the elections to be held in a free, fair and inclusive manner, with
broad participation by all segments of society, especially women and young people.
In this regard, we are encouraged by the joint efforts undertaken by UN-Women and
Iraqi institutions aimed at promoting and monitoring women’s electoral participation
and preventing violence against women candidates. We also commend UNAMI’s
assistance provided to the Independent High Electoral Commission so it could
develop procedures to ensure that all eligible voters, including internally displaced
persons, can cast their ballots.
We welcome the agreement between the federal Government and the
Kurdistan Regional Government on budget issues. It is our hope that the agreement
will pave the way for constructive discussions on outstanding issues between them.
We note the efforts of the Iraqi Government to reach out to regional and international
partners to explore opportunities for economic cooperation. We are in favour of
strengthening cooperation between Iraq and countries of the region in dealing with
common challenges. At the same time, we continue to call for full respect of Iraq’s
independence and territorial integrity by all regional and international actors.
Turning to humanitarian issues, we note reports that the Government of Iraq
has paused the closure of camps for internally displaced persons (IDPs). We welcome
the development and implementation of the national plan for displacement and
reconstruction. We urge the relevant Iraqi authorities and international partners to
redouble their efforts to ensure the safe, voluntary, dignified and sustainable return
or settlement of IDPs, and to avoid a crisis of secondary displacement at all costs. We
are also pleased at the adoption of the Yazidi female survivors law that recognizes
women survivors of conflict-related sexual violence and provides for assistance and
reparations for survivors.
We join other members of the Council in commending the continued
cooperation between the Governments of Iraq and Kuwait in the search for missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and the return of Kuwaiti property. We welcome
the recent DNA identification of missing Kuwaiti and Saudi Arabian nationals,
as well as the handover of the property to the Kuwaiti Government on 28 March.
We value the assistance that UNAMI and the International Committee of the Red
Cross provided to the national authorities so that they may fulfil their obligations in
accordance with resolution 2107 (2013).
Before concluding, we would like to reaffirm Viet Nam’s support for the
mandate of UNAMI and United Nations agencies in assisting Iraq to maintain
21-0646331/35

S/2021/474

stability and security as well as to provide humanitarian assistance to people
severely affected by conflict, poverty and the coronavirus disease pandemic. We
look forward to working with members of the Council to renew the mandate of
UNAMI by the end of this month.

32/35

21-06463

S/2021/474

Annex XVII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Iraq to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, allow me to congratulate His Excellency Mr. Zhang Jun,
Permanent Representative of the People’s Republic of China, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council this month.
I express my gratitude to Her Excellency Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), for her briefing.
Since the last Council meeting on the situation in Iraq in February 2021 (see
S/2021/152), there has been no real change in the situation or the magnitude of the
major and interrelated economic, security, health and social challenges facing my
country, Iraq. The Government is continuously working to the best of its ability and
at the highest levels, as promised, to meet the people’s demands by maintaining peace
and security, providing services, countering the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, fighting terrorism, instituting political and economic reforms and taking
the necessary steps to prepare to organize free and fair elections.
The country’s economic and financial situations are priorities for the Iraqi
Government, which is seeking sustainable solutions. The Government has begun
to implement the White Paper for Economic and Financial Reform to restructure
the national economy by reducing dependence on oil revenues and promoting
investment in different sectors, in addition to holding a vote on the 2021 budget in
the Council of Representatives. Alongside this challenge, the Government is facing a
significant increase in coronavirus disease (COVID-19) cases, which have exceeded
a daily mark of 8,000. To confront these challenges, on 10 February the Council
of Ministers decided to form a high reform committee headed by Prime Minister
Mustafa al-Kadhimi, and to accelerate the adoption of automation and e-governance
procedures in all Government departments and institutions in order to strengthen
anti-corruption efforts.
Since its formation, the current Government has resolved to fulfil the
commitment it made to the people to respond to the demonstrators’ demands. In that
regard, the Government has sought to gain the people’s confidence, especially that
of young people, by listening to their voices and respecting the constitutional right
to demonstrate peacefully and express oneself freely.
The Government has also promised to protect demonstrators from any
human rights violations. The competent authorities have made significant efforts
to prevent outlaw groups from targeting demonstrators and to reduce the number
of incidents by adopting a number of measures, the most important of which is the
prosecution of criminal gangs targeting demonstrators. My Government has also
made strenuous efforts to compensate the victims and their families and to do more
to hold the perpetrators of violations accountable by forming a fact-finding team
to investigate the bloody events with a view to preventing such violations from
recurring in the future. Appropriate legal action was taken, in accordance with
the relevant domestic law, against members of the security services found to be
involved in targeting demonstrators. An advisory council for the reconstruction
of the governorates has been established, and a commission has been formed to
investigate the recent violence. These efforts are part of the Iraqi Government’s
pledge to enforce the rule of law, restrict possession of weapons to the State and
promote security reform efforts in government institutions in order to strengthen
hu-man rights procedures as part of its effort to enforce the rule of law. Considerable
21-0646333/35

S/2021/474

security challenges persist, affecting government efforts in various areas. Terrorism,
the greatest and most enduring threat, is foremost among them. In that regard, Iraq
reiterates its commitment to continue to cooperate with the international community
to combat terrorism and to continue to mobilize the capabilities of the competent
national entities. Therefore, I am pleased to high-light two important points. The
first pertains to the positive atmosphere that prevailed through-out the third round
of strategic dialogue with the United States of America. The second concerns the
determination of Iraq to provide support to victims of terrorism. The Council of
Representatives enacted the Yazidi Female Survivors Law.
My Government stresses that it is fully committed to protecting the staff and
premises of diplomatic and consular missions based in Iraq. In that connection, it
is making every effort to prevent the recurrence of rocket attacks carried out by
outlaw groups. In perpetrating such attacks, those groups seek to destabilize Iraq
and adversely affect cooperation between the Government and the international
community in the fight against terrorism. These formidable security challenges have
not deterred Iraq from moving forward with the preparations to hold early, free and
fair elections in response to the demands of the demonstrators. The most important of
those measures are the enactment of the new expanded Federal Supreme Court law,
and the decision of the Council of Representatives to dissolve itself on 7 October 2021
in preparation for the elections on 10 October. The Iraqi Government is determined
to create a positive environment conducive to promoting dialogue with the Kurdistan
Regional Government, concerning the budget, control of border crossing points and
the management of oil resources in particular. It is also committed to ensuring that
the meetings are intensive and are held regularly in order to reach a sustainable
agreement on various issues.
My country, Iraq, places the idea of cooperation at the centre of its relations
with Ku-wait and complies with the obligations set forth in paragraph 4 of resolution
2107 (2013), including searching for the remains of missing Kuwaitis and Kuwaiti
property and continuing to cover compensation instalments in a timely manner.
Iraq continues to demonstrate that it is fully committed to paying compensation
in a timely manner. Its most recent payment was $380 million on 28 April 2021.
Kuwait is owed an outstanding balance of only $1.7 billion, out of an initial total of
$52.4 billion.
With regard to the question of missing persons, Iraq welcomes the announcement
by the Kuwaiti authorities that the remains of eight of the missing persons have been
identified, bringing the total number of persons identified to 28 of the 69 missing
persons whose remains were handed over in two instalments since August 2019 have
been identified. Meanwhile, Iraq calls on the Tripartite Commission and the State of
Kuwait to accelerate the process of announcing the results of DNA tests of the remains
of the other 41 persons and to make the announcement at the earliest opportunity.
The upcoming early elections are an essential part of the reform programme
that the Iraqi Government has committed to implement. Given the importance of
those elections, my Government addressed two letters to the Security Council, the
second of which was sent in February 2021 requesting United Nations support in
observing the elections.
Building and strengthening citizen confidence in the electoral process is a key
factor in ensuring the success of the most important pillar of democracy, namely,
elections. In that regard, the Government and people of Iraq trust that the United
Nations will be impartial in set-ting standards of integrity and transparency in the
electoral process and deterring violations on election day. Such is the trust that my
Government wishes to establish in order to bolster and fully restore voter confidence
in the electoral process, encouraging voters to participate actively so that the will of
34/35

21-06463

S/2021/474

the masses is expressed in the election results, which will, in turn, be reflected in the
formation of a Government that draws its strength from broad popular support and
that is able to meet various challenges, consolidate stability and combat terrorism.
My Government understands that the new election date of 10 October
2021 gives the United Nations time to address the Iraqi request more effectively
while respecting the country’s sovereignty and cooperating with the relevant
national authorities.
In that connection, my Government endorses the contents of the penholder’s
proposal regarding the request of Iraq for election observation and hopes that
Council members will support the proposal. Iraq also stresses that it is committed
to providing comprehensive security in order to protect United Nations observers.
Lastly, I thank the Secretary-General for his position of unwavering support
for Iraq by affirming respect for its sovereignty and territorial integrity and stressing
that the international community must continue to support and cooperate ever more
closely with Iraq in order to achieve prosperity and stability for the Iraqi people.
On behalf of my Government, I wish to express my appreciation for the
efforts made by the Head and staff of UNAMI in various areas, particularly on
humanitarian and development-related matters, during the period covered by the
Secretary-General’s report.

21-0646335/35
