S/PV.9105

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9105th meeting

Friday, 29 July 2022, 2 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De Almeida Filho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Benaabou
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Boateng
Mr. Vinito
Mr. Kenneally
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Ríos Sánchez
Ms. Syed
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Ms. Jacobs
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Letter dated 14 June 2022 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2022/489)
Letter dated 29 June 2022 from the Panel of Experts on the Central African
Republic extended pursuant to resolution 2588 (2021) addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2022/527)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-44483 (E)
*2244483*

S/PV.9105

The situation in the Central African Republic

The meeting was called to order at 2.05 p.m.

29/07/2022

Abstaining:
China, Gabon, Ghana, Kenya, Russian Federation

Adoption of the agenda.

The President: The draft resolution received
10 votes in favour, none against and 5 abstentions.
The draft resolution has been adopted as resolution
2648 (2022).

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Letter dated 14 June 2022 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2022/489)

I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Francophonie and Central Africans Abroad of
the Central African Republic.

Letter dated 29 June 2022 from the Panel
of Experts on the Central African Republic
extended pursuant to resolution 2588
(2021) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2022/527)

Ms. Baipo Temon (Central African Republic)
(spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting on the
adoption of resolution 2648 (2022), submitted by France
in its capacity as penholder on issues concerning the
Central African Republic.

The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Central African Republic to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Sylvie Valérie Baipo Temon, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Francophonie and Central Africans Abroad of
the Central African Republic.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2022/579, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by France.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/489, which contains the text of a
letter dated 14 June 2022 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
and document S/2022/527, which contains the text of
a letter dated 29 June 2022 from the Panel of Experts
on the Central African Republic extended pursuant to
resolution 2588 (2021) addressed to the President of the
Security Council.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, France, India, Ireland, Mexico,
Norway, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
2/11

First, let me thank all the members of the Security
Council for participating in the debate on the embargo
in the resolution submitted for their consideration. The
arms embargo, which was established in 2013 to the
detriment of the governmental forces, is a crucial issue
for the Central African Republic. That is why, while we
have taken note of the results of the vote on resolution
2648 (2022) and the progress represented by its
adoption just now, the Central African Republic would
first like to commend Council members for their efforts
in the discussions on the resolution, and secondly to
express its satisfaction with the first significant step to
have been made with regard to the embargo on armed
groups, although since the resolution is the first of its
kind, it still remains to be seen how it can be applied to
armed groups. But it is nevertheless welcomed and to
be encouraged.
We would also like to thank the States that in their
awareness of the injustice and ineffectiveness of the arms
embargo on the forces of the Central African Republic
have been willing to voice their support for lifting it
completely. I especially want to thank the People’s
Republic of China, whose consistent position and call
for taking into account the realities on the ground in
terms of the imbalance in the power dynamics between
the Government forces and those of the rebels are
appreciated; the Russian Federation, whose steadfast
support for the arguments concerning the reality on
the ground in the Central African Republic has also
been unwavering; and the three African members of
the Security Council, Gabon, Kenya and Ghana (A3),
which have given us a great example, and more, of how
African solidarity requires us to speak with one voice.
22-44483

29/07/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

I would like to take this opportunity to remind the
Council that this concerns Africa as a whole, not just
the file on the Central African Republic. The threat
facing my country is one that is confronting the entire
subregion and African continent. As Council members
are aware, given the fact that the Central African
Republic is located geographically at the heart of
Africa, it would be delusional to believe that when the
heart is sick the rest of the body can fare better.
Furthermore, the history of Africa reminds us that
the struggle for African independence was motivated by
our illustrious founding fathers’ desire to remain united
and indivisible in order to avoid becoming vulnerable to
the inconstancy of the world through our own disparities.
That position is firmly supported by the A3 in line with
that of all continental and other African organizations
through the African Union Commission, which, in its
27 July communiqué reiterated its call to the A3 to
show solidarity in accordance with the African mandate
conferred on them, and the principles of the African
Union Charter, which opposes unjust sanctions on our
States. I would be remiss in concluding our thanks if I
did not express the gratitude of the Government and the
people of the Central African Republic to all the States
represented here today that have supported the Central
African Republic’s appeal and therefore a better way
forward for my country.
With regard to resolution 2648 (2022), my country
welcomes the progress it represents in dismissing
the notion of limiting access to certain categories of
weapons for the governmental and legitimate forces of
the Central African Republic, with a view to ensuring
that they can be provided with adequate equipment
against the backdrop of the security-sector reform
that is under way. Indeed, the resolution adopted
today no longer adheres strictly to the concept of an
arms embargo but rather creates the possibility for our
forces to equip themselves, subject to notification to
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013) concerning the Central African Republic.
We do not need to point to the importance that the
subject of our meeting today has for the Central African
Republic. The arms embargo established nine years ago
in 2013 has been a major issue for the Government and
the people of my country. It is therefore an honour for
me to be with the Council members at this important
meeting to reiterate our position. I am delighted to be
the voice of the Central African Republic today before
the Council, a voice that has often been drowned out

S/PV.9105

by misinformation, manipulation of the media and
censorship. But against all adversity, it has stayed the
course in its noble mission to make itself heard in order
to legitimately articulate the injustices that 5 million
people have suffered not just since the emergence of
the Séléka coalition in 2013 but for decades and even
centuries prior to that.
The Central African Republic has consistently
condemned an embargo that has become unjust.
I concede that at the height of the crisis in 2013 the
embargo could be understood in terms of the urgent
need to contain the exponential proliferation of
weapons resulting from the unprecedented violence of
the Séléka rebellion and the abandonment of the people
by the authorities of the Central African Republic at
the time, who were duty bound to protect them. Today,
however, the embargo can no longer be justified unless
it is by a desire to leave a country and its people at the
mercy of extremists. The embargo established in 2013
has unquestionably been ineffective, as it has failed
to provide concrete solutions to the serious problems
posed by the spread of weapons through the militias
and extremist rebels in possession of an overwhelming
number of sophisticated weapons. In that regard, the
resolution adopted today does not respond to the Central
African Republic’s legitimate request, for it implicitly
maintains the sanctions regime merely by upholding its
precedent. I reiterate that the Central African Republic
is requesting the total lifting of the embargo, and with
it an acknowledgement of the legitimacy of the ruling
authorities and the Government’s efforts.
I will conclude by once again expressing my
gratitude to and recognition of all the States that were
able to make the voice of the Central African Republic
heard in order to better understand the reality on
the ground.
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
members of the Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Benaabou (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2648 (2022),
which renews the mandate of the Panel of Experts on
the Central African Republic for one year. We call
on all members of the Security Council to enable the
Panel to continue its work as effectively as possible by
ensuring the rapid appointment of its members. The
Panel’s inability to work for more than eight months
of the past year has meant that a number of serious
incidents, such as in Boyo in December 2021 and
Aigbando in January, have been passed over in silence.

22-444833/11

S/PV.9105

The situation in the Central African Republic

Investigations are essential to uncovering the truth
about such violent incidents and those responsible for
them. We should remind the Council that upholding
human rights law and international humanitarian law
is a prerequisite to the support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic for the Armed Forces of
the Central African Republic.
The goal of the arms embargo has always been to
reduce the threat posed by armed groups in the Central
African Republic. We should point out that the Security
Council has always been attentive to the need for the
country’s armed forces to be provided with the necessary
equipment, and as a result they have received more than
20,000 weapons and 29 million rounds of ammunition
in recent years. Today the Security Council decided
to go even further by making it even easier for the
Central African Republic’s armed forces to acquire all
types of weapons and ammunition. That sends a strong
message to the Central African Republic, whose greater
involvement is key to combating the proliferation of
weapons in the country, and to its defence and security
forces, on the importance of ensuring respect human
rights law and international humanitarian law. We will
continue to follow vigilantly the implementation of
the benchmarks, whose importance the African Union
Peace and Security Council has just underlined.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
peace process must remain a priority for all of us. The
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic and the Luanda road map are
our only hope for lasting stability and reconciliation.
France reiterates its full support for the efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Central African Republic, the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the Economic Community of Central African States
and Rwanda and Angola. We call on all the parties to
fully commit to the peace process.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to welcome Ms. Baipo Temon,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Central African
Republic, to today’s meeting.
China abstained in the voting on resolution 2648
(2022), which was just adopted by the Council, on the
issue of sanctions on the Central African Republic.
We welcome the fact that resolution 2648 (2022)
makes substantial adjustments to the arms embargo
on the Government of the Central African Republic in
4/11

29/07/2022

response to firm requests by the Government and by
various members of the Council. However, we believe
that the resolution still contains a number of restrictive
measures that could pose unnecessary obstacles to
the defence capacity-building of the Government of
the Central African Republic. There is still room for
improvement until the sanctions are completely lifted.
The Security Council imposed a comprehensive
arms embargo on the Central African Republic
in 2013, and those measures played an important
role in preventing the situation in the country from
deteriorating and controlling the proliferation of arms
in the light of the conditions that pertained at that time.
Given the progress that the country has made in recent
years and the continuing improvement in the security
situation, the arms-embargo measures have become
increasingly incompatible with developments in the
Central African Republic. They are not only failing to
prevent the rebels from acquiring weapons, but they
are preventing the Government from strengthening
its security capacity-building. The Government of the
Central African Republic has repeatedly called for the
arms embargo to be lifted and has received positive
responses from the countries of the region. The recent
summit of the Economic Community of Central African
States and meeting of the African Union Peace and
Security Council on the situation in the Central African
Republic have both supported lifting the arms embargo.
The International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region has also clearly expressed its support. During
the past few years, China and the relevant Council
members have continued to call on the Council to lift
the arms embargo and have encouraged the Council to
gradually relax the embargo measures.
Under the resolution just adopted, the Government
of the Central African Republic no longer requires the
approval of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central African
Republic to acquire arms in future, which reflects
full respect for the ownership that the Government
of the Central African Republic has demonstrated
on the security front. We believe that it will take this
opportunity to strengthen security capacity-building,
improve its management of arms and ammunition and
lay a solid foundation for the country’s long-term peace
and security.
In the past 20 years or so, the Council’s sanctions
mechanisms have shown a tendency to expand, with
negative consequences for peoples and their livelihoods
22-44483

29/07/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

that cannot be ignored. Such measures increasingly
interfere with ordinary people’s economic and social
activities. In recent years, African countries such as
the Sudan, South Sudan, Somalia and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have proposed that arms
embargoes and other sanctions be lifted, arguing
that they have had a negative impact on their ability
to enhance their security. These reasonable demands
are widely supported by African countries but still
face considerable resistance in the Security Council.
The Council’s sanctions and arms embargo measures
should not be indefinite. We call on the relevant
members of the Council to consider the legitimate
concerns and demands of African countries, and based
on these adjustments to arms sanctions, to conduct an
urgent and comprehensive review of existing sanctions
mechanisms and adjust or lift those that do not meet the
needs of specific situations as soon as possible.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I welcome the participation
of Her Excellency Ms. Sylvie Baipo Temon in today’s
deliberations following the voting and congratulate the
Foreign Minister for the significant victory she has won
for her country today. Her persistence and determination
are a vivid demonstration of the great wins that
countries can enjoy if they embrace the women and
peace and security agenda in ensuring the equality and
inclusion of women in key decision-making positions.
The Kenyan delegation thanks France for
facilitating the negotiations on resolution 2648 (2022),
leading to its adoption. We appreciate the fact that some
of the proposals made by Kenya and Gabon are in the
text. Indeed, the new resolution has taken a positive step
towards a full lifting of the arms embargo. However,
Kenya abstained in the voting because in our view, the
resolution still falls short of the full lifting of the arms
embargo on the Government of the Central African
Republic, as advocated by the Government itself, the
African Union, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region. All of those bodies have a clear
analysis of what is going on in the Central African
Republic and are united in calling for the embargo on
its Government to be fully lifted.
In line with the provisions of Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, the least the Council
should do is to give those regional organizations a
more respectful hearing. We reiterate our assertion
during the renewal of the sanctions on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo last month (see S/PV.9084) that

S/PV.9105

the notification requirement is unnecessary. It is an
ineffective tool for addressing the illicit proliferation
and supply of weapons to armed groups. If anything, it
serves only to reveal information that should otherwise
remain privileged to a sovereign State. Meanwhile,
armed groups have been acquiring superior arms
through illicit trafficking networks, financed by the
illegal exploitation of the country’s natural resources.
That has given them an advantage over Government
forces. In that regard, we hope that the Council will
listen to the voices of Central Africans and the relevant
regional organizations and take the remaining step
of removing the notification requirement as soon
as possible.
In the meantime, we encourage the Government
of the Central African Republic and all parties in the
country to redouble their efforts to implement the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic through the Luanda
road map. They should also stay on course to expedite
security-sector reform. Kenya will continue supporting
the people of the Central African Republic in their
quest for peace, while always respecting their political
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, we would like to congratulate
the delegation of Brazil on a successful conclusion to
its presidency of the Security Council this month. We
appreciate our colleagues’ professionalism. We also
welcome Ms. Sylvie Baipo Temon, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Central African Republic, to
this meeting.
The Russian Federation abstained in the voting on
resolution 2648 (2022), on the renewal of the sanctions
regime for the Central African Republic, proposed
by France. Nevertheless, we note the efforts that the
French delegation made to bring Council members’
positions closer together. Russia has emphasized on
many occasions in this Chamber, as well as during the
consultations on the draft of the resolution, that the
Security Council must, finally, respond to the repeated
requests of the Government of the Central African
Republic to lift the sanctions on arms and military
equipment needed to supply the country’s security
sector. In October of last year, President Touadera of
the Central African Republic personally appealed to
the Security Council, also not for the first time, to show
wisdom and lift the arms embargo that has prevented
his country from fighting the illegal armed groups. It

22-444835/11

S/PV.9105

The situation in the Central African Republic

is no secret to anyone that the restrictions imposed on
the Central African Republic made life in Bangui itself
more challenging right from the start. And the rebels
are still receiving all the weapons they need through
every possible channel.
In June of last year, President Lourenço of Angola
visited New York in his capacity as Chair of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and
spoke in the Security Council in support of the Central
African Republic (see S/PV.8802). The African Union
has also expressed its position clearly, unanimously and
repeatedly, requesting the Security Council to lift the
embargo in order to ensure that the national defence
and security forces of the Central African Republic can
effectively carry out their constitutional mandate to
protect the country and its people. The voice of African
States has again gone unheard, despite the frequent
promises made in this Chamber to take account of the
views of regional organizations in our work, a situation
that once again emphasizes the importance of further
strengthening African solidarity on a wide range of
issues pertaining to the establishment of security on
the continent.
It is disturbing to see that opposition to the views
of Africans on the full lifting of sanctions has in our
opinion recently become a trend. That has been the case
with South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and for several years now, the Central African
Republic. Why do countries that are so in favour of
keeping sanctions regimes believe that they know the
situation better than the African Union? What we see
in that, particularly among Western States, is a desire
to do everything possible to keep their hands on the
levers of political influence, using the Security Council
sanctions mechanisms that are critical to international
cooperation for their own opportunistic purposes. That
is not a constructive approach, including for ensuring
effective sanctions regimes.
Our Western colleagues’ arrogant attitude to
Africans goes hand in hand with their efforts to cast
a shadow over Russian-African cooperation and
besmirch the efforts of the Russian experts who have
been assisting a number of African Governments in
stabilizing the situation in their countries and training
their security forces. That is real assistance on the
ground, not the advice and moralizing that we see from
other continents. We have noted the declarations from
a number of Western capitals claiming that Russia’s
policies in Africa are not to Africa’s benefit or that our
6/11

29/07/2022

actions are malign, in an obvious and unconvincing
attempt to pit African countries against Russia. The
Africans themselves have an answer to that. The
Governments of the Central African Republic and other
States welcome Russian assistance, seek to develop
equal and mutually respectful relations with us and
value our historical ties.
It is obvious that the Security Council should revisit
its approach to the situation in the Central African
Republic. In our view, the resolution adopted today does
not respond fully to the task of stabilizing the situation
there. We have all seen that the situation on the ground
has substantially changed since 2013, when the United
Nations sanctions regime was introduced. In that regard,
the switch to a notification regime is a meaningful but
overdue step. We believe that an adequate measure,
commensurate with the current state of affairs in the
Central African Republic, would be a Security Council
decision to abolish any sanctions on the efforts of a
sovereign State to ensure its national security.
Ms. Syed (Norway): I too would like to recognize
the presence of the Foreign Minister of the Central
African Republic in the Council today.
We thank the penholder, France, in particular,
and all delegations for going the extra mile to find a
solution that was workable for all. In all such decisions,
we believe that we should be guided by good and
factual balance. On the one hand we should recognize
and encourage progress where it is merited, but on
the other we must also acknowledge continuing and
even increasing concerns, not least about international
humanitarian law and human rights. On previous
occasions we have also commended progress and
expressed concern about the situation in the Central
African Republic. We believe that such a combined
overall assessment is what should lead to a potential
and gradual decrease in restrictions, in line with what
we hope will be further progress.
We firmly believe that the best way forward is an
inclusive political dialogue among all parties with the
continued support of the region and the international
community. In that regard, we appreciate the references
to the road map of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region, which we also view as an important
indicator, alongside benchmarks for assessing further
and much-needed progress.
22-44483

29/07/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

Lastly, as this is the final meeting of the Security
Council for the month of July, I would also like to
congratulate Brazil on a busy and successful presidency.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): I thank Foreign Minister
Sylvie Baipo Temon for her presence in the
Chamber today.
At the outset, I would like to express our appreciation
to the penholder, France, for all the efforts to provide
us with a comprehensive resolution. We recognize
that the task was significant and challenging, as the
difficult negotiations showed. Resolution 2648 (2022)
is nevertheless a product of compromise, designed to
bridge divergent opinions constructively on a very
sensitive issue. Albania supported today’s resolution
because we believe it includes substantial steps that
can potentially pave the way for a more secure Central
African Republic. I will highlight only one of them,
which is how the resolution handles the request for
lifting arms-delivery notifications.
We believe that is the closest to a balanced
approach, and we thank all States for their constructive
suggestions in that regard. Albania recognizes the
progress made by the Central African Republic in
meeting its benchmarks, as well as the challenges
remaining on the ground, and the resolution does the
same. Its final formula keeps the focus on the need to
improve the ability of the Central African Republic
to safeguard its internal security, but also to further
improve its compliance with its benchmarks. That is
why the resolution foresees the possible review at any
time of the appropriateness of the measures it contains,
based on how the security situation in the country
evolves and on the progress achieved.
Albania is committed to the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of the
Central African Republic and reaffirms its willingness
to support future adjustments as needed, reflecting
the aspirations of the Central African Republic and
documented progress on the ground.
Ms. Jacobs (United Kingdom): I would like to start
by thanking France, as penholder, for its tireless efforts
to achieve consensus. We have been clear throughout the
negotiations that in our view the arms embargo remains
an important tool for supporting the maintenance of
peace and stability in the Central African Republic. We
remain convinced that the further proliferation of arms,
both within the country and the wider region, would
have a destabilizing effect. We are seriously concerned

S/PV.9105

about the continuing allegations that atrocities are being
committed against civilians, not just by armed groups
but by Government forces and their security partners.
It is therefore crucial that the notification process set
out in resolution 2648 (2022) be implemented in a
timely and thorough way to maximize transparency.
We will continue to follow that closely through the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013) concerning the Central African Republic.
Mr. Kenneally (Ireland): I would like to begin by
recognizing the presence of the Foreign Minister of the
Central African Republic at today’s meeting.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 2648
(2022). We also welcome the progress made on the
implementation of the key benchmarks. However,
we share the Secretary-General’s view that further
progress is required on the national disarmament,
demobilization,
reintegration
and
repatriation
programme and on effective weapons and ammunition
management. We encourage the Central African
Republic to make further efforts to meet the objectives
set out in the resolution.
There are ongoing allegations of violations and
abuses against civilians by the national security forces
and other security personnel, along with those committed
by armed groups in the Central African Republic.
Given that extremely worrying context, improving
arms control is particularly important. We are
especially concerned about the findings outlined in two
reports released this week by the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, which highlight very
disturbing events that took place in recent months in the
Central African Republic. We urge the Government to
implement the recommendations made in those reports
and put in place effective concrete measures to protect
civilians and prevent future human rights violations
and abuses.
In conclusion, I would like to express our deep and
sincere appreciation to France as the penholder on this
file for its unstinting efforts to secure agreement on
this important resolution.
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Sylvie Baipo Temon, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Central African Republic, to today’s meeting. I
would also like to recognize France and other members
of the Council for their efforts and commitment during
the negotiations.

22-444837/11

S/PV.9105

The situation in the Central African Republic

Resolution 2648 (2022), which we have just
adopted, is the result of intense discussions and shows
us that it is possible to reach a compromise in the
Council. It constitutes a very important initial step
forward and a great accomplishment for the people of
the Central African Republic. The arms embargo will
now be replaced by a notification regime. Nevertheless,
the notification regime proposed by the resolution
does not take into account the recommendations of
the African Union Peace and Security Council, in
particular that of 25 July, which asked that the arms
embargo be lifted in order to enable the Central African
Republic’s national defence and security forces to fully
carry out their constitutional mandate to protect their
country and its citizens. In that connection, it appealed
to the three African members of the Security Council
to support the request of the Central African Republic
with regard to the arms embargo. The African Union’s
recommendations are also supported by the 25 July
communiqué of the Economic Community of Central
African States and a decision of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
The fact is that the backdrop in 2013, when the
sanctions regime was established by the Security
Council, was very different from the circumstances
that pertain today. We now have a Government
democratically elected through elections that were held
twice in a stable environment, and a social, economic
and political situation that has the potential to revive
the Central African Republic. Why, then, should the
Council continue to restrain the operational capacities
of a democratically elected Government? How can we
ignore the appeals of the people of the Central African
Republic, who are asking only to live in peace? We all
know only too well that there can be no lasting peace in
the country or any willingness to negotiate among the
armed groups if the situation on the ground is to their
advantage. Gabon stands in solidarity with the people
of the Central African Republic.
Mr. Boateng (Ghana): Your delegation has conducted
the affairs of the Security Council professionally this
month, Sir, and I would like to congratulate you on a
successful presidency. I would also like to acknowledge
and recognize the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Central African Republic.
I want to begin by thanking the delegation of
France, the penholder on the Central African Republic
sanctions resolution, for its brilliant efforts to forge
consensus on resolution 2648 (2022), which we have
8/11

29/07/2022

just adopted. We are particularly grateful for all the
penholder’s efforts in trying to accommodate the input
of delegations for a responsible release of the levers on
the arms embargo against the Central African Republic
in a way that does not have an adverse impact on the
stability of the country and its neighbours in the region.
We note that the present resolution represents the best
possible outcome given the prevailing circumstances,
and we urge the Council to lend its continued support
to the efforts being made by the Central African
Republic, in collaboration with the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic and international partners,
to succeed in attaining the benchmarks established by
the Council.
We encourage the Central African Republic to
vigorously pursue its much-needed security-sector
reforms, as well as to further develop enhanced
management practices that can prevent weapons and
ammunition from falling into the hands of unauthorized
armed groups. In that regard, we encourage the Central
African Republic’s improvement of its joint bordermanagement procedures with neighbouring States to
control the listed flow of small arms and light weapons,
and ask that the national body for arms and light
weapons strengthen its operations. We also urge the
Central African Republic to sustain its implementation
of the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation programme with the support of its partners.
In conclusion, I want to express Ghana’s firm
encouragement of the Central African Republic
authorities in ensuring its implementation of measures
to protect the country’s civilian populations without
discrimination and in a manner that facilitates national
cohesion and respect for the rights of all citizens.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank France for
its efforts in facilitating the consultations process and
the other members of the Council for their participation.
I also want to thank Her Excellency Ms. Sylvie Baipo
Temon, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Central
African Republic, for her valuable briefing.
The United Arab Emirates approached the
negotiations on resolution 2648 (2022), which we have
just adopted, in a constructive and collaborative spirit.
We carefully considered all Council members’ views
and those of the relevant regional organizations, along
with the demands of the Central African Republic
concerning the sanctions regime imposed on it.
22-44483

29/07/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

Throughout the process, we have seen key aspects of
the resolution evolve, including the arms embargo.
In that context, the United Arab Emirates stresses its
support to the Central African Republic on its path to
peace and stability, which is vitally important to the
Council, particularly given the ongoing challenges the
country is facing. It is therefore important to find ways
to support the Central African Republic’s commitment
to reform, including in the security sector, as it builds on
positive developments already achieved or that will be
achieved in the context of the implementation process
of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic through the Luanda
road map.
We are cognizant that this issue is first and foremost
an African one that relies mainly on African voices,
and we believe the Council should have found a way to
more effectively incorporate African views. However,
mindful of the complexity and importance of the issues
at hand, the United Arab Emirates voted in favour of
the resolution.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate the United Arab
Emirates’ commitment to continuing to work with
the Government of the Central African Republic, our
partners in the region and the broader international
community to support the people of the Central African
Republic on the path to peace and stability.
Lastly, I would like to thank Brazil for its successful
presidency of the Council for this month and to wish
China every success in its presidency in August.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank you and your delegation for your leadership of the
Council this month, Sir. We also welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Central African Republic to
today’s meeting.
We support and welcome the extension of the
mandate of the Panel of Experts on the Central African
Republic, as well as the renewal of the travel ban and
measures for the freezing of assets for a further 12
months. We thank France for its efforts to get us over
the finish line in that regard. Our goal is to promote
peace and stability in the Central African Republic and
across the region, and we believe that the measures
in resolution 2648 (2022), adopted today, aim to do
just that. Specifically, today’s action helps to ensure the
continuation of the Panel’s reporting, which spotlights
key issues for the Government and the people of the
Central African Republic and for the Council.

S/PV.9105

On the arms embargo, the region is awash with
guns, and it is time to halt that unfettered flow. If
effectively implemented, the arms embargo will help
to silence the guns. Effective implementation in that
case means a notification requirement, which is critical
to transparency. It also means, as the resolution calls
for, that the Central African authorities must continue
improving physical protection and accountability when
it comes to weapons. Although the resolution calls for
a relaxation of the arms embargo, we must therefore
ensure that it does not endanger Central Africans,
other civilians, United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic personnel, other United Nations staff or
humanitarian workers.
The truth is that military actions alone will
not resolve the Central African Republic’s crises.
Good governance, credible security-sector reform,
transparent disarmament and reintegration, national
dialogue and justice and accountability are the
most important steps towards peace. To that end, we
appreciate the Government’s efforts to address those
issues through the revitalization of the country’s 2019
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic and its dedication to the
Luanda road map.
The United States is committed to the people of the
Central African Republic and to finding and forging
a durable peace. We will continue to work closely
with the country’s Government, our fellow Council
members and all stakeholders to facilitate true security
and prosperity for the country and the region.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Brazil.
My delegation welcomes the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Central African Republic, Her Excellency
Ms. Sylvie Baipo Temon, to this meeting.
The renewal of the Central African Republic
sanctions regime in resolution 2648 (2022), just
adopted by the Council, keeps in place important
mechanisms, such as the system of benchmarks and
the work of the Panel of Experts, to help guide the
country towards stabilization and durable peace. It also
addresses — though only partially — the assessments
and claims of the Central African authorities, the
African Union and other regional organizations, whose
views are equally important. Their voices can indeed
make a meaningful contribution to the process, not only

22-444839/11

S/PV.9105

The situation in the Central African Republic

because of their legitimacy, but also primarily because
they offer us a perspective that considers the peace and
security situation in the Central African Republic on
its own merits. That approach should be at the core of
our work, or the Council runs the risk of new failures
in the fulfilment of its mandate whenever it allows
political considerations other than those pertaining to
the context on the ground to interfere.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Central
African Republic has asked to make a further statement.
I now give her the floor.
Ms. Baipo Temon (Central African Republic)
(spoke in French): I thank you, Sir, for giving me
the floor once again. I delivered my initial remarks
assuming I would be given the chance to speak again
at the end of the meeting, as is often the case, so I am
grateful to you for affording me that opportunity.
I would like to start by once again thanking the
members of the Security Council and assuring them
that the Central African Republic has taken note of
their various recommendations. I would also like
to reiterate my country’s steadfast determination to
continue in our efforts. That is because it is the primary
responsibility of the Central African authorities to
ensure the territorial integrity of our country and the
protection of our populations, which we have been
striving to do for several years, particularly since
President Touadera was elected. On behalf of the
Central African Republic, I have listened to the various
recommendations and concerns expressed by Council
members, and I would ask them to bear in mind the
efforts that the Central African Republic has been
making in every area pertaining to human rights. In
that connection, President Touadera has been striving
to establish mechanisms at the ministry level dedicated
to upholding human rights.
I would like to draw attention to the fact that
reports have been drafted concerning the call for
respect for human rights and demanding that no effort
to be spared by all Central African authorities to that
end. It is also important to recall that within the context
of the information in the reports, impartiality must be
maintained, given that they did not mention several
cases of human rights violations. In that connection, on
1 November 2021, we saw a contingent from the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
10/11

29/07/2022

Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
violate not just the sovereignty of the Central African
Republic but the terms of the agreement between
MINUSCA and the Central African Government, owing
to its presence barely 100 metres from the President’s
residence, something that would not normally be
accepted in other States. I would like to remind the
Council that the mandate of the Gabonese MINUSCA
contingent was cut short based on misleading
information, and subsequent investigations have shown
that the related accusations were false.
I also want to point out that the attack in Boyo,
which has been mentioned here before, was perpetrated
by armed groups, which called into question the
capacity for self-defence of the Central African
Republic. In December 2021, also in Boyo, MINUSCA
drove out 200 rebels who were occupying the area and
disrupting the peaceful life of the community. And on
30 May 2021, following the unfortunate incident that
took place on the border with Chad, an international
investigation was requested. It was a struggle to
establish that investigation, owing to the false claims
of various media campaigns. Despite those difficulties,
the Central African Republic was able to prove that
the incident took place on its soil. In addition, I should
inform the Council that four legionnaires were recently
arrested after claiming to be MINUSCA personnel.
They were found to be in the possession of illegal
weapons and did not reside on the MINUSCA premises.
All of that information should be taken into
consideration. We are aware that there are violations
taking place because we know that the Central
African Republic is embroiled in a conflict situation.
We therefore urge the Security Council to spare no
effort and to encourage the imposition of sanctions on
the armed groups that are rife in the Central African
Republic, as we must work together to cut off the
sources that fuel them. If we want to avoid the negative
consequences, including a catastrophic humanitarian
situation, resulting from the human rights violations
taking place on Central African Republic territory, it
is essential to break with the forces of evil and the true
cause of all the issues and incidents that have brought
us together today, which is the presence of rebel forces
on our territory.
I would like to conclude with something that I
neglected to mention earlier, which is to congratulate
you, Sir, on your presidency of the Security Council.
We have closely followed that the work the Brazilian
22-44483

29/07/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

presidency has done this month and commend you for it.
We also want to reiterate our gratitude for all the efforts
and commitment of Council members on an issue that
is so significant for the Central African Republic. We
congratulate France in particular for its tireless work
with the other Council members and for ensuring that
the voice of the Central African Republic was heard,
which enabled the adoption of resolution 2648 (2022)
today, even if it does not fully respond to the needs and
expectations of the Central African Republic.
We therefore encourage the Security Council
to continue on this path and to listen to and heed the
concerns of the Central African Republic and the
country’s 5 million women and men. Since 2013, our
people have endured and suffered the antics and ravages
wrought by the armed groups that have continued to
attack from time to time because the Government forces
have been stripped of their equipment. Thanks to their
advances in that regard, we have been able to send a
significant message to those armed groups. The Central
African Republic invites the Council to continue its
path in support of the efforts of our country and the
subregion, which is also fully engaged and has always
stood by the side of the Central African Republic, as has
the African Union. I should recall that the Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic is an initiative born under the auspices of
the African Union and pursued in good faith by the
subregion in line with the principle of subsidiarity.

S/PV.9105

I would therefore like to thank all stakeholders in
the subregion and across the continent for supporting
us in the struggle against the armed groups, first in
attaining a degree of stability in the Central African
Republic, but also in our struggle to make our voice
heard and to finally allow the Government to continue
unhindered in its efforts to offer its people a minimum
of peace and tranquillity.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
Before adjourning the meeting, as this is the last
scheduled meeting of the Council for the month of July,
I would like to express the sincere appreciation of the
delegation of Brazil to the members of the Council
and the Secretariat of the Council for all the support
they have given us. It has indeed been a busy month,
and one in which we rallied to consensus on several
important issues within our purview. We could not
have done it alone or without the hard work, support
and positive contributions of every delegation and
the representatives of the Secretariat, including the
conference-service officers, interpreters, translators,
verbatim reporters and security staff.
As we end our presidency, I know I speak on behalf
of the entire Council in wishing the delegation of China
good luck for the month of August.
The meeting rose at 3 p.m.

22-4448311/11
