U N IT E D
N A T IO N S

General Assembly
Dietr.
GENERAL
A/RES/46/37
31 December 1991

Forty-aixth eeseion
Agenda item 61
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/46/674))
46/37.

Review and implementation of the Concluding Document of
the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly

World Disarmament Campaign
The General Assembly.
Recalling its decision taken in 1982 at its twelfth special session, the
second special session devoted to disarmament, by which the World Disarmament
Campaign was launched.
Recalling also its various resolutions on the subject, including
resolution 45/59 С of 4 December 1990,
Having examined the reports of the Secretary-General of 4 October 1991 on
the implementation of the World Disarmament Campaign, 1/ and of 30 August 1991
on the Advisory Board on Disarmament Hatters relating to the implementation of
the World Disarmament Campaign, 2/ as well as the Final Act of the Ninth
United Nations Pledging Conference for the Campaign, 3/ held on 29 October
1991,
Taking note with appreciation of the contributions that Member States
have already made to the Campaign,

1/

A/46/498.

2/

A/46/400.

3/

A/CONF.159/1.

91-42754

A/RES/46/37
Page 2

1.
Welcomea the report of the Secretary-General of 4 October 1991 on
the World Disarmcunent Campaign;
2.
Commends the Secretary-General for his efforts to make effective use
of the resources available to him in disseminating as widely as possible
information on arms limitation and disarmament to elected officials, the
media, non-governmental organizations, educational communities and research
institutes, and in carrying out an active seminar and conference programme;
3.
Notes with appreciation the contributions to the efforts of the
Campaign by the United Nations information centres and the regional centres
for disarmament;
4.
Recommends that the Campaign, as a global information programme,
should further focus its efforts:
(a) To inform, to educate and to generate public understanding of the
importance of and support for multilateral action, including by the United
Nations and the Conference on Disarmament, in the field of arms limitation and
disarmament, in a factual, balanced and objective manner;
(b) To facilitate unimpeded access to and an exchange of information on
ideas between the public sector and public interest groups and organizations,
and to provide an independent source of balanced and factual information that
takes into account a range of views to help further an informed debate on arms
limitation, disarmament and security;
(Ç) To organize meetings to facilitate exchanges of views and
information between governmental and non-governmental sectors, and between
governmental and other experts in order to facilitate the search for common
ground;
5.
Invites all Member States to contribute to the World Disarmament
Campaign Voluntary Trust Fund;
6.
Decides that at its forty-seventh session there should be a tenth
United Nations Pledging Conference for the World Disarmament Campaign, and
expresses the hope that on that occasion all those Member States which have
not yet announced any voluntary contributions will do so, bearing in mind the
objectives of the Third Disarmament Decade and the need to ensure its success;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at
its forty-seventh session a report covering both the implementation of the
programme of activities of the Campaign by the United Nations system during
1992 and the programme of activities contemplated by the system for 1993;
8.
Also decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fortyseventh session the item entitled "World Disarmament Campaign”.
65th Plenary meetina
6 December 1991

A/RES/46/37
Page 3

Regional confidence-building measuree
The General АвветЫу,
Recalling the purpoaes and principles of the United Nations and its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security
in accordance with its Charter,
Bearing in mind the guidelines for general and complete disarmament
adopted at its tenth special session, the first special session devoted to
disarmament,
Recalling also its resolutions 43/78 H and 43/85 of 7 December 1988,
44/21 of 15 November 1989 and 45/58 M of 4 December 1990,
Considering the importance and effectiveness of confidence-building
measures taken at the initiative and with the participation of all States
concerned and taking into account the specific characteristics of each region,
in that they can contribute to regional disarmament and to international
security, in accordance with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Convinced that the resources released by disarmament, including regional
disarmament, can be devoted to economic and social development and to the
protection of the environment for the benefit of all peoples, in particular
those of the developing countries.
Bearing in mind the final document adopted by the States members of the
Economic Community of Central African States on confidence-building measures,
security, disarmament and development in their subregion, 4/ at the seminarworkshop held at Yaoundô from 17 to 21 June 1991,
1.
SuDtxjrts and encourages efforts aimed at promoting confidencebuilding measures at regional and subregional levels in order to ease regional
tensions and to further disarmament and non-proliferation measures at regional
and subregional levels in Central Africa;
2.
Welcomes the initiative taken by the States members of the Economic
Community of Central African States with a view to developing confidencebuilding measures, disarmament and development in their subregion, by, in
particular, the creation, under the auspices of the United Nations, of a
standing advisory committee on security questions in Central Africa;
3.
Thanks the Secretary-General for his contribution to the Yaoundô
seminar-%rorkshop and requests him to continue providing assistance to the
Central African States in implementing the recommendations and conclusions set
forth in the final dociiment of the seminar-workshop, by, in particular,
establishing the standing advisory committee on security questions in Central
Africa;

1/

A/46/307-S/22805, annex.

A/RES/46/37
Page 4

4.
Also requeeta the Secretary-General to submit to the General
Assembly at its forty-seventh session a report on the implementation of the
present resolution;
5.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-seventh
session an item entitled "Regional confidence-building measures".
6Sth Plenary meeting
6 December 1991
С
■

Nuclear-arms freeze

The General Assembly.
Recalling that, in the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the
General Assembly, 1/ the first special session devoted to disarmament, adopted
in 1978 and unanimously and categorically reaffirmed in 1982 during the
twelfth special session of the General Assembly, 6/ the second special
session devoted to disarmament, the Assembly expressed deep concern over the
threat to the very survival of mankind posed by the existence of nuclear
weapons.
Reaffirming the goal of general and complete disarmament under effective
international control.
Welcoming the new trends that have led to an improvement in the
international security environment.
Welcoming also the announcements of the significant measures, including
unilateral steps, by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United
States of America, which could signal the reversal of the nuclear-arms race.
Welcoming further the Treaty between the United States of America and the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the Reduction and Limitation of
Strategic Offensive Arms, signed on 31 July 1991, and expressing the hope that
it will be followed by agreement at an early date on further cuts in strategic
nuclear arsenals.
Convinced of the urgency of further negotiations for the substantial
reduction and qualitative limitation of existing nuclear arms.
Considering that a nuclear-arms freeze, while not an end in itself, would
constitute an effective step to prevent the qualitative improvement of
existing nuclear weaponry during the period when the negotiations take place,
and that it would at the same time reinforce the favourable environment for
the conduct of negotiations to reduce and eventually eliminate nuclear
weapons.
SJ

Resolution S-10/2.

£/
See Official Records of the General Assembly. Twifth. SPeciai.
Session. Annexes, agenda items 9 to 13, document A/S-12/32.

A/RES/46/37
Page 5

Convinced alBO that the undertakings derived from the freeze can be
effectively verified,
.
Welcoming the unilateral steps taken by the nuclear-weapon States for the
cessation of the production of highly enriched uranium for nuclear weapons and
for the shutting down of reactors producing weapons-grade plutonium.
Noting with concern that all nuclear-weapon States have not so fartaken
any collective action in response to the call made in the relevant resolutions
on the question of a nuclear-arms freeze.
Convinced further that the current international situation is most
conducive to nuclear disarmament,
1.
Urges the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States
of America, as the two major nuclear-weapon States, to reach agreement on an
immediate nuclear-arms freeze, which would, inter alia, provide for a
simultaneous total stoppage of any production of nuclear weapons and a
complete cut-off in the production of fissionable material for weapons
purposes;
2.
Calls uTX>n all nuclear-weapon States to agree, through a joint
declaration, to a comprehensive nuclear-arms freeze, whose structure and scope
would be the following:
(a)

It would embrace:

(i)

A comprehensive test ban on nuclear weapons and on their delivery
vehicles;

(ii)

The complete cessation of the manufacture of nuclear weapons and of
their delivery vehicles;

(iii)

A ban on all further deployment of nuclear weapons and of their
delivery vehicles;

(iv)

The complete cessation of the production of fissionable material for
weapons purposes;

(b) It would be subject to appropriate and effective meaeures and
procedures of verification;
3.
Requests once again the nuclear-weapon States to submit a joint
report, or separate reports, to the General Assembly, prior to the opening of
its forty-seventh session, on the implementation of the present resolution;
4.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-seventh
session the item entitled "Nuclear-arms freeze".
65th Plenary meeting

6 ppç^nJ!>?g. 1?91

A/RES/46/37
Page 6

Convention on the Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear Weapons

The ceneya; Ав?епфД,у,
Convinced that the existence and use of nuclear weapons pose the greatest
threat to the survival of mankind.
Convinced also that nuclear disarmament is the only ultimate guarantee
against the use of nuclear weapons.
Convinced further that a multilateral agreement prohibiting the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons should strengthen international security and
contribute to the climate for negotiations leading to the ultimate elimination
of nuclear weapons.
Welcoming the Treaty between the United States of America and the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic
Offensive Arms, signed on 31 July 1991,
Welcoming also the announcements by the Government of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the Government of the United States of America of
significant measures, including unilateral steps, which could signal the
reversal of the nuclear arms race, and expressing the hope that these will be
followed by agreements at an early date on further cuts in strategic nuclear
arsenals.
Conscious that the recent steps taken by the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and the United States of America towards a reduction of their
nuclear weapons and the improvement in the international climate can
contribute towards the goal of complete elimination of nuclear weapons.
Recalling that in paragraph 58 of the Final Document of the Tenth
Special Session of the General Assembly, £/ it is stated that all States
should actively participate in efforts to bring about conditions in
international relations among States in which a code of peaceful conduct of
nations in international affairs could be agreed upon and that would preclude
the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons.
Reaffirming that the use of nuclear %«eapons would be a violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and a crime against humanity, as declared in its
resolutions 16S3 (XVI) of 24 November 1961, 33/71 В of 14 December 1978,
34/83 G of 11 December 1979, 35/152 D of 12 December 1980 and 36/92 I of
9 December 1981,
Noting with reoret that the Conference on Disarmament, during its 1991
session, was not able to undertake negotiations with a view to achieving
agreement on an international convention prohibiting the use or threat of use
of nuclear weapons under any circumstances, taking as a basis the text annexed
to General Assembly resolution 45/59 В of 4 December 1990,
1.
Reiterates its reouest to the Conference on Disarmament to commence
negotiations, as a matter of priority, in order to reach agreement on an
international convention prohibiting the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons under any circumstances, taking as a basis the draft Convention on the
Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear Weapons annexed to the present resolution;
/...

A/RES/46/37
Page 7

2.
Alflo recruestB the Conference on 01вагталпепЬ to report to the General
Aeaembly on the results of these negotiations.
65th Plenary meeting
6 December 1991
ANNEX
Draft Convention on the Prohibition of the Use of
Nuclear Weapons
The States Parties to this Convention.
Alarmed by the threat to the very survival of mankindposed by the
existence of nuclear weapons,
.
Convinced that any use of nuclear weapons constitutes a violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and a crime against humanity.
Convinced that this Convention would be a step towards the complete
elimination of nuclear weapons leading to general and complete disarmament
under strict and effective international control.
Determined to continue negotiations for the achievement of this goal.
Have agreed as follows:

Aptlcj-e.;
The States Parties to this Convention solemnly undertake not to use or
threaten to use nuclear weapons under any circumstances.
Article 2
This Convention shall be of unlimited duration.
Arti.çl8.J

1.
This Convention shall be open to all States for signature. Any
State that does not sign the Convention before its entry into force in
accordance with paragraph 3 of this article may accede to it at any time.
2.
This Convention shall be subject to ratification by signatory
States. Instruments of ratification or accession shall be deposited with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.
3.
This Convention shall enter into force on the deposit of Instruments
of ratification by twenty-five Governments, including the Governments of the
five nuclear-weapon States, in accordance with paragraph 2 of this article.
4.
For States whose instruments of ratification or accession are
deposited after the entry into force of the Convention, it shall enter into
force on the date of the deposit of their instruments of ratification or
accession.
/...

A/WSS/46/37
Page 8

5.
The depositary shall promptly infozrm all signatory and acceding
States of the date of each signature, the date of deposit of each instrument
of ratification or accession and the date of the entry into force of this
Convention, as well as of the receipt of other notices.
6.
This Convention shall be registered by the depositary inaccordance
with Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations.
Article 4
This Convention, of which the Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian
and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, who shall send duly certified copies
thereof to the Government of the signatory and acceding States.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly authorized thereto by
their respective Governments, have signed this Convention, opened for
signature at
on the
day of
one thousand nine hundred and
.

United Nations disarmament fellowship, training and advisory
services programme
The General Assembly.
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations disarmament fellowship, training and advisory services ргодггшапе, 7/
Recalling its decision, contained in paragraph 108 of the Final Document
of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, S/ the fi.rst special
session devoted to disarmament, to establish a programme of fellowships on
diserm«unent, as well as its decisions contained in annex IV to the Concluding
Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly, 6/ the
second special session devoted to disarmament, in which it decided, inter
a ULa # to continue the programme and to increase the number of fellowships from
twenty to twenty-five as from 1983,
Noting with satisfaction that the programme has already trained an
appreciable number of public officials selected from geographical regions
represented in the United Nations system, most of whom are now in positions of
responsibility in the field of disarmament affairs in their respective
countries or Governments,
Recalling also its resolutions 37/100 G of 13 December 1982, 38/73 С of
15 Oec«nber 1983, 39/63 В of 12 December 1984, 40/151 H of 16 December 1985,
41/60 H of 3 December 1986, 42/39 I of 30 November 1987, 43/76 F of
7 December 1988, 44/117 E of 15 December 1989 and 45/59 A of 4 December 1990,

2/

A/46/530.

/...

A/RES/46/37
Page 9

Noting aleo with eatiafaction that the progranune, as designed, has
enabled an increased number of public officials, particularly from the
developing countries, to acquire more expertise in the sphere of disarmament,
Believiho that the forms of assistance available to Member States,
particularly to developing countries, under the programme will enhance the
capabilities of their officials to follow ongoing deliberations and
negotiations on disarmament, both bilateral and multilateral,
1.
Reaffirms its decisions contained in annex IV to the Concluding
Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly and the report
of the Secretary-General 8/ approved by resolution 33/71 E of 14 December
1978;
2.
Expresses its appreciation to the Governments of Finland, France,
Germany, Japan, Sweden and the United States of America for inviting the 1991
fellows to study selected activities in the field of disarmament, thereby
contributing to the fulfilment of the overall objectives of the programme;
3.
Notes with satisfaction that, within the framework of the programme,
the Department for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat organized regional
disarmziment workshops for Africa in April 1989 at Lagos, for Asia and the
Pacific in January 1991 at Bandung, Indonesia, and for Latin America and the
Caribbean in July 1991 at Mexico City;
4.
Expresses its appreciation to the Governments of Nigeria, Indonesia
and Mexico for their support of the regional disarmament workshops, as well as
to the Governments of Norway and New Zealand for making financial
contributions;
5.
Commends the Secretary-General for the diligence with which the
programme has continued to be carried out;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue the implementation of the
programme within existing resources and to report to the General Assembly at
its forty-seventh session.
65th Plenary meeting
6 December 1991

8/

A/33/305.

A/RES/46/37
Page 10

United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament
in Africa, United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific and United Nations,
Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development
in Latin America and the Caribbean
'
The General Assembly.

,

. Recalling its resolutions 40/151 G of 16 December 1985, 41/60 D of
3 December 1986, 42/39 J of 30 November 1987 and 43/76 D of 7 December 1988 on
the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa,
41/60 J of 3 December 1986, 42/39 К of 30 November 1987 and 43/76 H of
7 December 1988 on the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament
and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean, 42/39 D of
.
30 November 1987 and 43/76 G of 7 December 1988 on the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia, and 44/117 F of 15 December 1989 and
45/59 E of 4 December 1990 on the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Africa, United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific and United Nations Regional Centre for
Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean,
Reaffirming its resolutions 37/100 F of 13 December 1982, 38/73 J of
15 December 1983, 39/63 F of 12 December 1984, 40/94 A of 12 December 1985,
41/59 M of 3 December 1986, 42/39 E of 30 November 1987, 44/117 В of
15 December 1989 and 45/58 M. of 4 December 1990 on regional disarmament.

.

Convinced that the initiatives and activities mutually agreed upon by
Member States of the respective regions aimed at fostering mutual confidence
and security, as well as the implementation and coordination of regional
activities under the World Disarmament Campaign, would encourage and
facilitate the development of effective measures of confidence-building, arms
limitation and disarmament in these regions.
Welcoming the programme of activities carried out by the regional
centres, which have contributed substantially to understanding and cooperation
among the States in each particular region and have thereby strengthened the
role assigned to each regional centre in the areas of peace, disarmament and
development.
Recognizing the need to provide the regional centres with financial
viability and stability so as to facilitate the effective planning and
implementation of their respective programmes of activities.
Expressing its gratitude to the Member States and international
governmental and non-governmental organizations and foundations that have
contributed to the trust funds of the three regional centres,
yaking по^:е wjL^h аврддд^а^Лрд of the report of the Secretary-General on
the three regional centres, 2/ and of his efforts in providing the necessary
administrative measures to permit the effective functioning of the three
centres, which are an Integral part of the Department for Disarmament Affairs
of the Secretariat,
2/

A/46/365.

A/RES/46/37
Page 11

1.
Encourages the regional centres to continue intensifying their
efforts, in accordance with their mandates, in promoting cooperation among the
States in their respective regions with a view to facilitating the development
of' effective measures of confidence-building, arms limitation and disarmament;
2.
Commends the Secretary-General for all the efforts he has made to
assist the regional centres in carrying out their programmes of activities,
and requests him to continue to provide all the necessary support to the
centres;
3.
Appeals once again to Member States, as well as to international
governmental and non-govetnmental organizations and foundations, to make
voluntary contributions in order to strengthen the programmes of activities of
the regional centres and their effective implementation;
4.
Decides that, to ensure the continued financial viability of the
regional centres, the administrative costs of the centres shall be financed
from the regular budget;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at
its forty-seventh session on the implementation of the present resolution.
66th plenary meeting
9 December 1991
