VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and Cultural Organization and the International Labour
Organisation,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination on
its twenty-third and twenty-fourth sessions;
2. Strongly condemns the policy of apartheid in So~th
Africa and Namibia as the most abhorrent forrn of racial
discrimination and urges all Member States to adopt effective political, economic and oth~r measures in_ order to secure the elimination of that policy and to achieve the full
implementation of the relevant resolutions of _the Gen_eral
Assembly, the Security Council and other Umted Nations
bodies;
3. Commends the Committee for paying greater attention to the question of the elimination of the policy of apartheid in South Africa and Namibia, as well as to the
elimination of acts and practices of racial discrimination in
Trust and Non-Self-Governing Territories and in all other
Territories to which General Assembly resolution 15 I4
(XV) of 14 December 1960 applies;
4. Calls upon the United Nations b~dies concerned_ to
ensure that the Committee is supplied with all relevant mforrnation on all the Territories to which General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) applies and urges the administering
Powers to co-operate with these bodies by provid_ing all
necessary inforrnation in order to enable the _Committee to
discharge fully its responsibilities under article 15 of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forrns
of Racial Discrimination;
5. Once again invites States parties to the Convention
to furnish the Committee, in accordance with its general
guidelines, with the inforrnation on the implementation of
the provisions of the Convention, including inforrnation on
the demographic composition of their populatio~ and on
their relations with the racist regime of South Afnca;
6. Calls upon all Member States to adopt effective legislative, socio-economic and other necessary measures for
elimination or prevention of discrimination based on race,
colour, descent or national or ethnic origin;
7. Commends the Committee for paying due attention
to the steps taken by the States parties t? t~e. Convention
to assure within their jurisdiction the ava1lab1hty of appropriate recourse procedures for the victims of racial
discrimination;
8. Further commends the Committee for taking up the
problems of discrimination of migrant workers and requests
States parties to the Convention to protect fully the nghts
of those workers;
9. Calls upon States parties to the Convention to protect
fully, through the introduction C?f relevant l~gislative_ ~nd
other measures, the rights of national or ethmc mmont1es,
as well as the rights of indigenous populations;
10. Reiterates its grave concern that some States parties
to the Convention, owing to reasons beyond their control,
are being prevented from fulfi_lling thei~ oblig~tio~s under
the Convention in parts of their respective temtones;
11. Takes note with appreciation of the Committee's
plans to participate in the preparations and the work of the
second World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination, to be held in 1983;
12. Requests the Committee to explore the possibility
of preparing also for the Conference, in addition to stu~ies
on the implementation of articles 4 and 7 of the Conventl_on,
a study on the implementation of subparaisraph (e) of article
5 in conjunction with paragraph 2 of article 2;
13. Takes note of the decision of the Committee to hold
its spring 1982 session at the United Nations offices at
Nairobi and requests the Secretary-General to explore the

163

possibility of holding this session within the context of the
implementation of the Programm_e fo~ t~e .De~ade for
Action to Combat Racism and Racial D1scnmmat1on.
42nd plenary meeting
28 October 1981
36/13.

Status of the International Convention on the
Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid

The General Assemblv,
Recalling its resoluti~n 3068 (XXVIII) of 3~ November
1973, by which it adopted and opened for signature ~nd
ratification the International Convention on the Suppression
and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid, and its resolutions 3380 (XXX) of 10 November 1975, 31/80 of 13
December 1976, 32/12 of7 November 1977, 33/103 of 16
December 1978, 34/27 of 15 November 1979 and 35/39 of
25 November 1980,
Recalling also Commission on Human Rights resolutions
13 (XXXIII) of 11 March 1977, 17 7 (XXXIV) of22 February
1978, 18 10 (XXXV) of 5 March 1979, 19 12 (XXXVI) and
13 (XXXVI) of 26 February 198020 and 6 (XXXVII) of 23
February 1981 , 21
Convinced that the Declaration and the Programme of
Action adopted by the World Conference to Combat Racism
and Racial Discriminatior, 22 as well as the programme of
activities to be undertaken during the second half of the
Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, adopted by the General Assembly i_n its resolut\on
34/24 of 15 November 1979, and their full 1mplementat1on
will contribute to the final eradication of all vestiges of
apartheid, racism and racial discrimination,
Reaffirming its conviction that apar_theid constitutes a
total negation of the purposes and prmCil_)ies ?f the Charter
of the United Nations and is a gross v10lat1on of human
rights and a crime against humanity, seriously threatening
international peace and security,
Strongly condemning South Africa's stepping up its policy of apartheid, repression and "bantustanization" and its
continued illegal occupation of Namibia, thereby perpetuating on Namibian territory its odious policy of apartheid,
racial discrimination and fragmentation,
Deeply concerned about South Africa's repeated acts <?f
aggression against sovereign Afri~an States, which co~st1tute a manifest breach of international peace and secunty,
Underlining that the strengthening of the existing mandatory arrns embargo and the application of comprehensive
mandatory economic sanctions under Chapter VII of the
Charter are vital in order to compel the racist regime of
South Africa to abandon its policy of apartheid,
Condemning the continued collaboration of certain States
and transnational corporations with the racist regime of
South Africa in the political, economic, military and other
fields as an encouragement to the intensification of its odious
policy of apartheid,
'' See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Sixty-second
Se.uion, Supplement No. 6 (E/5927), chap. XXI, sect. A.
" See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. 1978,
Supplement No. 4 (E/1978134), chap. XXVI, sect. A.
'" Ibid., 1979. Supplement No. 6 (E/1979/36), chap. XXIV, sect. A.
2
" Ibid .. /980. Supplement No. 3 (E/1980/13 and Corr. I). chap. XXVI,
sect. A.
"Ibid .. /981. Supplement No. 5 (E/1981/25 and Corr.I). Chap.
XXVIII, sect. A.
22
Report of the World Conference to Combat Racism_ and Racial Discrimination, Geneva, 14--25 August /978 (United Nations pubhcatJon.
Sales No. E.79.XIV.2). chap. II.

164

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

Commending the Paris Declaration on Sanctions against
South Africa and the Special Declaration on Namibia, 2:1
adopted by the International Conference on Sanctions
against South Africa, held in Paris from 20 to 27 May 1981 .
Stressing the need to disseminate on a wider basis more
information on the crimes committed by the racist regime
of South Africa, taking into consideration the recommendation contained in the documents adopted by the International Seminar on Publicity and the Role of the Mass Media
in the International Mobilization against Apartheid, held at
Berlin, German Democratic Republic. from 31 August to
2 September 1981 , 24
Underlining that ratification of and accession to the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment
of the Crime of Apartheid on a universal basis and the
implementation of its provisions without any delay are necessary for its effectiveness and would be a useful contribution towards achieving the goals of the Decade for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination,
Firmly convinced that the legitimate struggle of the oppressed peoples in southern Africa against apartheid, racism
and colonialism and for the effective implementation of their
inalienable right to self-determination and independence
demands more than ever all necessary support by the international community and. in particular, further action by
the Security Council,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-Genera12'
on the status of the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid;
2. Commends those States parties to the Convention that
have submitted their reports under article VII of the Convention, in particular those which presented their second
reports, and appeals to those States parties that have not yet
done so to submit their reports as soon as possible;
3. Appeals once again to those States that have not yet
done so to ratify or to accede to the Convention without
further delay;
4. Requests States parties to the Convention to take fully
into account the guidelines 26 prepared by the Group of
Three of the Commission on Human Rights, established in
accordance with article IX of the International Convention
on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid;
5. Calls upon all States parties to implement fully article
IV of the Convention by adopting legislative, judicial and
administrative measures to prosecute, bring to trial and punish, in accordance with their jurisdiction. persons responsible for, or accused of, the acts enumerated in article II of
the Convention;
6. Again calls upon all States parties to the Convention
and the competent United Nations organs to consider the
conclusions and recommendations of the Group of Three
contained in its reports 27 and to submit their views and
comments to the Secretary-General;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify his efforts through appropriate channels to disseminate information on the Convention and its implementation with a
view to further promoting ratification of or accession to the
Convention;
. 8. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to contmue to undertake the functions set out in article X of the

2

A/CONF. 107/8. sect. X.
A/36/496-S/14686, annex I
2
' A/361454 and Add. I
2
• E/CN.4/1286, annex.
27
E/CN.4/1358. sect. IV: E/CN.411417. sect IV.
'

24

Convention and invites the Commission to intensify, in cooperation with the Special Committee against Apartheid,
its efforts to compile periodically •the progressive list of
individuals, organizations, institutions and representatives
of States deemed responsible for crimes enumerated in article II of the Convention, as well as of those against whom
or which legal proceedings have been undertaken;
9. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to take
into account General Assembly resolutions 33/23 of 29
November 1978 and 35/32 of 14 November 1980 as well
as relevant documents of the Commission and its subsidiary
organs in which it is reaffirmed, inter alia, that States giving
assistance to the racist regime of South Africa become ::.ccomplices in the inhuman practices of racial discrimination
and apartheid;
10. Calls upon all States parties to the Convention and
competent United Nations organs to continue to provide the
Commission on Human Rights, through the Secretary-General. with information relevant to the periodic compilation
of the above-mentioned list as well as with information
concerning the obstacles that prevent the effective suppression and punishment of the crime of apartheid;
11. Appeals to all States, United Nations organs, specialized agencies and international and national non-governmental organizations to step up their activities in enhancing
public awareness through denouncing the crimes committed
by the racist regime of South Africa;
12. Requests the Economic and Social Council, in preparing for the Second World Conference to Combat Racism
and Racial Discrimination, to be held in 1983, to give special attention to the activities aimed at the eradication of
apartheid;
13. Welcomes the active campaign waged by the Special
Committee against Apartheid, in co-operation with the
Commission on Human Rights, to publicize the importance
of the Convention;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to distribute the
above-mentioned list among all States parties to the Convention and all Member States and to bring such facts to
the attention of the public by all means of mass
communication;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his
next annual report under General Assembly resolution 3380
(XXX) a special section concerning the implementation of
the Convention.
42nd plenary meeting
28 October 1981

36/16.

Physical education and sports exchanges among
young people
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the Promotion among Youth
of the Ideals of Peace, Mutual Respect and Understanding
between Peoples. proclaimed in its resolution 2037 (XX)
of 7 December 1965.
Recalling also its resolution 33/8 of 3 November 1978.
in which it requested the Secretary-General to submit to it
at its thirty-sixth session a report on the activities undertaken
by Member State~. the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, regional organizations and
other interested organizations and programmes of the United
Nations system in the field of physical education and sports.
particularly among young people,
Taking into account the activities carried out by the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
with a view to promoting physical education and sports in
