.

UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-NINTH

COUNCIL

RECORDS
YEAR

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2515). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda.................................................

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 14 February 1984 from the Permanent Representative of France
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16339). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*....................

1

SfPV.2515

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
I :
j
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2515th MEETING
Held in New York
President:

Mr. S. Shah NAWAZ

on Thursday,

16 February

3. The delegation of Eavnt wishes also to express to
your predecessor, Mr. Chamorro Mora, the representative of Nicaragua, its deep appreciation of his excellent conduct of the Council’s work during his presidency in January.

(Pakistan).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional

4. Before turning to the matter before us today,
I should like to offer Egypt’s condolences to the Soviet
delegation on the passing away of the Soviet leader Yuri
Andropov.

agenda (S/Agenda/2515)

5. Allow me to start by quoting part of the statement
made by President Hosni Mubarak the day before yesterday-14
February-at
the White House after his
meeting with President Ronald Reagan. He said:

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 14 February 1984 from the Permanent Representative
of France to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16339)
The meeting

“The situation in Lebanon today is intolerable.
The escalation of violence and the bloodshed is a
threat to us all. Every nation is called upon to help.
The peace-keeping role of the United Nations must
be expanded and reinforced. The partition of this
war-tom country should be prevented at any cost.
The Lebanese people have a right to live and prosper
like all other nations.“*

was called to order at 11.55 a.m.
Adoption

1984, at 11 a.m.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 14 February 1984 from the Permanent
Representative of France to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16339).

6. Egypt has always called for respect for the sovereignty, independence
and territorial
integrity of
Lebanon. Therefore, we called and we continue to call
for the withdrawal of all non-Lebanese forces from
Lebanese territory, foremost among which are the
Israeli forces. Egypt has always called for national
reconciliation
in Lebanon and will continue to do
so. Therefore, we welcomed the glimmer of hope that
shone when the Geneva conference for national reconciliation was held and the fighting was stopped, thus
taking a positive step that augured well for the achievement of reconciliation.
Hopes were once again rekindled when it was said that a security agreement
between Lebanese factions was imminent. But those
hopes were once again shattered. The deterioration of
the situation is symbolized by the very fact that the
Lebanese capital, Beirut, has once more become a
divided city and that everywhere the civilian population
is subjected to various kinds of bitter suffering, if they
can escape the deadly dangers surrounding them at all
times.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken at the 2514th meeting, I invite the representative of Lebanon to take a place at the Council table.
I invite the representative of Italy to take the place
reserved for him at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Fakhoury
(Lebanon) took a place at the Council table; and
Mr. Jannuzzi (Italy) took the place reserved for him at
the side of the Council chamber.
2. Mr.
KHALIL
(Egypt)
Jinterpretation
from
Arabic]: At the outset, Sir, I should like to express to
you our sincere congratulations on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of February. Your deep understanding of international affairs,
your long experience and your well-known courtesy all
assure us of the good conduct of the Council’s work
under your presidency. In addition, it also gives me,
personally, and the delegation of Egypt great pleasure
to see the representative of friendly Pakistan presiding
over the Council.

7. Today we are not addressing the Lebanese crisis
with its internal tragedies and foreign external dimen* Quoted in English by the speaker.

1

sions. Therefore, the delegation of Egypt will confine
itself to the French proposal, that is, the replacement of
the multinational
force in Beirut by United Nations
forces. The immediate task before us today is for the
international community represented in the Council to
take the initiative, with the sense of urgency dictated by
the situation, to halt bloodshed in Lebanon and achieve
a cease-fire-a major step and a new necessary attempt
towards creating an atmosphere conducive to the resumption of action at the political level in Lebanon.

the Presidium of the Supreme ,Soviet of the Soviet
Union and General Secretary of the Communist Party
of the Soviet Union.
15. The first words of my statement must be ones of
profound sympathy for the people of Lebanon, and
particularly for the thousands of innocent people of that
country who are suffering. in a continuing period of
fighting and tension. I speak, of course, not only for
myself and my delegation, but also for my Government,
who are deeply concerned at this tragic situation.

8. Proceeding from this, Egypt supports the French
proposal. It is clear that the call for the withdrawal from
Beirut of the multinational
force is not intended to leave
a dangerous vacuum in the wake of that withdrawal, as
long as we are simultaneously
called upon to support
the replacement of the multinational
force by a United
Nations force.

16. It is right that the Security Council should meet so
that we, who are charged under the Charter with the
maintenance of international
peace and security, can
have the opportunity to see what, can be done to avert
further tragedy.

9. In addition to supporting the French proposal,
Egypt believes that the deteriorating
situation in
Lebanon,demands-that
all of us assist in facilitating the
withdrawal of the multinational
force and in making it
possible for the Council to shoulder its responsibilities
with the aim of the most rapid possible deployment of
the United Nations’forbe.

17. There is an immediate need to put an end to the
fighting in Lebanon, to promote the process of national
retionciliation
and to make possible the withdrawal of
all foreign forces from Lebanese territory. The Council
repeatedly has expressed support for the territorial
integrity, sovereignty’ and political independence of
Lebanon within its internationally
recognized boundaries. That is a phrase which comes easily to the lips of us
all. The difficulty is to translate it into deeds.

10. I wish to add that I have recently been informed by
the delegation of the United Kingdom that it is‘about to
put forward a proposal as a contribution
to our joint
effort. That proposal is to make ,use of the United
Nations personnel already stationed in Beirut. I do not
wish to put the cart before the horse, but I should like to
confirm that we are ready to give impartial consideration to this positive British proposal, and we are willing
to accept .any constructive measure.

18. My Government believes that the United Nations
has an important role to play in achieving these objectives. Indeed, we have urged for a long time, in the
Council and in our diplomacy generally at the United
Nations, that the United Nations should be given an
enhanced role in Lebanon. The British Prime Minister,
Mrs. Thatcher, gave her full support for such a role
when she spoke to the Secretary-General in September.
Over many months now we have been following this up
in discussion with other delegations and with the Secretariat, exploring the possibilities of such a role.

11. The worsening of the situation in Lebanon impels
all of us in the Council to take action as soon as possible
to put a stop to that deterioration.
The delegation of
‘Egypt is ready to contribute with all its energy’to any
joint effort in support of the French proposal, which we
consider to be intended to create the atmosphere neces-,
sary once again to break the cycle of violence and thus
to promote a .political settlement, Lebanese national
reconciliation,
and the withdrawal of all foreign forces
from the territory of Lebanon.

19. 1 So we strongly support the efforts which you,
Mr. President, are making at the request of the Government of France to see if the Council can agree on a new
mandate for such a role. We share the objective of
getting an effective United Nations presence in and
around Beirut.
20. I hope that the Council will consider carefuily how
best to reach agreement on this, including the eventual
replacement of the multinational
force, of which Britain
is a member, by an enhanced United Nations presence.
Much political will and flexibility will be required, not
least on the part of the various parties involved in the
fighting within Lebanon. But all of us know something
of the national positions of the countries concerned. We
know, therefore, that this process will take time.

12. Mr. MARGETSON
(United Kingdom): I should
like first, Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council. We have already, in this
first half of the’month, experienced the authority and
skill which you bring.to that task.
13. I should also like to express my thanks to the
representative of Nicaragua, Mr. Chamorro Mora, who
steered us with great ability and high professionalism
through our tasks last month.

21. Meanwhile, as we negotiate here, events in Lebanon do not stand still; the fighting continues, and with
it the suffering of innocent people. We ask ourselves,
therefore, “What can the United Nations do to help
right now?”

14. May I also join others in expressing profound
sympathy with the Soviet Union in the loss of their
distinguished leader, Mr. Yuri Andropov, President of
2

22. The SecretaryiGeneral
has said that the strength
of the United Nations operations lies in the fact that
they symbolize the will of the international community.
There are United Nations observers in Beirut at this
moment. There are not very many, and they are not as
mobile as they would like to be. Nevertheless, to the
people of Beirut they are the visible expression of the
United Nations; they symbolize the peace and security
which the United Nations, through the Charter, stands
for. My Government would like to see the maximum
possible use made of this small observer force, because
we believe that it could have an important effect in
reassuring the local population and in contributing to a
lowering of tension.
.

steps, they are humanitarian
steps and they are the
steps which we believe can be taken now.
29. As we all know, small steps can sometimes lead to
larger ones by creating the necessary confidence in
which more ambitious policies can be negotiated. We
have faith in the effect of even modest measures taken
in the name of the United Nations. They can provide
some reassurance to the people of Lebanon that the
United Nations is able and willing to play a humanitarian and politically neutral role in working for the
restoration of peace and stability in their country.
30. I hope that these small measures can receive the
general support which I believe they deserve.

23. With this in mind, my Government has proposed
to the Secretary-General
a number of limited steps
which we believe that the United Nations could take
now without a new Council resolution. This does not
cut across in any way the major work of reaching
agreement on a new mandate for an enhanced United
Nations role. Nor are these steps in any way a substitute for the more far-reaching proposals which the
Council must consider in due course.

31. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States): Sir, I understand that my colleagues have already congratulated
you on your accession to the office of President of the
Council. I should like to express once again my personal pleasure, as well as that of my Government,, at
seeing that distinguished office occupied by a representative of a good friend and constructive member of the
Council. I might say personally as well that I should like
to congratulate the representative
of Nicaragua for
what I am told by many colleagues in and out of our
Mission was a most skilful and expeditious conduct of
the business of the Council during the previous month.

24. First, we hope that the United Nations observers
and other United Nations representatives already in
Beirut could undertake
small confidence-building
measures. I shall not specify any particular ideas as
I believe that the United Nations personnel themselves
are in a better position to identify the particular functions they might perform, especially in the humanitarian role. It may be that to undertake such tasks a modest
increase in the number of United Nations observers
may be necessary. We believe that the Council should
not stand in the way of such an increase if the SecretaryGeneral considered that this would be helpful.

32. As we meet today, the Lebanese people are once
again enduring the agony which has been too often, too
consistently, their lot in the last troubled years. Today,
as we meet during the agony of Lebanon, the purpose
and the commitment
of the United States Government
remains the same as it has been during these past painful months: to support the legitimate Government and
people of Lebanon in the restoration and preservation
of their independence,
sovereignty
and territorial
integrity throughout the land of Lebanon to their internationally recognized borders.

25. I should like in passing to say how much we
admire the courage and the dedication of the United
Nations observers and other United Nations representatives in Beirut in the face of considerable personal
danger.

33. The United States shares the view expressed by,
the Government
of France that the international
community
should assume greater responsibility
for
assisting the people of Lebanon. We welcome all constructive contributions
to this effort to bring peace
-this time a peace which can perhaps endure-to
Lebanon. We welcome therefore the suggestions of our
colleagues from the United Kingdom as well.

26. Secondly, we would like to suggest the active use
by the Secretary-General
of his good-offices role. The
particular way in which the Secretary-General
could
use this role is, of course, for him to judge and, in the
fluid situation which exists in Lebanon, he best can
assess the nature and the timing of any action he would
take to bring his good offices to bear with maximum
effect.
27. Thirdly, we believe that further consideration
should be given to the expansion of the role of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
to
facilitate Israeli withdrawal from southern Lebanon.

34. The people of Lebanon have suffered too long the
torments of violence, death, and occupation.
They
have endured too many months of violence, occupation
and death. They have lived too long in the midst of
uninvited participants in their destiny.‘They deserve a
much better fate. They deserve more help from the
international community.

28. These steps are not ambitious ones and they may,
to those who do not understand the political difftculties
of the Council, appear very inadequate in the face of the
present situation in Lebanon. But they are practical

35. The United States position with regard to a United
Nations peace-keeping role in Lebanon is clear and
consistent, although efforts are made from time to time
to cast doubt. on our support for a United Nations
3

sion Organization
(UNTSO),
which could be raised
-doubled,
we understand-on
short notice, and a
nearly 6,000-man peace-keeping force, UNIFIL,
in
southern Lebanon, deployed in some cases in areas
where violence no longer threatens the people of Lebanon.

peace-keeping role in Lebanon. We have supported a
United Nations peace-keeping role in Lebanon with our
votes, our diplomacy and our financial contributions.
We have also actively supported a maximum role for
United Nations observers in Lebanon. Repeatedly
during the last year we have sought to enlarge the
number and to extend the deployment of these observers in order to reinforce the fragile cease-fires
which have from time to time been agreed to, only
then, tragically, to be broken. We have made repeated
efforts, formal and informal, alone and conjointly with
others on the Security Council and in the United Nations, to enhance the role and participation of United
Nations forces in the tasks of peace-keeping.
We
worked, for example, arduously at the time when a
fragile cease-tire was achieved at the end of September
1983. We had worked in the months prior to that and we
will continue our efforts to this end.

39. The United States has consistently supported a
United Nations peace-keeping role. We have been
ready to consult with .our colleagues on the Council on
the composition and deployment of such a force. We
remain ready at this time to enter into serious discussions with our colleagues on the Council and in the
Secretariat concerning the composition
and deployment of United Nations forces, preferably throughout
Lebanon, to achieve these goals. The United States
imposes no pre-conditions. We are ready to participate,
when our colleagues are ready, in the achievement of
these goals, which may bring, finally, relief to the suffering people of Lebanon.

36. Parties to the comolex. multi-sided Lebanese conflicts have changed. The United States Government’s
support’for a United Nations peace-keeping role that
can perform constructive tasks in an effective manner
to bring peace to this country has remained constant.
There should be no doubt in anyone’s mind about our
commitment.
Today, as in the past, the United States
supports authentic international peace-keeping efforts
in Lebanon. We will support any reasonable proposal
concerning real, effective United Nations participation
in helping constructively to solve the truly tragic problems of the region. Yesterday the Secretary of State,
Mr. Shultz, in Washington made this clear when he said
it would be useful to state once again that a United
Nations presence would be useful throughout Lebanon, particularly for such purposes as protecting Palestinian refugee camps and reinforcing cease-fires. He
noted that the United Nations role presumes a return to
stability, a balance of forces and some measure of political accord. All of those are, of course, goals we
have all been pursuing for quite some time. Secretary
Shultz’s words were reinforced and reiterated by the
President in his conversations with the press yesterday
and will be reiterated again today-as I understand it.

40. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Italy. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
41. Mr. JANNUZZI
(Italy) [in&rpretation
from
French]: First of all, please allow me warmly to congratulate you, Sir, on behalf of the Italian delegation, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month and to tell you how pleased our delegation is
to see the Council guided by the representative of a
great country, with which Italy has such close bonds of
friendship. We are convinced that the discussion that
began yesterday, one we consider to be of the greatest
importance, will gain from the fact that it is being presided over by you with your proven stature and experience. Please allow me also to express the gratitude of
the Italian delegation for having been permitted to participate in this discussion, one that is, I repeat, of the
greatest importance to us.
42. The painful consequences of the Lebanese crisis
are becoming ever clearer. With increasing strength
world public opinion is calling for an end to the suffering
of a population already so severely tried and to the
divisions and hatred that have given rise to so much
mourning and is demanding the initiation of a process
of national reconciliation,
the sole process by which
Lebanon can be saved from total disintegration,
one
that must also heal the wounds opened by civil war and
restore conditions to enable that country to return to a
state of domestic peace and progress.

37. We have noted that too often our efforts in the
Council have been hampered and marred by the efforts
of certain parties to gain short-range political advantage, and too often those efforts to gain short-range
political advantage have taken priority over the search
for peace. The efforts of some members of the Council
to utilize to the fullest existing facilities and authority
for United Nations participation
in peace-keeping in
Lebanon have been hampered by the pursuit of shortrange political goals on the part of some parties.

43. The Italian Government feels itself in duty bound
to act as the interpreter of these feelings here in this
highest world forum.

38. The United States does not and has not pursued
short-range national political goals in Lebanon. That is
not the purpose of our participation in the multinational
force. It never has been. We believe that the United
Nations has available today actual or potential instruments in Lebanon which might be useful: a 50-man
observer group, the United .Nations Truce Supervi-

44.’ Italy, which regards the United Nations as the
supreme and impartial body for the safeguarding and
guidance of the international community has, from the
outset, seen in the evolution of the Lebanese crisis a
signal opportunity for an effective concrete confirmation of that United Nations role.
4

45. What is at stake in Lebanon is not only such
fundamental humanitarian objectives as the protection
of innocent and unarmed civilian populations and defenceless Palestinian refugees; also at stake is a political
principle that is of basic importance, namely, the survival of a small but noble State that is a full-fledged
Member of the United Nations and whose unity and
territorial integrity are today seriously threatened, a
country anxiously wondering about its future.

eral contacts he has just had with the countries most
closely concerned in the Lebanese crisis.
49. Italy is today more than ever convinced that
meeting that need can no longer be postponed. Our
position is not inspired by a desire to evade our commitments of solidarity and assistance-commitments
we
regard as still valid-towards
a country which is in
difficulty and which is so dear to us. Rather, our position is dictated by the fact that the Lebanese political
situation has deteriorated further, to the extent that the
urgent intervention of the United Nations is required,
as the’highest expression of the will of the international
community to safeguard those humanitarian and political interests to which Italy and the other countries of
the multinational
force have made their respective contributions, which we consider worthwhile. The process
of national reconciliation which began at Geneva under
fairly.promising
auspices has not been continued. Consequently, it seems to us that the Lebanese army,
essential for the reconstruction of the country, has not
so ,far succeeded in fully and effectively representing
the national community as a whole.

46. When, in August and again in September 1982, the
Italian Government decided to send military contingents to Lebanon in response to the urgent appeal of the
Lebanese Government, and-we must reiterate-with
the full agreement of all the parties concerned, it made it
clear from the outset that the aforementioned initiative
was being taken because of its realization of the impossibility of stationing a United Nations force there. That
concept has constantly and consistently been repeated
by the Italian Government, at all levels and in all circumstances, including here in this forum.
47. The Italian Government has always -considered
that, better than any other, a United Nations force
could have carried out the tasks we deemed to be essential. It is clear, however, that in the absence of a United
Nations initiative,
Italy-basing
itself on a careful
evaluation of its responsibilities
and on the solidarity
that unites us, as a Mediterranean
country, with the
Near East-could
not fail to assume the role ,it has
played as part of the multinational
force, a role that has
won us the unanimous appreciation of all the parties
concerned, to solve political .and humanitarian problems weconsidered to be essential and pressing. Within
the framework of the multinational
force, the Italian
contingent has in particular performed the invaluable
task of protecting the Palestinian camps, of .making
impartial contact with all the parties and of providing
assistance-with
an equal impartiality-in
the form of
hospital facilities and basic relief to meet the vital requirements of the neediest sectors of the Beirut population.

50. The time has come for all of us to ask, with a sense
of responsibility
and a clear historical view, whether
the United Nations can remain passive and inert in the
face of the very disturbing prospects opened up by the
current crisis in Lebanon. The time has come for us to
demonstrate to .that section of world public opinion
which still looks to the United Nations with hope and
confidence that the Organization is in fact able to carry
out its institutional
tasks-that
is to say,.to stamp the
imprint of peace, humanity and justice on international
life. If we do not meet that need we shall resign ourselves to a restricted and diminished standing for the
United Nations, and in thefinal analysis for ourselves.
And history-and,
even before history is written, political events-will
hold us accountable.
5 1. The modalities for sending a United Nations force
to Beirut and putting it in position there, its role and the
tasks that it should accomplish, must of course be subject to the most careful evaluation, above all in connection with the objective of replacing the multinational
force in such a way as to ensure, in the interests of the
population and the Lebanese situation as a whole, that a
dangerous vacuum is avoided., In our opinion, a United
Nations presence in the Lebanese capital must also be
seen in. relation to the problem of the full restoration of
Lebanese sovereignty; beginning with the implementation of Security Council resolution 520 (1982) and other
relevant resolutions.

48. In a spirit of sincere and full support for the United
Nations and its governing principles, Italy therefore
decided to send its contingent and attempted to maintain the closest possible contact .with United Nations
personnel until the assignment to Lebanon of a United
Nations force, which we regard as the principal course
to be followed, became possible. In this connection, in
December 1983 we supported the consultations undertaken by Mr. van der Stoel, then President of the Security Council, and by the Secretary-General for strengthening the United Nations Observer Group stationed at
Beirut. In that same spirit, during the course of many
earlier contacts and at his recent meeting with the Secretary-General
in January this year, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Italy stressed the need to develop
conditions under which the duties of the multinational
force in Beirut might be taken over by a United Nations
presence. That idea has been reiterated by our Minister
for Foreign Affairs during the course of the many bilat-

52. At this time of grave crisis for a ,noble friendly
country, the Italian Government hopes that the Council
will be able to carry out its fundamental task. We are
ready to give it our sincere co-operation.
53. Mr. MEESMAN
(Netherlands):
May I add my
voice to others who have congratulated you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council and
5

say how happy we are to see someone of your experience and ability presiding over the debate on a difficult and tragic situation in a country which for years
now has been the scene of so much violence. May I also
add my thanks to the representative of Nicaragua for
his very.distinguished
presidency of the Council last
month.
54. Before I address the item on our agenda, allow me
to convey through you, Mr. President, to the representative of the Soviet Union my country’s condolences on
the death of the President of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
55. It is with deep and growing concern that my Government has followed the latest events in and around
Beirut. During past weeks the city has again been subjected to bitter strife, causing extensive damage to its
infrastructure. My Government is particularly shocked
by the terrible loss of human life during the latest round
of hostilities. We therefore call on all parties concerned
to refrain forthwith from the use of force and to agree
promptly to a cease-fire to which they should then
adhere scrupulously, for one cannot hope for a restoration of some measure of public order in Beirut as long
as the fighting continues, fighting which would lead
only to further chaos and anarchy. We also call on all
involved to facilitate the activities of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, of the United Nations Coordinator of Assistance for the Reconstruction
and
Development of Lebanon and of all other United Nations agencies concerned in humanitarian activities in
the area.
56. However, it is not solely for humanitarian reasons
that we stress the need for a prompt and effective ceasefire in the Beirut area. Such a cease-fire would also be
conducive to an early renewal of the process of internal
reconciliation in Lebanon, which was begun in Geneva
last year. We have welcomed those first steps taken at
Geneva, and we urge all parties concerned to resume
without further delay the process of reconciliation and
negotiation aimed at the establishment of a Government enjoying the widest possible national support and
exercising authority throughout the territory of Lebanon. Such a Government would be in a much better
position to assert its authority and to accomplish
the desired goal of a complete withdrawal of all nonauthorized non-Lebanese forces from Lebanese territory. The position of my Government on this issue
remains unchanged: we fully support the territorial
integrity,
unity, sovereignty and independence
of
Lebanon; and it is clear that these require the withdrawal of all unauthorized foreign forces from that
country.
57. Sir, we all know that under your most able guidance members of the Council have been actively deliberating on the present tragic situation in Beirut during
the past few days. Yesterday, the representative of
France [251&h meeting] proposed the deployment in
the Beirut area of a United Nations force which would

take the place of the multinational
force at present
stationed in the ‘area. Bearing in mind that the grave
situation confronting Lebanon endangers peace and
security in the region, we firmly believe that all parties
concerned are in duty bound to consider seriously ways
and means in which the United Nations could help to
bring about a more stable situation in the Beirut area.
The most pressing problem which the Council should
address now is how to avoid a further deterioration by
helping to bring about an effective cease-fire in that
city.
58. We agree with the Secretary-General
that the
United Nations is in a position to provide Lebanon with
the necessary assistance to monitor such a cease-fire
and to preserve peace in the area. At his press conference on 21 December last, the Secretary-General
already stated his opinion that United Nations peacekeeping forces are perhaps the best way of preserving
peace in Lebanon. At that time the Secretary-General
made his observations in direct reference to the situation in Beirut, where the multinational
force has encountered great difficulties in carrying out its mission.
My Government fully shares the Secretary-General’s
views, and we think it is high time to look again into the
possibilities for the United Nations to make a more
meaningful contribution
to improving the situation in
Beirut.
59. However, the experience of the multinational
force also serves as an example that we should not
embark too hastily on a United Nations peace-keeping
mission in that area. On several occasions, the Secretary-General has made clear under what conditions
United Nations peace-keeping forces could carry out
their mission effectively. First, United Nations peacekeeping forces should be deployed with the permission
of the host country and with the consent of all other
parties involved. Secondly, any United Nations peacekeeping mission should be given a clearly defined mandate. Thirdly, such a force would need the approval and
full backing of the Security Council. It is with these
important general conditions in mind that my Govemment remains prepared to support any constructive
proposal that would lead to a stable and effective ceasefire in Beirut.
60. Again we wish to stress in this connection the
overriding importance of an early resumption of the
process of internal reconciliation between all Lebanese
factions, without which I am afraid the prospects of
peace in that war-tom country will remain slim. We do
feel, however, that the United Nations can play a useful
role in helping to bring about favourable conditions for
a successful resumption and hopefully speedy conclusion of this process of internal reconciliation.
61. In this respect, I should like to express my appreciation for the suggestions made just now by the representative of the United Kingdom concerning some
limited steps which could be taken almost immediately.
As he indicated, these should in no way take the place

of more far-reaching proposals on which the Council
could agree at a later stage. However, we feel that in
the present circumstances even some small steps now
could be useful as interim measures.

collective and individual
responsibility
vis-d-vis the
continuation
of the present intolerable conditions in
that city will stand in the way of suggestions aimed at
enabling the United Nations to make a meaningful contribution to an improvement
of the situation in that
area.

62. Lastly, we do hope that, given the serious situation in Beirut, no member of the Council aware of its

The meeting

7

rose at 12.40 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes. New York ou Geneve.

Maaannn
Opra~r~mq%rw
O~%~JJAH~HHL,IS
annax
w arenTcTnax
no neex pakonax
aaweM KHWKKHOM Maraanne
HJIU nnnrn~e
HauLi;

CeKqwR

no nponame

COMO

CONSEGUIR

w3AaHwk.

PUBLICACIONES

Haqwii

MOXHO

xynmb

Mupa. HaBOnnTe
cnpaanw
no aapecy : OpraHmaum
HMO-H•

PK nnu

B KHWXH~IX
Mara06 H3AaHHHX
a
O~I.~AWH~HH~IX

XCeHesa.

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas est&r en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas pattes del mundo. Cons&e a su librero o dirijase a: Nacioncs Unidas, Seccibn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations,

New York

Cm300

90-61313~January

1993-2.050
