A /77/PV.77

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

77th plenary meeting

Thursday, 8 June 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 116 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs
(b) Election of members of the Economic and
Social Council
Note verbale dated 12 May 2023 from
the Permanent Mission of Monaco to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretariat
(A/77/889/Rev.1)
The President: The Assembly will first proceed
to a by-election to elect one member of the Economic
and Social Council to fill the seat of the member that
is relinquishing its seat before the end of its term, in
accordance with rule 140 of the rules of procedure, as
well as an election to fill one remaining vacancy for a
member from the Group of Eastern European States.
The election of 18 members of the Council will take
place immediately after that.
In connection with the by-election, I would like to
draw the attention of members to a note verbale dated
12 May 2023 from the Permanent Mission of Monaco
to the United Nations (A/77/889/Rev.1), in which
the Mission, in its capacity as Chair of the Group of
Western European and other States for the month of
May, announced that Greece would relinquish its seat on
the Economic and Social Council in favour of Türkiye
for the period 2024–2025. The Group has endorsed the
candidature of Türkiye.

As a result, one vacancy in the Council will occur
and a new member must be elected to fill Greece’s
unexpired term, commencing on 1 January 2024 and
expiring on 31 December 2025. In accordance with
paragraph 4 of resolution 2847 (XXVI), of 20 December
1971, and taking account of the fact that the vacancy
will occur among the Western European and other
States, the new member should be elected from that
region. I would like to inform the Assembly that the
candidate that receives the greatest number of votes and
a two-thirds majority of those present and voting will be
declared elected. In accordance with rule 92 of the rules
of procedure, the election shall be held by secret ballot.
I should like to inform members that as of 1 January
2024, the following seven States from among the
Western European and other States will be represented
on the Economic and Social Council: Belgium, Canada,
Denmark, Italy, New Zealand, Sweden and the United
States of America. The names of those States should
therefore not appear on the ballot paper.
In addition to the by-election, we will proceed to
the election to fill the one remaining vacancy for a
member from the Group of Eastern European States.
Since no candidate obtained the required two-thirds
majority in the previous ballot during the 56th plenary
meeting, on 20 December 2022, one seat still remains
to be filled from among the Eastern European States.
Both elections will take place concurrently. We shall
therefore proceed to a tenth unrestricted ballot. In
accordance with rule 94 of the rules of procedure, this
twenty-third round of balloting shall be unrestricted. I
would like to remind the Assembly that any Member

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-16306 (E)

*2316306*

A/77/PV.77

State from among the Eastern European States may be a
candidate, except those that are current members of the
Economic and Social Council. The following members
therefore cannot be voted for in the present balloting:
Bulgaria, Croatia, Czechia, Slovakia and Slovenia.
Before we begin the voting process, I should
like to remind members that pursuant to rule 88 of
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, no
representative shall interrupt the voting except on a
point of order in connection with the actual conduct
of the voting. In addition, ballot papers will only be
given to the representative seated directly behind the
country’s nameplate.
We shall now begin the voting process. Members
are requested to remain seated until all ballots have
been collected. I would like to remind members that at
this stage, they are voting in the by-election for one seat
for the Western European and other States and in the
election to fill the one remaining vacancy for a member
from the Eastern European States. The election of 18
members of the Council will take place immediately
following those elections. Ballot papers will now be
distributed, and the voting has therefore begun.
In accordance with resolution 71/323 of
8 September 2017, the names of the States that have
been communicated to the Secretariat have been
printed on the ballot papers. An additional blank line
corresponding to the one vacant seat to be filled from
each of the two groups has been provided on the ballot
paper, for inscribing another State if desired.
I request representatives to use only those ballot
papers that have been distributed and to put an “X” in
the box next to the name printed on the ballot paper or
to write the name of another eligible State on the blank
line. If the box next to the name of a State is checked,
the name of that State does not have to be repeated on
the blank line.
There should be no more than one checked box or
handwritten name for the vacant seats to be filled as
indicated on the ballot papers. A ballot will be declared
invalid if it contains more names of States from the
relevant region than the seat allocated to it. Accordingly,
members can only check the box or write one name of
an eligible Member State from the respective groups in
the space provided.
If the ballot paper contains a vote for a Member
State that does not belong to the region concerned or
2/6

08/06/2023

for a Member State from a region that continues to be a
member of the Council next year, the ballot paper will
be declared invalid.
Finally, if a ballot paper contains any notation other
than a vote in favour of an eligible Member State, those
notations will be disregarded.
At the invitation of the President, the representatives
of the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Mauritius, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands and Romania acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The President: In the interests of time, the General
Assembly will now proceed to consider the other items
announced in The Journal of the United Nations while
the ballots are being counted.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 116.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: I invite the attention of the General
Assembly to draft resolution A/77/L.72, circulated under
sub-item (j) of agenda item 18, entitled “Combating
sand and dust storms”.
Members will recall that at its 3rd plenary meeting,
on 16 September 2022, the General Assembly decided
to allocate sub-item (j) of agenda item 18 to the Second
Committee. To enable the Assembly to take action
expeditiously on the document, may I take it that the
Assembly wishes to consider sub-item (j) of agenda
item 18 directly in plenary meeting and proceed
immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 18 (continued)
Sustainable development
(j) Combating sand and dust storms
Draft resolution (A/77/L.72)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba to introduce draft resolution
A/77/L.72 on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
23-16306

08/06/2023

Mr. Rodriguez Leon (Cuba): On behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, I have the honour to introduce
draft resolution A/77/L.72, entitled “International
Day of Combating Sand and Dust Storms”. The draft
resolution stresses the need for cooperation at the
global and regional levels, with a view to managing
and mitigating the effects of sand and dust storms
through the enhancement of early-warning systems
and the sharing of climate and weather information to
forecast sand and dust storms, and affirms that resilient
action to combat sand and dust storms requires a better
understanding of the severe multidimensional impacts
of sand and dust storms, including the deterioration of
people’s health, well-being and livelihoods, increased
desertification and land degradation, deforestation,
loss of biodiversity and land productivity and their
impact on sustainable economic growth. It is based on
paragraph 19 of resolution 77/171, in which the General
Assembly decided to consider during its seventyseventh session the measures required to designate a
day of every year as the International Day of Combating
Sand and Dust Storms.
The objective of the draft resolution is to further
raise international awareness of sand and dust storms,
taking into consideration that the paragraph mentioned
was based on the flexibility that our Group showed
in having it in a separate process. The Group was
completely aware of another substantive resolution
(resolution 77/171), adopted during the Assembly’s
current session, in which the International Day was
agreed upon. To that end, the draft resolution proclaims
12 July as the International Day of Combating Sand
and Dust Storms, to be observed annually. The Group
expresses its gratitude to the delegation of Iraq for its
effort in coordinating the draft resolution on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China, in addition to its role as
facilitator. We look forward to seeing draft resolution
A/77/L.72 adopted by consensus.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
the draft resolution. I now give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that there have been no additional sponsors
since the submission of draft resolution A/77/L.72. I
would like to remind members that the draft resolution
is already sponsored by the members of the Group of
77 and China.

A/77/PV.77

The President: Since no delegation has asked for
the floor in explanation of vote before the voting, the
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/77/L.72, entitled “International Day of Combating
Sand and Dust Storms”. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.72?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 77/294).

A/77/L.72

was

adopted

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (j)
of agent item 18.
I shall now suspend the meeting for 10 minutes to
allow for the completion of the ballot counting.
The meeting was suspended at 10.25 a.m. and
resumed at 10.45 a.m.
The President: The result of the vote is as follows:
Western European and other States (1 seat)
Number of ballot papers:190
Number of invalid ballots:1
Number of valid ballots:189
Abstentions:2
Number of members present and voting:187
Required two-thirds majority:125
Number of votes obtained:
Türkiye186
Andorra1
Eastern European States (1 seat)
Number of ballot papers:190
Number of invalid ballots:1
Number of valid ballots:189
Abstentions:5
Number of members present and voting:184
Required two-thirds majority:123
Number of votes obtained:
Russian Federation102
North Macedonia82
Having obtained the required two-thirds majority,
Türkiye was elected a member of the Economic and
Social Council for a term of office beginning on
1 January 2024 and ending on 31 December 2025
(decision 77/423).
The President: I congratulate Türkiye on
having been elected a member of the Economic and
Social Council.

23-163063/6

A/77/PV.77

One seat remains to be filled from among the
Eastern European States. In accordance with rule 94
of the rules of procedure, we should continue with the
series of balloting. Further balloting will take place on
a date to be announced.
The General Assembly will now proceed to the
election of 18 members of the Economic and Social
Council to replace those members whose term of office
expires on 31 December 2023.
The 18 outgoing members are: Argentina, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Bulgaria, France,
Guatemala, Indonesia, Israel, Japan, Liberia, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Mexico, Nigeria, Portugal,
Solomon Islands, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and Zimbabwe. Pursuant to
rule 146 of the rules of procedure, those countries are
eligible for immediate re-election.
As of 1 January 2024, the following States will
be represented on the Economic and Social Council:
Afghanistan, Belgium, Belize, Botswana, Brazil, Cabo
Verde, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark,
Equatorial Guinea, Eswatini, India, Italy, Kazakhstan,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Mauritius, New
Zealand, Oman, Peru, Qatar, the Republic of Korea,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden, Tunisia, Türkiye, the
United Republic of Tanzania and the United States of
America. The names of those States should therefore
not appear on the ballot papers.
In accordance with paragraph 4 of resolution 2847
(XXVI), of 20 December 1971, and taking into account
the number of States that will remain members of the
Council after 1 January 2024, the 18 members should be
elected as follows: five from the African States; three
from the Asia-Pacific States; one from the Eastern
European States; four from the Latin American and
Caribbean States; and five from the Western European
and other States. The ballot papers reflect that pattern.
I should like to inform the Assembly that those
candidates, their number not exceeding the number of
seats to be filled, that receive the greatest number of
votes and a two-thirds majority of the votes by members
present and voting, will be declared elected.
If the number of candidates obtaining a twothirds majority is less than the number of members to
be elected, there shall be additional ballots to fill the
remaining places, the voting being restricted to the
candidates obtaining the greatest number of votes in
4/6

08/06/2023

the previous ballot to a number not more than twice
the places remaining to be filled. Also, consistent with
past practice, in the case of a tied vote, and when it
becomes necessary to determine the candidates to be
elected or the ones to proceed to the next round of
restricted balloting, there will be a special restricted
ballot limited to those candidates that have obtained an
equal number of votes. May I take it that the General
Assembly agrees to those procedures?
It was so decided.
The President: Regarding candidates, I have been
informed of the following. For the five vacant seats for
the Group of African States, five endorsed candidates
have been communicated, namely, Kenya, Mauritania,
Nigeria, Senegal and Zambia. For the three vacant seats
for the Group of Asia-Pacific States, five candidates
have been communicated, namely, Iraq, Japan, Nepal,
Pakistan and Tajikistan. For the one vacant seat for
the Group of Eastern European States, one candidate
has been communicated, namely, Poland. For the four
vacant seats for the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States, four endorsed candidates have been
communicated, namely, Haiti, Paraguay, Suriname
and Uruguay. For the five vacant seats for the Group
of Western European and other States, five endorsed
candidates have been communicated, namely, France,
Germany, Liechtenstein, Spain and the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of procedure,
we shall now proceed to the election by secret ballot.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like
to remind representatives that pursuant to rule 88 of
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, no
representative shall interrupt the voting except on a point
of order on the actual conduct of the voting. In addition,
ballot papers will only be given to the representative
seated directly behind the country’s nameplate.
We shall now begin the voting process. Members
are requested to remain seated until all ballots have
been collected. Ballot papers marked “A”, “B”, “C”,
“D” and “E” will now be distributed. The voting has
thus begun.
In accordance with resolution 71/323 of
8 September 2017, the names of the States that have
been communicated to the Secretariat at least 48 hours
prior to the election today have been printed on the
ballot papers for each of the regional groups. Also,
additional blank lines corresponding to the number of
23-16306

08/06/2023

vacant seats to be filled for each of the regional groups
have been provided on the ballot papers for inscribing
other names if desired.
Representatives are requested to use only those
ballot papers that have been distributed and to put an
“X” in the boxes next to the names of the Member
States from the relevant region that they wish to vote
for, or to write the names of other eligible States on the
blank lines. If the box next to the name printed on the
ballot paper is checked, the name of that State does not
need to be repeated on the blank line. The total number
of checked boxes and all handwritten names may not
exceed the number of vacant seats to be filled, as
indicated on the ballot paper. A ballot paper containing
more names of States from the relevant region than the
number of seats allocated to it will be declared invalid.
Accordingly, for the ballot papers marked “A”, for
the African States, the total number of checked boxes
and handwritten names should not exceed five; for the
ballot papers marked “B”, for the Asia-Pacific States,
the total number of checked boxes and handwritten
names should not exceed three; for the ballot papers
marked “C”, for the Eastern European States, the
total number of checked boxes and handwritten names
should not exceed one; for the ballot papers marked
“D”, for the Latin America and Caribbean States, the
total number of checked boxes and handwritten names
should not exceed four; and for the ballot papers marked
“E”, for the Western European and other States, the
total number of checked boxes and handwritten names
should not exceed five.
The ballot paper will be declared invalid if none of
the names of the States on that ballot for which votes
were cast belongs to the relevant region. If a ballot
paper of a region contains one of the following, the
ballot remains valid but the vote for these States will
not be counted: names of Member States that do not
belong to the region concerned or Member States that
will continue to be members of the Council. If a ballot
paper contains any notation other than votes in favour
of specific eligible candidates, those notations will
be disregarded.
At the invitation of the President, the representatives
of the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Mauritius, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands and Romania acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.

A/77/PV.77

The meeting was suspended at 11 a.m. and resumed
at 12.10 p.m.
The President: The result of the voting is as follows:
Group A — African States (5 Seats)
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members present and voting:
Required two-thirds majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Nigeria:
Senegal:
Zambia:
Kenya:
Mauritania:189
Group B — Asia-Pacific States (3 Seats)

191
0
191
0
191
128

Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members present and voting:
Required two-thirds majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Nepal:
Pakistan:
Japan:
Tajikistan:
Iraq:
Group C — Eastern European States (1 Seat)

191
6
185
0
185
124

191
190
190
189

145
129
127
97
50

Number of ballot papers:
191
Number of invalid ballots:
1
Number of valid ballots:
190
Abstentions:
13
Number of members present and voting:
177
Required two-thirds majority:
118
Number of votes obtained:
Poland:
177
Group D — Latin American and Caribbean States
(4 Seats)
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members present and voting:
Required two-thirds majority:
Number of votes obtained:

191
0
191
2
189
126

23-163065/6

A/77/PV.77

Suriname:
Haiti:
Paraguay:
Uruguay:

08/06/2023

189
184
184
184

Group E — Western European and other States (5 Seats)
Number of ballot papers:
191
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
191
Abstentions:
8
Number of members present and voting:
183
Required two-thirds majority:
122
Number of votes obtained:
Spain:
176
Liechtenstein:
174
Germany:
170
France:
163
United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland:
162
San Marino:
2

6/6

Having obtained the required two-thirds majority
of members present and voting and the greatest
number of votes, the following 18 States are
elected members of the Economic and Social
Council for a three-year term beginning on
1 January 2024: France, Germany, Haiti, Japan,
Kenya, Liechtenstein, Mauritania, Nepal, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Poland, Senegal, Spain,
Suriname, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Uruguay and Zambia
(decision 77/423).
The President: I congratulate the States that have
just been elected members of the Economic and Social
Council, and I thank the tellers for their assistance in
the election.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 116.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

23-16306
