S/PV.7688

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7688th meeting

Thursday, 5 May 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aboulatta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Egypt)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Yoshikawa
Mrs. Adnin
Mrs. Schwalger
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 26 April 2016 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2016/395)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-12757 (E)
*1612757*

S/PV.7688

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 26 April 2016 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/395)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance with
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia and Serbia to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Chargé d’affaires ad interim of
the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/395, which contains a letter dated
26 April 2016 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council, transmitting
the forty-ninth report of the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I now give the floor to Mr. Inzko.
Mr. Inzko: When I addressed the Council six
months ago (see S/PV.7555), we were on the eve of the
twentieth anniversary of the Dayton Peace Agreement.
That was an opportunity to mark how far Bosnia and
Herzegovina had come, but also to recognize that
there was much more work needed to ensure lasting
stability and a better future for the people of that
beautiful country. The signifance of that event was also
underlined by an important conference held in Dayton,
Ohio, in which former United States President Clinton,
one of the peacemakers 20 years ago, participated.
Against that backdrop, on 15 February the country
took the historic step of applying for membership in
the European Union. Bosnia and Herzegovina chose
2/23

05/05/2016

its direction clearly, and that direction is a future in
the European Union. Of course, transition is a process
and not a event, and the transformation that the country
must undergo on the path to membership will make
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina better off.
Accordingly, we are fully united in supporting the
country in its European Union (EU) aspirations. What
lies ahead for Bosnia and Herzegovina will undoubtedly
be a challenging period, but it is one the country can
navigate if all parties work together and fully respect
the Dayton Peace Agreement.
As I stress in my report (S/2016/395, annex),
developments on the ground over the past six months
have been mixed. It remains unclear at what point we can
say Bosnia and Herzegovina is irreversibly on course
for Euro-Atlantic integration. On the positive side, as
I mentioned, the country submitted its membership
application with the European Union. Associated with
this, the authorities have also taken steps to implement
a reform agenda, including the adoption of new labour
legislation in both entities. In this context, I would like
to praise the significant efforts of the European Union
Special Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Lars-Gunnar Wigemark. He has really gone the
extra mile.
While the progress achieved by the authorities
on the reform agenda is indeed very welcome, let
us not lose sight of the need to accelerate the pace
of reform. There must be much more urgency in the
decision-making process. From the point of view of my
mandate to uphold the Peace Agreement, I welcome the
fact that the authorities of Republika Srpska have not
taken further steps to implement a referendum on the
authority of the State Court and the Prosecutor’s Office
and on the authorities of the High Representative, as
that would be a clear violation of the Peace Agreement.
That step is indeed welcome.
My current assessment is that although the
referendum has still has not been officially withdrawn,
it does appear to have been put aside. I must note,
however, that various political actors have continued
to advocate the organization of yet another entity
referendum on the validity of a recent decision of the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In
this context, I need to stress that the Peace Agreement
explicitly states that the decisions of the Constitutional
Court are final and binding.
16-12757

05/05/2016

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

In addition to efforts made to meet European Union
requirements, I would like to commend the efforts of
the authorities to register military properties to the
State of Bosnia and Herzegovina. This is a condition
for the activation of a NATO membership action plan
and one of the prerequisites set by my Steering Board
for the closure of the Office of the High Representative
(OHR). I call on Republika Srpska authorities to enable
the registration of such properties located on the
territory of that entity, as the Federation has been doing.
If Republika Srpska authorities are as keen to see the
closure of my Office and my departure as they claim,
then they need to deliver the results needed to enable
the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board to
take that decision.
Another largely positive factor has been the regional
situation. Serbian Prime Minister Vučić’s high profile
commitment of notable donor funds to Srebrenica
did much to foster reconciliation. By the way, he
has personally visited Srebrenica twice. The very
important first joint session of the Council of Ministers
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Government of the
Republic of Serbia in November was a very welcome
and positive step forward. A similar joint session with
the Croatian Government has been announced, and is
also a positive development.
In the broader region, a decision was taken a
few days ago in Zagreb by the Presidents of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Croatia and Turkey to reinvigorate
the process of trilateral meetings among those three
countries. I take this opportunity to encourage Bosnia
and Herzegovina and its neighbours to significantly
increase the level of State-to-State cooperation, to the
benefit of all sides.
Despite these positive developments, the forward
momentum they created was diminished, regrettably, by
a number of parallel developments during the reporting
period. The readiness of some political actors to question
and challenge the Peace Agreement, including new
attempts to undermine the sovereignty and authority of
the State and its institutions, continues to cast a shadow
over positive efforts to advance economic and social
reforms. Sharply divergent reactions to the verdict of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
in the case of wartime Republika Srpska President
Radovan Karadžić highlighted the need for greater
efforts towards reconciliation.

S/PV.7688

I was deeply shocked by the high-profile opening by
the current Republika Srpska President of a dormitory
named after Karadžić only two days before his firstinstance conviction for genocide and crimes against
humanity In our countries, it would be unthinkable
to glorify individuals convicted of committing mass
atrocities. With this act, the Republika Srpska President
sent an insidious message to those affected by the
horror and trauma of wartime ethnic cleansing, and
put himself outside the standards and morality of the
civilized world. I also take this opportunity to reject
his thesis that fairness in transitional justice requires
the prosecution of equal numbers of war criminals from
different ethnic groups. We must seek justice for every
innocent individual victim and his or her parents and
relatives, but applying a principle of ethnic parity to
mass graves or war criminals would do a disservice to
victims and survivors of all nationalities.
The passing of time brings new challenges to all
of us, and Bosnia and Herzegovina is no different. A
terrorism-inspired act carried out by a single attacker
in Sarajevo on 18 November resulted in the death of two
soldiers of the armed forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The attack once again highlighted the challenges facing
the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the fight
against terrorism.
An additional issue of concern is the participation
of some citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina in foreign
conflicts, some of whom have returned and could
pose a threat to the future stability of the country.
Additional incidents continue to occur that threaten
to undermine inter-ethnic relations. For example,
processions organized in March in Srebrenica and
other municipalities by supporters of Vojislav Šešelj to
celebrate his first-instance verdict of not guilty. This
raised fear among Bosniak returnees who are still
trying to come to terms with the crimes of the past.
Other direct challenges to the Peace Agreement
during the reporting period included the conclusion
reached by the Republika Srpska Government in
December that the entity’s institutions would cease
cooperating with the State Investigation and Protection
Agency, a State-level police agency, over a legally
authorized raid on a police station in Republika Srpska
in relation to war crimes investigations. While the
Republika Srpska authorities eventually resumed
operational cooperation under a signed agreement,
that apparent interference of politics into police work

16-127573/23

S/PV.7688

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

is unacceptable, in particular at a time when agencies
need to be strengthening their cooperation.
The continued policy by representatives of the
ruling party in the Republika Srpska, in particular its
President, to advocate for the secession of that entity
from Bosnia and Herzegovina troubles me deeply and
raises fundamental questions about the commitment of
some officials and political parties to fully respect the
Peace Agreement. In that context, I remain concerned
that that party’s official platform includes a threat to
organize an independence referendum in 2018 if certain
conditions are not met. I take this opportunity to say
once again that the Peace Agreement does not grant the
entities the right to secede, and any attempt to change
the Peace Agreement requires the agreement of all the
parties.
In my previous report to the Council, and again
today, I described the opportunity provided to Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s leaders by the European Union and
how critical it was for them to demonstrate that they
were ready and able to deliver on the reform agendas
they had set for themselves, while also fully respecting
the Peace Agreement. That opportunity must now
be embraced with both hands. What that means in
practice is an acceleration of concrete results. When
I next report to the Council, in six months’ time, I
sincerely hope that the authorities will have undertaken
that challenge with greater urgency. Let us therefore
together issue a challenge to the authorities to deliver
on the following five points: first, publication of the
results of the 2013 census; secondly, a final agreement
on the EU coordination mechanism; thirdly, the full
implementation of decisions of the Constitutional Court
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, including the rulings on the
Mostar elections, State property and the 9 January Day
in the Republika Srpska; fourthly, measurable progress
on fiscal and economic reforms, including meeting
the outstanding requirements set by the International
Monetary Fund for a new arrangement; and, lastly, real
progress on implementing the outstanding requirements
for the closure of the OHR. For that to happen, political
leaders will need to stop linking issues into ever-more
complex and out-of-reach packages and put the needs
of citizens first.
The year 2016 can be one of progress towards
Euro-Atlantic integration, economic growth and
job creation, but only if the country pulls together
and works as one. Questioning and challenging the
fundamentals of the Peace Agreement — which is also
4/23

05/05/2016

the Constitution — is not a formula for success. Given
the complex environment that continues to prevail in
the country, the presence of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force in Bosnia and Herzegovina with an
executive mandate remains of vital importance, thereby
enabling my Office and others in the international
community to fulfil our respective mandates, as well as
reassuring citizens from all ethnic groups throughout
the country of a safe and secure environment. I very
much hope that in six months’ time I will be able
to report to the members of the Council a marked
improvement based on the delivery of concrete results
and a situation where there is full respect for the Peace
Agreement. That is the surest way forward for Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
I would like to conclude today with some positive
news, which offer encouragement in our efforts to
ensure sustainable stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
but also serve to highlight the challenges. The first
is a small, even trivial, example, but one of broader
symbolic significance. Just a few days ago, several local
associations agreed to create a single karate association
for the whole country. But even that small step required
20 years of efforts towards reaching that goal. The
second piece of news is of great significance. The
day after tomorrow, the splendid Ferhadija Mosque in
Banja Luka, demolished in the war along with 15 other
mosques in the city, will be reopened. That will be an
event of broader significance for reconciliation and
tolerance in the region and beyond, and a huge number
of honorary guests are expected from Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia, Serbia, Turkey and elsewhere. It
will be a very special moment not only for Banja Luka
but for humankind as a whole.
On that positive note, I would like to thank the
Security Council for its attention and continued support
for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Inzko
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): It is our pleasure
to welcome High Representative Valentin Inzko
back to the Security Council and to thank him for
his comprehensive briefing and report (S/2016/395,
annex). As this is my first statement on the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina after Ukraine assumed its
non-permanent membership in the Council, I would like
16-12757

05/05/2016

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

to assure Mr. Inzko of our full support for his activities
as High Representative for the Implementation of the
Peace Agreement.
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later on behalf of the European Union (EU).
First and foremost, we congratulate the Government
and the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina on their
application to join the European Union. Ukraine hopes
that historic decision will provide additional impetus
for further progress under the General Framework
Agreement for Peace. Ukraine welcomes the readiness
of the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
advance the reform agenda. We look forward to the
conclusion of a final agreement between the EU and
Bosnia and Herzegovina on the adaptation of the
trade provisions of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement.
Ukraine also praises the efforts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s Government aimed at the activation
of the country’s NATO Membership Action Plan.
We support close cooperation between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and NATO as an important factor of
security in Europe. In that regard, we hope for the
quickest-possible resolution of the issue of immovable
defence property as the precondition to the country’s
Membership Action Plan.
Our meeting today is taking place at an important
moment for Bosnia and Herzegovina. A little more than
20 years ago, the General Framework Agreement for
Peace was reached at Dayton. A lot of work has been
done, but yet after 20 years of peace we are still seeing
serious political divisions inside the country.
As a positive sign of efforts to find a way to bridge
the differences, we note the decision of Republika
Srpska authorities not to hold the referendum on the
State judiciary. However, the absence of an appropriate
decision on the subject by the Republika Srpska National
Assembly is a worrying sign. I would like to underscore
that any referendum that contradicts the provisions of
the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina and of the
Dayton Agreement is illegitimate.
Ukraine shares the concerns of High Representative
Inzko with regard to certain statements by Republika
Srpska officials calling for that entity’s secession from
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We strongly condemn any
provocative actions that could undermine the progress
under the Dayton Peace Agreement and the stability

S/PV.7688

of Bosnia and Herzegovina. I once again reiterate our
strong support for Bosnia and Herzegovina’s territorial
integrity, which is guaranteed by its Constitution
and by international law, including the Charter of the
United Nations.
Ukraine believes that more efforts could have
been made to achieve more sustainable progress on the
5+2 agenda. We hope that, during the next reporting
period, we will see long-awaited developments
towards meeting the set of objectives and conditions.
We believe that special attention should be paid to the
issue of prospective defence property, in particular
the registration of specific properties located on the
territory of Republika Srpska. Other areas where
progress would be highly welcome, in addition to
implementing the Sejdic-Finci judgment, include the
issues of the publication of the 2013 census results, the
proper functioning of the coordination mechanism on
EU matters, the implementation of the Constitutional
Court’s decision on Mostar and delivering on
outstanding International Monetary Fund requirements.
Finally, I would like to underscore that, given
the information we heard today from the High
Representative, it is very important to overcome
political differences in Bosnia and Herzegovina and to
achieve tangible progress in implementing the necessary
reforms, as well as the 5+2 agenda. Achieving all five
objectives and the two conditions as quickly as possible
would be the best way forward.
In our view, as we enter the third decade of the peace
process in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Council has an
obligation to provide all necessary political support to
ensuring the country’s further peaceful development.
It is of utmost importance that any attempt to encroach
on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s independence, unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity be resolutely
addressed.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I thank
High Representative Inzko for his briefing, service,
representation of the international community in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and stewardship of the Office
of the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The United States again reiterates its strong support for
High Representative Inzko’s mandate under the Dayton
Peace Agreement as the final authority with regard to
the interpretation of the civilian implementation of the
Peace Agreement. We of course look forward to the day
when Bosnia and Herzegovina meets the objectives and

16-127575/23

S/PV.7688

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

conditions established by the Peace Implementation
Council for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative, but let us be very clear — that day has
not yet arrived.
The United States commitment to Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s success is enormous, and our
commitment to peace there enduring. It is in that spirit
that we welcome Bosnia and Herzegovina’s positive
steps towards greater Euro-Atlantic integration. The
submission of its European Union (EU) membership
application in February was an important milestone, and
I would like to congratulate Bosnia and Herzegovina
on that step. The United States also welcomes the
Government’s full registration of 21 defence properties
within the Federation, which is a positive sign of
tangible progress to meeting Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
NATO Membership Action Plan.
Despite those positive steps, continuing down the
path of Euro-Atlantic integration will require vision. It
will require political will. It will require real followthrough on commitments, and it will require focus to
meet the conditions set by the Peace Implementation
Council. The United States joins the High Representative
in his call for the registration of defence properties
within the Republika Srpska and continued registration
of additional properties within the Federation. We
also continue to encourage Bosnia and Herzegovina
to make genuine progress on the EU socioeconomic
reform agenda. As the High Representative noted,
new labour laws in both entities are important steps
towards improving the business climate in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and making the country more competitive
in the global market place. However, critical work
remains to be done to enhance the rule of law, tackle
corruption and improve the overall political climate
in the country, which are steps that will benefit all of
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s citizens.
Impunity and divisiveness are not acceptable. I
am particularly disturbed by the truly outrageous and
dangerously provocative decision to name a building
in honour of Radovan Karadžić and the timing of
the proclamation in advance of the ruling of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in
his case. Honouring a man who has been charged with
and, days later, convicted of genocide is despicable.
Such craven political manoeuvres do a disservice to
his victims and the country and undermine the spirit
of peace and reconciliation needed for Bosnia and
Herzegovina to move forward. The United States also
6/23

05/05/2016

remains deeply concerned by politicians who seek to
erode the competencies of State-level institutions.
In the interest of greater stability and security, we
encourage the Republika Srpska National Assembly to
formally withdraw its decision to hold a referendum on
the State-level Court and Prosecutor’s Office.
We look forward to the day when Bosnia and
Herzegovina meets the objectives and conditions
established by the Peace Implementation Council for
the closure of the Office of the High Representative,
and when we can say with absolute confidence that
Bosnia and Herzegovina has reached full compliance
with the Dayton Peace Agreement and is now a
peaceful, viable State irreversibly on the course for
European integration. We have seen progress, but
that day has not yet arrived. For instance, despite the
recent surge and local engagement on Mostar, political
leaders remain unwilling to make the compromises
necessary for the city to hold elections for the first time
since 2008. That same intransigence blocks progress
on other fundamental issues, such as the release of the
2013 census data, and reflects on individual leaders’
credibility with regard to Euro-Atlantic aspirations.
We encourage Bosnia and Herzegovina’s leaders
and all members of the international community to
support the actions and reforms needed to reach that
milestone and provide all necessary support to the High
Representative as he fulfils his mandate.
Finally, I would like to just reiterate the High
Representative’s own sentiments in his report
(S/2016/395, annex) in connection with the death of
Mr. Roberts Owen. Mr. Owen gave of his own time
and energy to serve as the Presiding Arbitrator of the
Arbitral Tribunal for Dispute over the Inter-Entity
Boundary in the Brcko Area, and we are grateful for
his unwavering dedication to establishing irreversible
peace and stability through his work at Dayton and on
the Tribunal.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We welcome and thank
Mr. Valentin Inzko for having presented the fortyninth report of the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina (S/2016/395, annex) and commend
his work in assisting in the building of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina State.
We take note of the successes achieved and the
challenges that lie ahead in consolidating Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s statehood and the future of unity and
peace. As a declaration of principle, we reaffirm our
16-12757

05/05/2016

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

respect and support for the unity, territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina and for
the General Framework Agreement for Peace. In our
statement, we will focus on three main issues: the
general political environment, challenges to the General
Framework Agreement and non-cooperation with the
High Representative.
With regard to the general political environment,
we are encouraged by the application of Bosnia and
Herzegovina for membership of the European Union.
It is now our expectation that the political leaders will
pursue efforts to meet the conditionalities of the reform
agenda for the country’s integration into the European
Union, strengthening the prospects of a united,
multi-ethnic, stable and prosperous country advancing
towards development.
We welcome the adoption of the labour legislation
as part of the reforms that the Republic was entitled to
carry out and the disclosure by the Republika Srpska
entity that the referendum on the jurisdiction of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina State Court and Prosecutor’s
Office will not go forward. However, the failure by the
authorities to reach solutions for a number of issues,
such as the European Union coordination mechanism,
the announcement of the 2013 census results and the
implementation of the decision of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitutional Court on Mostar, among
others, are matters of concern.
The occurrence, during the reporting period, of
a number of security-related incidents, including a
terrorist attack resulting in the killing of soldiers,
is a call to the authorities on the imperative need to
adopt and implement vigorous measures and policies
to counter terrorism, and namely to address the issue
of foreign terrorist fighters and the danger that they
represent when returning home from theatres of war.
Another matter of concern were the reactions to
the verdict of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia in the first instance against Radovan
Karadžić, the war-time leader of the self-proclaimed
Republika Srpska, who was found guilty of war
crimes and crimes against humanity and sentenced to
40 years of imprisonment, while Vojislav Šešelj was
found not guilty for similar indictments. We condemn
the outrageous incidents that occurred following the
Court’s decision and the ensuing security incidents that
impacted the overall security situation in the country,
undermining the fragile national reconciliation process.

S/PV.7688

Regarding challenges to the General Framework
Agreement for Peace, most worrisome are the statements
made by officials of the Alliance of Independent Social
Democrats, the ruling party in the Republika Srpska,
advocating for the secession and dissolution of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina State. Such statements threaten
the General Framework Agreement and the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Furthermore, they undermine
the cohesion of the multi-ethnic society being built in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and of national reconciliation
at a very crucial moment of the country’s life.
We fully support the affirmation made by the High
Representative that under the General Framework
Agreement, the entities have no right to secede from
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the country are guaranteed by
the Agreement, the Constitution and international
law. Concerning non-cooperation with the High
Representative, we deeply regret the continued attacks
on his Office, as well as the policy of Republika Srpska
authorities of denying the High Representative access
to official information and documents required to fulfil
his mandate. The work accomplished by the Office
of the High Representative in support of the peace,
security and development of Bosnia and Herzegovina is
highly commendable, and we recall that under annex 10
of the General Framework Agreement, all authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina are duty-bound to full
cooperation with the High Representative, as well as
with international organizations and agencies.
In conclusion, we acknowledge the important role
played by the European Union-led military operation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina in supporting the country’s
efforts to maintain a safe and secure environment
conducive to the building of a multi-ethnic society, a
multinational State and a democratic country.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina
for his comprehensive briefing on the situation and for
his work.
France aligns itself with the statement to be made
by the observer of the European Union.
France welcomes the fact that the European
perspective today serves as the main engine for
the development and consolidation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Its recent application to join the European
Union reflects the overwhelming support of that

16-127577/23

S/PV.7688

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

perspective within the Bosnian population, as well as
the unanimity that exists around this topic within the
collegial Presidency of the country. The Council noted
these developments that in resolution 2247 (2015),
the most recent resolution on the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which was adopted unanimously on
10 November.
In that context, the European Union will continue
now more than ever to support the Bosnian and
Herzegovina authorities in the implementation of
reforms that meet the economic and social aspirations
of the population. The reform agenda adopted last year
is crucial to that end. We welcome the fact that it has
already produced initial concrete results, such as the
adoption of new labour legislation at the entity level.
Nonetheless, the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities must bear in mind that their candidacy is
only the beginning of a long and demanding process
that will require efforts at the central State and entity
levels. It is especially important that a fully operational
European coordination mechanism be set up as soon
as possible, that significant progress be achieved
in the implementation of the reform agenda and the
Stabilization and Association Agreement, and that the
country advance towards a judicial system that is fully
independent, impartial and effective.
More than 20 years after their signing, the
Dayton-Paris Peace Accords remain the cornerstone
of stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It will be up
to the Bosnians themselves to ensure that, when the
time is right, their institutions evolve. At a time when
the country is facing elections, we call on all political
forces to set aside divisive rhetoric that is as outdated
as it is dangerous in favour of the construction of the
future. Local campaigns should not pit one side against
the other on the basis of hatred and rancour, but should
lead to constructive discussion of political projects.
Faced with mass unemployment, Bosnians deserve
that priority be given to the economic development of
the territories.
All Bosnians deserve the right to express
themselves democratically in free and fair elections.
As such, we remain concerned about the situation of
the city of Mostar. Indeed, due to the lack of consensus
between political forces, its inhabitants have been
deprived of their most basic civil rights at the local
level for nearly eight years. To accept such a status
quo would be irresponsible. However, the only viable
8/23

05/05/2016

solution will be one that creates a consensus among
local players. France therefore calls upon those local
players to do their all to ensure that elections can be
held this year, in respect for the principles reaffirmed
by the Peace Implementation Council’s communiqué of
2 December 2015.
We note with satisfaction the statements issued
by the Republika Srpska authorities on the indefinite
postponement of the referendum project, which could
have challenged the competence of the central State in
the judicial field. Whether it refers to the functioning
of judicial institutions or public holidays, compromise
solutions must be found. That is in the interest
of everyone.
Today, the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
despite its weaknesses, seems to be moving in the
right direction of normalization. While there is no
imminent risk of destabilization, the presence of the
international community remains necessary at this
stage. Its framework of reference remains, of course, the
Dayton-Paris Peace Accords. We therefore call on all
parties to cooperate with the institutions mentioned in
the Peace Accords, notably the High Representative and
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
The absence of manipulation and respect for the rulings
of the Tribunal are crucial in order to prevent the
revival of dangerous intercommunal tensions. We call
on everyone to bear their responsibilities.
Our goal for the coming years remains, without
undermining the fundamental principles of the
Dayton-Paris Peace Accords, the fully adapt the
international presence to current realities on the ground.
The consideration of the reconfiguration of the Office
of the High Representative should therefore continue.
In the 20 years after experiencing the horror of
war, Bosnia and Herzegovina is today advancing in
the right direction, with the support of the European
Union and its other partners. The responsibility of the
international community, including the Council, is to
encourage it to continue along that path.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I would like to thank High
Representative Valentin Inzko for his comprehensive
briefing and for his latest report to the Council
(S/2016/395, annex).
Malaysia takes note of the positive developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina during the reporting period,
as outlined by the High Representative. We welcome
16-12757

05/05/2016

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

the country’s submission of a formal application for
membership in the European Union (EU) in February.
That latest milestone reflects the continuing aspiration
of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina and its
leaders to European integration. We believe that the
accompanying political and socioeconomic reforms
required for EU membership would pave the way for
stability and prosperity for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We therefore urge the leaders to remain steadfast
in their commitment to implementing the country’s
reform agenda.
Malaysia also welcomes the positive developments
in relations between Bosnia and Herzegovina and
its neighbours. That includes the ratification of the
State Border Treaty with Montenegro, the visit by
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina to Croatia,
and the first-ever joint Cabinet meeting with Serbia
in Sarajevo.
Despite the positive developments during the
reporting period, the commitment of all parties to
the Dayton Peace Agreement and to the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina
unfortunately remains in doubt. Malaysia is alarmed
by the continuing challenges, through words and
actions, posed by the leaders of the Republika Srpska
to the Dayton Peace Agreement, the Office of the High
Representative, and the State-level judicial institutions
and authorities. Such challenges are clearly against the
Peace Agreement, the rule of law and the Constitution
of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Malaysia takes note of the High Representative’s
briefing on the cancellation of the planned referendum
by the Republika Srpska, which would have challenged
the authority of the High Representative, as well
as the country’s rule of law and judiciary. While we
welcome this latest development, we regret the fact that
the referendum, together with other, similar threats,
were called for in the first place. We strongly urge the
Republika Srpska authorities to respect the country’s
Constitution, the various Security Council resolutions
and the Dayton Peace Agreement.
Two decades after a devastating war, there is
simply no place in the country or the region for
divisive, provocative or secessionist rhetoric, which
can serve only to perpetuate narrow political agendas
at the expense of peace and stability in the region.
We also condemn the intimidation, harassment and
even death threats that have been directed at the High

S/PV.7688

Representative and the country’s international judges.
Such acts are unacceptable and must cease immediately.
The divergent reactions among the ethnic communities
to the recent decisions of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia relating to Radovan
Karadžić and Vojislav Šešelj prove that reconciliation is
still a distant vision. We call on all parties to respect the
rule of law and use this opportunity to make progress
on national reconciliation.
In conclusion, Malaysia reiterates the importance of
intensifying efforts to fully implement the 5+2 agenda
as prerequisites for the closure of the Office of the
High Representative. Until then, Malaysia reaffirms its
strong support to the Office of the High Representative,
as laid down in the Dayton Peace Accords and upheld
in various Council resolutions. We also recognize
the important role played by the European Union
Multinational Stabilization Force in ensuring security
and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank High Representative Inzko for his briefing.
Recently, thanks to the collective efforts of the
Government and the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the country has generally maintained stability. Its
economy is improving and it has made some headway
with the political process and the rule of law. China
welcomes those positive developments. We respect
the country’s sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity, and we believe that the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina have the right to independently
determine their own path to development and their own
foreign policy. The international community should
respect the choices they have made for their future.
China hopes that the members of all the country’s ethnic
groups will work actively to consolidate the positive
results that have been achieved in nation-building,
continue to fully implement the Dayton Peace Accords
and promote improvement throughout the country on
all fronts.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important country
in the Balkans. Maintaining peace, stability and
development there is in the common interests of the
entire international community, including all the other
countries of the region. Where Bosnia and Herzegovina
is concerned, the international community should adopt
a balanced and prudent approach that fully respects the
leadership and ownership of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and should be committed to promoting

16-127579/23

S/PV.7688

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

unity among all ethnic groups in the country, harmony,
sustainable economic and social development and
lasting stability.
China supports High Representative Inzko in his
efforts to fulfil his mandate and to work in a manner
that will enable him to continue to play a constructive
role in advancing the political process in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. China is ready to work with the
international community in continuing to contribute to
achieving lasting peace, stability and development in
the country.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I would like to join
others in welcoming High Representative Inzko back to
the Council. At the outset, I would like to reiterate the
United Kingdom’s full support for his role and I thank
him for his briefing today.
Since we last met on this issue (see S/PV.7555),
we have witnessed historic developments in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We have marked 20 years of peace;
we have seen one of the worst war criminals of the
conflict brought to justice; and we have seen Bosnia
and Herzegovina take steps to move beyond its painful
history and seek a better future in the European Union
(EU). But for all the progress of recent months, Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s path is not yet set. The United
Kingdom sees two challenges ahead. The first is
coming to terms with the past; the second is seizing the
opportunity of the future.
In any post-conflict environment, coming to terms
with the past is vital to building a peaceful future.
One way of doing so is by ensuring accountability for
past crimes. The landmark Karadžić ruling last month
brought some welcome closure to one of the darkest
chapters in post-war Europe. The verdict will never
erase the suffering of the victims and their families, but
it sent a powerful message to the world that perpetrators
of atrocities will be held accountable for their actions,
no matter how much time has elapsed.
Coming to terms with the past also means
refraining from actions that reopen old wounds and
deepen division. We recognize that others will be
deeply disappointed at the Šešelj verdict, but we
respect the independent judicial process and the judges’
decision. As the High Representative has made clear,
all parties and all peoples in Bosnia and Herzegovina
must do their utmost to advance reconciliation. In that
regard, just like the High Representative, we welcome
the fact that the Republika Srpska referendum on the
10/23

05/05/2016

State-level judiciary is off the table for now, though we
regret that the decision to hold the referendum has not
yet been formally withdrawn. Such challenges belong
in a bygone age.
The same can be said of the continuing impasse in
Mostar. For nearly eight years, the people of that city
have been denied their democratic right to elect their
local representatives, and no agreement has been reached
on changes to the law that would enable elections to
take place in October. With elections fast approaching,
the time has come to make a breakthrough. The people
of Mostar need to see positive leadership from all the
parties in order to reach agreement as soon as possible,
so that they can begin to look to the future. That is
true across the country. After years of inertia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina has a chance to look to the future, a
future in the European Union and NATO. To make that
a reality, all its leaders must now work together.
We welcome Bosnia and Herzegovina’s renewed
commitment to its EU path, as demonstrated by its
application for membership earlier this year. We support
the High Representative’s call to leaders to intensify
their efforts to advance reforms aimed at achieving
that goal. They will need to work quickly to solve two
issues in particular. The first is adapting Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s stabilization and association agreement
to take Croatia’s accession to the EU into account;
the second is establishing a functioning coordination
mechanism that will enable Bosnia and Herzegovina to
speak with one voice to the EU on accession matters.
We also believe that the population and housing census
should be finalized and its results published without
delay. We attach crucial importance to the census, not
only because of its relevance to the integration process
but also because of its instrumental role in economic
and social planning. That is particularly urgent in the
context of the reform agenda.
Ultimately, to seize the opportunity of the future,
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina need stability
and security. That means overcoming the threat posed
by terrorism, and the United Kingdom expresses its
condolences to the families of those who lost their
lives in the attack in Sarajevo in November. That attack
highlights the challenge facing the Bosnian authorities
in the fight against terrorism. We call on all those
with authority and in positions of leadership at all
levels to cooperate closely in order to prevent further
incidents. More broadly, it is clear that stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina is still not yet entrenched, and
16-12757

05/05/2016

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

we remain concerned about the political and security
situation. A serious breakdown in law and order
could be catastrophic. We therefore share the High
Representative’s assessment that the European Union
military mission, with an executive mandate, remains
vital. We will therefore support the retention of that
crucial asset when its mandate comes up for renewal
in November.
I would like to end with this reflection. After a week
spent discussing some of the world’s most intractable
conflicts in this Chamber, Bosnia and Herzegovina
should give us hope that there can be a better future
for those living in conflict today. But we cannot afford
to take our eye off the ball. Let me therefore close
by reiterating the United Kingdom’s commitment to
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s future stability and its future
membership of the European Union and NATO. We
stand ready to support progress towards those goals.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we would
like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his briefing.
Venezuela reaffirms its full support and respect
for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina and believes
that the international community must continue to
support the implementation of the 1995 General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a way to contribute to a peaceful
solution of the differences among the parties concerned.
In this context, the European Union-led multinational
stabilization force in Bosnia and Herzegovina has
carried out its work within the framework of the
mandate assigned to it, in cooperation with the
authorities, to ensure a safe environment for all the
ethnic communities in the country.
We reaffirm that it is incumbent on the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to carry out and lead the
efforts related to the future of their country, as part of
a process through which ethnic groups must genuinely
work through dialogue and with respect for the laws
and institutions of the country, peace, human rights,
cooperation and economic and social development.
The High Representative should therefore foster
constructive work as part of his primary responsibility
for promoting the civilian aspects of the Framework
Agreement. His efforts to move that work forward and
find common ground among the parties, commensurate

S/PV.7688

with the mandate that has been entrusted to him, must
ensure impartiality and transparency, as well as a
balanced and prudent approach in which the opinions
and views of all stakeholders are reflected.
The strengthening of relationships among Bosnia
and Herzegovina and its neighbours is a positive
development, which we welcome. In that regard,
we underscore in this process the ratification of the
border treaty between Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Montenegro, the high-level meetings with Croatian
authorities in the context of dialogue and negotiation,
and the positive visit to Srebrenica.
Moreover, Venezuela rejects terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, as well as the spread of
extremism. In that vein, we deplore the murder of two
members of the armed forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina
on 18 November 2015 in Rajlovac, near Sarajevo. We
also commend the steps that are being taken to avoid
the recruitment of foreign terrorist fighters to fight
in the armed conflicts besetting the Middle East.
Nonetheless, it is necessary to remain vigilant on this
issue, which is so crucial to peace and security in the
context of fluid international cooperation to confront
the scourge of terrorism.
With regard to violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law committed during the
armed conflict in the territories that belonged to the
former Yugoslavia, we once again publicly express our
support for the work of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, the body set up to try those
responsible for such atrocities. The criminal tribunals
have played a pivotal role in the strengthening of the
rule of law and the promotion of long-term stability
and reconciliation, and since their inception, they have
been a vital tool for tackling impunity and ensuring
that the perpetrators of the most serious international
crimes do not escape justice. They have also paved the
way for creating jurisprudence that serves as a source
of inspiration for all national and international courts
that are responsible or will be responsible for trying
individuals accused of those crimes.
In conclusion, we reiterate our call on all parties
to redouble their efforts to maintain their resolve and
political courage, to build confidence and to develop
their capacity to work together in the framework of
international law, which are key elements of a just
and lasting solution that redounds to the benefit of the
parties and the entire region.

16-1275711/23

S/PV.7688

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke
in Spanish): I want to thank the High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina for his briefing. We have
taken due note of it and of the content of his quarterly
report (S/2016/395, annex). I would like to reaffirm to
Mr. Valentin Inzko Spain’s support for his work and the
work of his Office.
As a State member of European Union, Spain
aligns itself fully with the statement to be delivered by
the observer of the European Union.
Twenty years have elapsed since the Dayton Peace
Agreement was signed, which gives us an opportunity
to evaluate the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
with a certain perspective in order to assess the success
stories and progress that has been made, as well as
the challenges that remain. We have taken note of the
High Representative’s assessment of the country’s
achievements in the last quarter towards compliance
with the five objectives and two conditions established
for the completion of his mandate and the closure
of his Office. We reiterate our appeal to all political
stakeholders in Bosnia and Herzegovina to redouble
their efforts and continue to progress towards the
achievement of all these objectives as soon as possible.
We very much welcome the positive role being
played by the European Union-led peacekeeping force
Operation Althea, which is supporting the authorities
in Bosnia and Herzegovina in maintaining security
and contributing to their training and capacitybuilding. In the current context, the mission remains
a necessary element in guaranteeing the country’s
stability. Moreover, we reiterate our full support for
the work of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and its Residual Mechanism. We hope that
their decisions and rulings will not be exploited along
partisan lines by certain groups for the purpose of
further exacerbating the tensions in the country.
Over the past six months, there has been a positive
political environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which,
at the international level, has led to greater dialogue and
cross-border cooperation with neighbouring countries,
as evidenced in the border treaty with Montenegro. On
the domestic level, this positive political environment
has led to concrete reforms that allow Bosnia and
Herzegovina to continue on its path towards full
integration with the European Union.
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s application for
membership to the European Union is a very positive
12/23

05/05/2016

sign and needs to be assessed on its own merit, since,
as I said, much remains to be done, such as continuing
to implement the mechanism of interinstitutional
coordination, adapting it to the Stabilization and
Association Agreement and carrying out the reform
agenda. We remain convinced that headway in all these
areas will have a positive impact and lead to concrete
improvements in the lives of all the citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and in the country’s socioeconomic
situation.
Among the pending issues that still need to be
resolved is the publication of the results of the 2013
census, which is key to ensuring the smooth political
functioning of the country. Of equal importance are the
situation of Mostar and the attitude of the Republika
Srpska authorities, as has been pointed out by the High
Representative, with regard to such problems as the
refusal to move ahead in registering State properties
located on its territory
We are concerned about the divisive rhetoric of
some political leaders and representatives, in particular
of the Republika Srpska, where they continue to wield
the threat of a referendum, which poses a real challenge
to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country
and jeopardizes the system established by the Dayton
Peace Accords. We must not lose sight of the fact that
the political stability of the entire region depends to a
large extent on the stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Spain continues wholeheartedly to support the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We also uphold the need for the political
leaders of the country to respect the rule of law and the
principle of equality in all their actions. That principle
is an indispensable element not only of peaceful
coexistence in the country, but also for constructive
and cooperative relations with neighbouring countries.
Respect for that principle is the only way that Bosnia
and Herzegovina can make headway in its European
integration process.
Ms. Schwalger (New Zealand): I thank High
Representative Inzko for his briefing.
Since the Council last discussed the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (see S/PV.7555), it has taken
the significant step of lodging an application for
membership in the European Union (EU). We wish
Bosnia and Herzegovina well as it pursues an ambitious
reform agenda, with a view to closer integration with
the EU. The reform process will undoubtedly encounter
16-12757

05/05/2016

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

challenges and give rise to difficult choices. But it
is clear that this programme of modernization will
enable all citizens to reap the benefit of economic
growth and strengthened institutions. The reforms
also aim to increase employment opportunities, which
is particularly important for youth, who are looking
to contribute to a vibrant and prosperous society. We
encourage the international community, especially
neighbours in the region and the EU, to support Bosnia
and Herzegovina in its reform process. With a reform
agenda laying out a path forward, it is time for all
political actors to look for ways to deliver it, and not to
step backwards into divisive politics that have impeded
socioeconomic progress for all of its citizens.
It is now over 20 years since the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina
brought an end to the bitter conflict in the region.
But, as we have seen in the Security Council over the
past year, the wounds of the past are yet to fully heal.
We urge renewed commitment by the parties and the
international community to engage on the issues left
unresolved by the Dayton Peace Agreement as they
continue the process of national reconciliation.
Divisive rhetoric and talk of referendims challenge
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity, as well as the Dayton Peace Agreement. That
does nothing to move the country forward, and instead
detracts from the reform agenda and undermines
reconciliation efforts. The reconciliation process
requires due consideration of past events and, where
appropriate, holding individuals to account. We hope
that everyone can learn to respect the conclusions
of independent judicial processes, whatever their
outcome. When court decisions are used as justification
for inflammatory language and provocative actions,
it simply sets reconciliation backwards. The process
of administering justice should instead be used as an
opportunity to move forward together. Not only should
judicial decisions be respected, the judiciary itself
should be able to operate freely with independence. We
reiterate the High Representative’s call for the judiciary
to be left to prosecute and rule on cases free from
political pressure, but fully in line with principles of
professionalism and accountability.
As we have heard today, in the reporting period
only limited progress was made on the objectives and
conditions necessary for the closure of the Office of
the High Representative. We hope that progress on that
track can accelerate. We welcome the ongoing work of

S/PV.7688

the EU-led multinational stabilization force in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which continues to play an important
role in supporting the local authorities in maintaining
a safe and secure environment. While the future of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is, as it should be, in the hands
of its citizens, the international community, including
the Council, has a responsibility to encourage and
support it.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his briefing
this morning.
It is crucial that we uphold the commitment to full
compliance with the provisions of the 1995 General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and ensure full compliance with all efforts
aimed at promoting peace and stability for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In that regard, Uruguay supports the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We also support the need to respect
the rule of law in all actions of political leaders in the
country.
We note with concern that the forty-ninth report
of the High Representative for Implementation of
the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina
(S/2016/395, annex) indicates that little progress has
been made in achieving the five objectives and two
conditions still pending, as established by the Steering
Board, that are required for the closure of the Office
of the High Representative — known as the 5+2
agenda. In that connection, we urge that the process
move forward under more favourable conditions in the
coming months so that the 5+2 agenda can be fully
implemented through compromise by all parties.
Uruguay rejects all terrorist attacks, such as took
place in Rajlovac, on the outskirts of Sarajevo, on
18 November 2015, which cost the lives of two soldiers
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are also concerned
about continuing incidents that risk undermining
inter-ethnic relations.
We also take note of positive developments. We
welcome the fact that the Ministry of Defence and the
Ministry for Foreign Trade and Economic Relations
oversaw the full implementation of their obligations
flowing from the Subregional Arms Control
Agreement, in line with article IV, annex 1-B of the
Dayton Peace Accord. We also welcome the fact that
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina has adopted

16-1275713/23

S/PV.7688

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

decisions on the destruction of certain munitions and
explosive devices that have been stored in military
facilities. We particularly highlight the ratification of
the border demarcation agreement between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Montenegro, especially as this is the
first such agreement to be ratified with a neighbouring
country. We hope that during 2016 Bosnia and
Herzegovina will continue along this course of positive
developments, thus generating trust in stability.
Uruguay believes that the presence of the European
Union-led peacekeeping force Operation Althea is a
guarantee for the political and security stability of the
country. It is essential that the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina continue to cooperate fully with the
Office of the High Representative until the end of his
mandate, commensurate with the requirements of the
Dayton Peace Agreement. Uruguay hopes to see a stable
Bosnia and Herzegovina in which all communities can
coexist peacefully and harmoniously.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): My country
welcomes your initiative, Mr. President, to organize
this debate on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and would like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the
outstanding quality of his report (S/2016/395, annex).
My delegation would also like to assure him of its full
support for the work that he and his Office are currently
undertaking on the ground.
More than 20 years after the signing of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bosnia and Herzegovina continues,
despite a number of persistent difficulties, on its path
towards reunification and the building of a solid nation.
My delegation would like to note some of the
progress made by the country, in particular in terms
of the implementation of the reforms approved by the
authorities, which have started to bear fruit and give
rise to new hope. I am referring, to mention just some of
that progress, to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s application
for European Union membership, the efforts of the
Bosnian authorities aimed at transferring to the State
assets and property designated as defence property, as
well as the adoption of labour legislation. Of course,
those efforts need to be consolidated.
However, that progress should not lead us to forget
the fragile nature of the situation in the country and the
region. There are still causes for concern. I would like
to refer to the difficulties that the authorities seem to
14/23

05/05/2016

face in certain areas, such as the publication of the 2013
census results, the European coordination mechanism,
the implementation of the decision of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitutional Court on Mostar, as well
as the follow-up to the requests of the International
Monetary Fund. Other causes for concern include the
decision made to hold a referendum, which clearly
jeopardizes the sovereignty and integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as the calls made by a number
of Republika Srpska officals for the secession of that
entity.
Other developments that threaten the sovereignty
and integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina have been
observed, including the ongoing questioning of the
authority of the judicial authorities of the State. The
refusal by the principal authorities of Republika Srpska
to implement the decision of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional Court regarding the unconstitutionality
of the provisions of the Republika Srpska law on
holidays is one of several examples of that.
For all of those reasons, my delegation would like to
reaffirm its commitment to respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as guaranteed by the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the country’s
Constitution and international law.
Turning now to another area, counter-terrorism
is one of the acute challenges facing Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in a context where complex migration
flows and the return of foreign terrorist fighters are
likely to generate additional risks for the security of
the country. It goes without saying that tangible results
will not be achieved in that fight without the necessary
strengthening, at all levels, of cooperation between the
authorities.
Senegal also welcomes the outstanding work carried
out by the European Union Special Representative in
the promotion and implementation of the reconstruction
programme, as well as the socioeconomic programmes
involving cooperation between the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Republika Srpska. Along
those same lines, my delegation welcomes the interest
shown by the European Union in continuing its military
operation through the multinational stabilization force
in Bosnia and Herzegovina with the support of the
Security Council, which authorized the extension of its
mandate by 12 months.
16-12757

05/05/2016

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Furthermore, as underscored in the report of the
High Representative, the presence in the country of the
European Union military mission with an executive
mandate remains crucial. Nevertheless, we believe
that the international community should continue
to support the efforts of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
develop greater resilience in the face of socioeconomic
challenges. What is at stake here is the strengthening of
the security and defence forces of the country, one of
the priorities of the mandate of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force (EUFOR). We encourage EUFOR
to continue its support, which in the long term will
enable the armed forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
fill a number of strategic and operational gaps.
In conclusion, I would like to encourage the
European Union to continue its reform programme
for the restoration of peace, social cohesion and State
authority in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I reaffirm
the unreserved support of Senegal for the work
accomplished by the High Representative.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to welcome Mr. Inzko, High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It is with a great deal of attention that we have
familiarized ourselves with Mr. Inzko’s report to the
Security Council (see S/2016/395, annex) and listened
to his briefing today. However, we must be candid.
The assessments that he made do not promote national
reconciliation in that long-suffering country. That is
quite unfortunate, as national reconciliation and the
promotion of a mutually respectful relationship among
the country’s peoples are today gaining key importance
given the challenges faced by Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Once again, we are forced to note that the High
Representative’s report is far from being objective
and balanced in nature. It merely notes that there are
problems in Bosnian society, without attempting to
understand their essence or the objective reasons for
which they have emerged. We hope that in the future the
High Representative will — to a greater extent — focus
on assessments of the implementation of his mandate
and the activity of the structure that was entrusted to
him during the reporting period, and that he will limit
himself strictly to the issues having to do with Dayton.
Moreover, we expect the High Representative
to bear in mind and be respectful of the views of all
of the peoples of that State. That is why we consider

S/PV.7688

inappropriate for him to present his views with regard to
his support for the activities of a number of specialized
bodies in Bosnia and Herzegovina dealing with the
fulfilment of the criteria required for the country
to launch the programme of action leading to NATO
membership. In pushing the NATO topic, Mr. Inzko
is acting counter to his basic task, which is to seek
unifying factors for the country. In fact, he is siding
with but a part of Bosnian society. As is well known,
there are other views in the country — ones that are far
from being in favour of NATO membership.
We also believe that the topic of reallocating defence
property is one that should be considered exclusively as
one of the conditions for winding down the mechanism
of the High Representative. It should be considered in an
unbiased way, as it is intrinsically linked to the broader
issue of civilian versus State property. He should — not
just in words, but in fact — promote inter-Bosnian
dialogue. That, after all, is the last open point on the
5+2 agenda. He should take more seriously the political
agreements that were reached back in 2012 among the
leaders of the country’s main parties.
That is also true of Euro-integration-related
aspects. It would seem that, although a decision was
made to split the two mandates in 2011, the High
Representative continues to combine his position with
that of the European Union Special Representative.
A great many here today referred to the problem of
Mostar. In that regard, it would seem that everyone
has simply forgotten that it was interference by one of
Mr. Inzko’s predecessors that led to the impasse around
the prospect of forming a multi-ethnic society in the
city.
It is important that the report refer to the growing
threat of Islamic extremism facing Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We are convinced that that is one of the
most serious problems and should, in the future, be
featured as one of the key elements in the reports of the
High Representative, whose task it is to fully promote
the efforts of the competent bodies and organs in Bosnia
and Herzegovina involved in combating terrorism, and
to promote their cooperation with partner agencies in
neighbouring countries and international agencies.
The problem of terrorism presents yet another
strong argument in favour of a unifying agenda. It
is necessary to focus on strengthening inter-agency
coordination for counter-terrorism purposes. Instead
of that, the High Representative continues to focus

16-1275715/23

S/PV.7688

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

on imaginary challenges to the Dayton Agreement,
in an unjustified way, laying almost all responsibility
for every problem in the stabilization process on the
Bosnian Serbs. His discussion of the recent verdict of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
with regard to Karadžić and Šešelj reveals a similar
approach. We believe that in that situation it would
have been good for the High Representative to distance
himself from his personal feelings, which would
undoubtedly help the members of the Security Council
to form an objective picture of the processes in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. In that respect, we urge our colleagues
in the Council, as we have done before, to familiarize
themselves carefully with the latest report of the
leadership of Republika Srpska on their implementation
of the Dayton Agreement, which includes a great deal
of useful information and constructive considerations
for making progress on a settlement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
We would like to especially emphasize the
undesirability of any interference by the High
Representative in discussions on the sensitive topic
of reforming the Constitutional Court in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Attempts by the High Representative
to preserve the current situation, where the last
word in that key body lies with foreign justices, are
counterproductive. It is important that the Bosnian
parties, without foreign interference and without
pressure or threats, be able to reach agreement on
new parameters for membership in the Constitutional
Court, alongside the agreements already achieved on
clarifying the modalities for the operation of the Court
and the Prosecutor’s Office, which would substantially
contribute to overcoming the palpable crisis of
confidence in the common Bosnian justice system.
Let us turn now to the positive. We believe that it
is useful to acknowledge the joint steps taken by the
leadership of Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina to
forge intergovernmental cooperation, including the
first joint session of the Government of Serbia and the
Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, held
in November 2015, as well the visit by the Head of the
Government of Serbia, Mr. Vučić, to the Investment
Development Conference in Srebrenica. The parties
are quite capable of coexisting if no one interferes, and
they can promote national reconciliation.
Mindful of all those factors, we are in favour of
a further reduction in the budget and personnel of the
Office of the High Representative, based on the fact
16/23

05/05/2016

that the path towards transferring responsibility for the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina to the Bosnians
themselves is by now well justified and must continue
to be appropriately reflected in the methods of action of
the international presence. The time for protectorates is
long gone. Under the current conditions, we consider
the use by High Representative of his extraordinary
authority under the “Bonn Powers” to be unacceptable.
There can be no alternative to inter-Bosnian dialogue,
free of external pressure. The creation of conditions
for advancing such dialogue and for the search by the
Bosnian parties of mutually acceptable options for
reforms based on the Dayton principles is the priority
task for the international community.
Consolidating Bosnia and Herzegovina and
ensuring the functionality of its central structures will
be successful only if they are the result of consensus
among the three constituent peoples. That, I believe, is
an axiom.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for
the Implementation of the Peace Agreement for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, for his comprehensive briefing on the
situation in that country. It was very encouraging to
hear from him that the martial art of karate serves as a
means of uniting the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
More than 20 years have passed since the brutal
war in Bosnia and Herzegovina came to an end. The
prosperity of Bosnia and Herzegovina is critical, not
only for its future but also for the peace and stability
of the Western Balkans region. Japan, as a member of
the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board, has
continuously supported the country’s reconstruction
and State-building efforts for two decades.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is now at an important
juncture. The country has made the transition from war
to peace, but the question is whether the country can
achieve lasting peace and a successful future. In that
regard, Japan is seriously concerned about the decision
of the National Assembly of Republika Srpska to hold
a referendum on secession. Such a referendum would
constitute a breach of the Dayton Agreement. It would
also undermine the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Although the President of
Republika Srpska stated publicly that the referendum
has been put aside, the National Assembly’s decision
has not been repealed. Furthermore, the President
has continued to make public statements referring to
16-12757

05/05/2016

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

S/PV.7688

the Republika Srpska’s independence. Japan urges all
political leaders to refrain from any divisive rhetoric.

threats to the political process as a whole. It may also
have a spillover effect on the entire Balkan region.

Japan warmly congratulates Bosnia and Herzegovina
on its application to join the European Union, which it
submitted in February. We hope that that will present
an opportunity for the country to make further progress
on the reforms needed for greater integration.

We therefore call on all political leaders to put
the common interests of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina above narrow ethnic and political
interests, which undermine opportunities for progress
and stability. In that regard, Egypt emphasizes the
importance of all parties respecting the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and national Constitution of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as all decisions taken by its
judicial authorities and the mechanisms of international
justice, and to prevent any negative impact on the
political process in Bosnia and Herzegovina or its
regional relations.

Before concluding, I would like to reassure the
Security Council of Japan’s strong support for High
Representative Inzko and his Office. In the light of
the importance of the role of the High Representative,
Japan has been underwriting 10 per cent of the entire
budget of his Office for 20 years. The visit of the High
Representative to Japan in January was appreciated
by the Japanese authorities. I wish Mr. Inzko every
success so that outstanding objectives and conditions
necessary for the closure of his Office can be achieved
at an early date.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Egypt.
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Valentin
Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
for his comprehensive briefing to the Security Council
on his recent report (S/2016/841, annex) on the
implementation of the Peace Agreement in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Egypt reiterates its full support for
Mr. Inzko’s efforts.
Twenty years after the signing of the Dayton Peace
Agreement, which brought to an end one of the most
brutal conflicts in the world, Bosnia and Herzegovina
continues to face a number of critical political challenges.
Egypt would like to express its concern that efforts to
deal with those challenges remain insufficiently backed
by a comprehensive consensus among the different
political stakeholders in the country. Egypt warns that
the failure to address those challenges may undermine
some of the achievements made at the political level
since the signing of the Dayton Agreement.
In that respect, Egypt stresses that the Dayton
Agreement will remain the cornerstone for efforts to
bring peace to the region, which is the sole basis for
stability in the country.
In that respect, Egypt stresses that the divisive
rhetoric and calls by some stakeholders and political
parties that have called for the secession of Republika
Srpska from Bosnia and Herzegovina constitute serious

Moreover, we cannot separate internal developments
in Bosnia and Herzegovina from the larger context of
the Balkan region as a whole. We therefore stress the
importance of building good-neighbourly relations,
mutual trust, positive and constructive dialogue, and
enhanced regional cooperation in order to establish
peace and stability in all countries of the region.
The economic challenges facing Bosnia and
Herzegovina require the international community
to mobilize its efforts to promote the achievement of
an economic leap forward that could contribute to
creating a domestic environment conducive to stability.
We stress once again the importance of regional
cooperation in attaining such progress, and call on the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to pursue their
efforts to overcome the political obstacles to economic
growth by enhancing the political participation of
all citizens without discrimination, encompassing
all national groups irrespective of their ethnic
background. We affirm Egypt’s full support for the
efforts of the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina
in fighting terrorism and its readiness to provide all
forms of assistance in countering extremist ideologies,
in particular violent, radical religious rhetoric, and in
correcting religious misconceptions.
In conclusion, we reiterate the importance, now
more than ever before, for all people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to strive to affirm the principles of social
coexistance and political agreement and to move ahead
on the path to peace. This enterprise must be undertaken
in parallel with genuine regional and international
support.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

16-1275717/23

S/PV.7688

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Mr. Vukašinović (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May, and to wish you and your
delegation every success. We welcome Mr. Valentin
lnzko, High Representative for Implementation of the
Peace Agrement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we
have taken note of his forty-ninth report (S/2016/395,
annex), covering the period from 22 October 2015 to
15 April 2016.
During the reporting period, Bosnia and
Herzegovina continued its steady work on implementing
its socioeconomic reforms. Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
authorities at all levels have coordinated their efforts
in ensuring that all concrete measures necessary
to successful reforms are put in place. There is a
common understanding that refining the legal and
fiscal framework and creating an environment more
attractive to investment is essential to economic growth
and creating new jobs.
Bosnia and Herzegovina successfully chaired the
Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe, the
largest and oldest European political organization,
comprising 47 member States. During our chairmanship,
we successfully accomplished all our priorities and
coordinated the response of the Council of Europe
to the refugee crisis at its peak. Furthermore, the
chairmanship of Bosnia and Herzegovina facilitated
the process of opening for signature the Additional
Protocol to the Council of Europe Convention for the
Prevention of Terrorism, which focuses on the problem
of the foreign fighters.
Following the significant progress made on the
implementation of the reform agenda, Bosnia and
Herzegovina submitted its application for membership
to the European Union on 15 February. The submission
of the application of Bosnia and Herzegovina was a
concrete result of the new approach of the European
Union towards Bosnia and Herzegovina. We thank
the European Union and its member States for their
strong support for Bosnia and Herzegovina’s European
perspective. On its part, Bosnia and Herzegovina will
continue to work to implement its reforms, improve
the economy, and strengthen the rule of law and good
governance.
18/23

05/05/2016

The economic and fiscal situation of the country has
been under influence of the global economic slowdown.
However, in the first three quarters of 2015 industrial
production increased by 2.5 per cent and the inflation
rate stood at 0.8 per cent, which means that consumer
prices fell slightly in comparison to the previous year.
The advancement of friendly and constructive
cooperation among the countries of the region in areas
of mutual interest is one of main priorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to
pay special attention to strengthening cooperation with
countries of the region. There is a common agreement
among Western Balkan States that collaboration in the
field of transportation and energy is the most important
area for economic growth.
The International Economic Fair Mostar 2016,
held from 12 to 16 April, , was a great opportunity to
further bolster regional cooperation. During that event,
members of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
held a number of bilateral meetings with regional
leaders and leaders of neighbouring States, including
the President of Croatia, the President of Montenegro,
the Prime Minster of Serbia, the President of Slovakia
and the Deputy Prime Minister of Turkey.
Bosnia and Herzegovina stands committed to fully
cooperating with the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, as well as to continue processing
war crimes before domestic courts. We reiterate that
fighting impunity at the local level is vital to Bosnia
and Herzegovina as a complex and multinational State.
In that regard, implementing the national strategy for
processing war crimes, regardless of the national or
religious origins of perpetrators or victims, is essential
to reconciliation and long-term stability.
Terrorism, radicalization and violent extremism
constitute one of the main security challenges at
the global, regional and national levels. Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in accordance with the provisions of its
amended penal code, continues to process individuals
involved in fighting on behalf of terrorist and
paramilitary organizations, as well as those facilitating
the recruitment of terrorist fighters.
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s judicial and security
institutions continue to implement our strategy for
preventing and combating terrorism. The strategy,
alongside security measures, includes preventive
activities for deradicalization undertaken by national
stakeholders, including religious communities,
16-12757

05/05/2016

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

educational institutions, civil society organizations
and media. We would also like to underline that
during the reporting period, Bosnia and Herzegovina
made significant progress in combating organized
crime, corruption and money-laundering. Bosnia and
Herzegovina, supported by the European Union, has
introduced a regional initiative on the prevention of
terrorism and the illicit arms trade. The main goal of
the initiative is to establish a database of individuals
who constitute a security threat, as well as a regional
network for the prevention of arms smuggling from the
countries of the Western Balkans.
It is evident that flows of refugees and migrants
through the Balkans will continue to pose significant
challenges to the States of the region and their
instituions. Thus far, Bosnia and Herzegovina has not
been under pressure from the significant movement of
migrants through its territory. Nevertheless, Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s institutions have undertaken a set of
comprehensive measures, including in the humanitarian
and security fields, in the event of a massive influx
of refugees. We believe that only extensive and
coordinated actions at the global level to address the
underlying causes of migration in countries of origin
can serve to bring about a satisfactory solution to the
migrant crisis.
Lastly, I wish to express the unwavering
commitment of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s authorities
to continue to work steadily towards building a better
future for its citizens. I would also like to thank our
international partners for their continued support to
Bosnia and Herzegovina, a country that has travelled a
long way from being a security consumer to becoming
a police and military contributor to United Nation
peacekeeping missions worldwide.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
candidate countries Montenegro and Albania, as well
as Ukraine, align themselves with this statement.
I join other speakers in welcoming High
Representative Valentin Inzko back to the Security
Council and in assuring him of the European Union’s
continued support. I also welcome the Permanent
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina and thank
him for his statement.

S/PV.7688

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has been
subject to discussion in the Council for more than
two decades. Over that period, we have witnessed
an important transformation in the nature of these
discussions, reflecting the strengthened stability and
progress in the areas of democracy, the rule of law
and socio-economic development in the country. The
Council has contributed greatly to the advancements
seen since the end of the armed conflict in 1995.
Today Bosnia and Herzegovina is actively
contributing to United Nations missions, gradually
transforming from the role of the security consumer
to that of security provider. The country held a seat
among the Council’s members and took its share
of responsibility for global peace and security. At
the same time, the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the Residual Mechanism for
International Criminal Tribunals, supported by the
local judicial authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and other countries of the region, are continuing to try
to bring the perpetrators of war crimes to justice, and
peace to their victims
The European perspective of Bosnia and Herzegovina
has been a central driver in overcoming challenges
on the ground and in mobilizing citizens and their
elected representatives behind the necessary political
and socioeconomic reforms. A great majority of the
country’s citizens strongly desire that Bosnia and
Herzegovina advance in its European aspirations. On
15 February, the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
submitted the country’s application for membership of
the European Union. The European Union welcomed
that as a broad and unequivocal expression of the
country’s commitment to continue its efforts along the
EU path. The application follows a further deepening
of the political dialogue with the European Union in
2015. That reaffirms the true and lasting commitment
and engagement of the European Union to Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Together with our international partners, including
the international financial institutions, the European
Union continues to invest in Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
reforms. Those joint efforts support domestic stability
and lay the foundation for future prosperity for all
citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which has been a
long-shared goal of the European Union and that of the
Council.

16-1275719/23

S/PV.7688

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Bosnia and Herzegovina’s authorities, with the
support of the European Union and its international
partners, have developed, agreed and are implementing
the most comprehensive package of socioeconomic
reforms that the country has seen in its recent history.
Those efforts require a serious commitment and a
readiness to make difficult political decisions in
overcoming the long legacy of underinvestment, lack
of structural reforms and burdensome administrative
difficulties. Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to
re-energize its economy and make it more competitive.
Meaningful progress in that regard is needed and will
enable the Council of the European Union to decide on
the next steps along Bosnia and Herzegovina’s EU path.
The overall positive momentum on the ground,
however, continues to face important challenges flowing
from the persisting political divisions and inefficient
administrative and decision-making structures. In
anticipation of the municipal elections to be held in
October, we call for avoiding divisive agendas and
rhetoric, as that might weaken the positive momentum
and introduce inefficiency in decision-making at a time
when the country needs to mobilize all its resources
behind reforms.
Particular concerns have been raised by the
intentions of the leadership of Republika Srpska to
hold various referendums. Such political initiatives
distract attention from the mounting socioeconomic
difficulties, blurring the responsibility of the local
authorities, and have strong potential to undermine the
stability. Citizens will see through those actions, and
their elected representatives, whom they entrusted to
address those issues, will be held accountable. I would
like to take this opportunity to encourage all parties
involved to reach an agreement as soon as possible on
how to implement the electoral requirements to allow
for elections in Mostar in October.
Reconciliation needs to advance broadly among the
citizens and the political leadership representing their
interests. To succeed, the country needs to move forward
united. The European Union reiterates its unequivocal
commitment to the territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a sovereign and united country, as
well as to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s European Union
prospect.
The European Union will continue to use all available
instruments to support Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
stability and progress. The overall security situation
20/23

05/05/2016

has remained relatively calm and stable, yet stability
has not been fully entrenched. In that regard, the
European Union confirms its decision to maintain its
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including through
the executive mandate of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force Operation Althea, while focusing
on capacity-building and training.
As the country’s stability continues to strengthen
and further progress is achieved in reforms and on the
EU path, the European Union will be looking forward
to continuing the discussion with the international
community on the reconfiguration of the international
presence. We will do so in the appropriate forum. In
that regard, the European Union calls on the authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to meet the outstanding
objectives and the conditions for the closure of the
Office of the High Representative.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has made notable progress
since the last discussion in the Council (see S/P.7555). Its
European perspective drives the reforms in the country
and contributes to overall stability and development.
Political divisions remain, including across ethnic
lines, and require continued focus and efforts by the
international community, using appropriate tools. The
European Union looks forward to the continued support
of the Council in its role in guiding and assisting
Bosnia and Herzegovina towards peace, stability and
prosperity for all its citizens.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Let me start by joining
other speakers in welcoming High Representative
Valentin Inzko. I would also like to express our
appreciation for his briefing and for his comprehensive
report (S/2016/395, annex), as well as for his hard work
and dedication in carrying out his important mandate.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement just
delivered by the observer of the European Union (EU).
I would like to make several remarks in my national
capacity.
Croatia regularly participates in the Security
Council’s semi-annual debates on Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We do so not only for the obvious and
self-explanatory reasons — that we are a neighbouring
country and a friend of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Equally important reasons for our engagement include
the fact that Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina are one
16-12757

05/05/2016

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

of the three constituent peoples and that Croatia, as a
signatory to the Dayton Peace Agreement, has a special
responsibility towards Bosnia and Herzegovina. For
all those reasons, the importance Croatia attaches to
the territorial integrity, stability and functionality of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is of the highest degree.
We have stated on many occasions, and we shall
repeat it today: Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important
European country that deserves a secure and prosperous
future, and, Croatia, being the only member State that
directly borders Bosnia and Herzegovina, stands ready
to render it our full support and assistance.
The new Croatian Government is fully committed
to continuing to provide Croatia’s strong support to
Bosnia and Herzegovina. This is clearly demonstrated
by the fact that Bosnia and Herzegovina was the first
country that the new Croatian Minister for Foreign
and European Affairs, Mr Miro Kovač, visited after
coming into office in January. Also, a joint session
of the Government of the Republic of Croatia and
the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina
is planned to take place in the near future in order to
further strengthen our cooperation and relations.
As we discuss today developments in the reporting
period, I wish to address three points that are of
particular importance to us: European integration;
the territorial integrity, stability and functionality of
Bosnia and Herzegovina as a sovereign and united
country; and accountability and reconciliation.
On the first point, Croatia has been a strong
supporter of the Euro-Atlantic integration of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Therefore, we welcome fully and strongly
support Bosnia and Herzegovina’s submission of its EU
membership application in February. There is no doubt
that the European integration process is creating an
atmosphere conducive to the internal consolidation and
modernization of the country.
The new EU approach has so far proven effective
and is yielding results. It has helped inject new energy
into the country’s reform process and EU path. The focus
on the reform agenda, in particular positive efforts to
advance economic and social reforms, has enabled the
country to emerge from its deep stagnation. Croatia will
continue to advocate for a strong and permanent focus
on Bosnia and Herzegovina at the EU level and beyond.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at an important crossroads
now and its political leadership should spare no effort
to seize this positive momentum to move forward and

S/PV.7688

implement much-needed reforms aimed at improving
the socioeconomic situation and ensuring the overall
prosperity of all its citizens.
Secondly, the territorial integrity, stability and
functionality of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a sovereign
and unified country are of paramount importance to
Croatia. This is also a fundamental prerequisite for the
stability and prosperity of all of South-East Europe and
the entire European continent. The specific and complex
political system rooted in the Dayton Peace Agreement
is in many aspects based on ethnic representation,
which should rest on genuine equality among the three
constituent peoples. This equality is the key element for
achieving the stability and functionality of the country.
We are therefore deeply concerned about continued
secessionist rhetoric, ideas and actions coming from
Republika Srpska. This is unacceptable and highly
disruptive for the reform agenda and the overall stability
and progress of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The country’s
future must not be held hostage by a single entity.
We note that decision of the members of the National
Assembly of the Republika Srpska to call a referendum
on the authority of the High Representative, the Court
and the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina
was not acted upon, but we regret that this decision of
June 2015 has not yet been repealed. We are afraid that
the Republika Srpska’s political leadership may once
again pursue divisive agendas in the context of the
October municipal elections. This highly controversial
decision has had a detrimental effect to the sovereignty
and integrity of the state of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It
violates the Dayton Peace Agreement and has a strong
potential to undermine the stability of the country and
the wider region. We must not be silent about it; on the
contrary, such conduct should be condemned in clear
and definite terms.
Thirdly, with regard to accountability and
reconciliation, in late March the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia delivered the long-awaited
verdict in the case against Radovan Karadžić. The
Tribunal found him guilty of genocide, crimes against
humanity and violations of the laws or customs of war
committed by the Serb forces during the armed conflict
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The verdict came 20 years
after the war, during which unspeakable atrocities,
such as the genocide in Srebrenica, were committed.
Although Karadžić was sentenced to 40 years of
imprisonment, for the victims and their families it
will take much more than this verdict to heal the

16-1275721/23

S/PV.7688

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

wounds. Much more will be needed to achieve genuine
reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and beyond.
For that, not only the criminal has to be put behind the
bars, but also his genocidal and criminal policy.
We sincerely hope that more than 20 years after the
war and its horrors, Bosnia and Herzegovina is firmly
on the path towards a better, more prosperous, secure
and stable future. We firmly believe that this future for
Bosnia and Herzegovina lies within the community of
the European Union and NATO States. We are looking
towards the days when the biggest stories coming
from Bosnia and Herzegovina will not be about war
crimes and suffering, or about irresponsible politicians
threatening the very existence of the country they are
supposed to serve, but stories like the one I would
like to conclude my statement with — a story about a
bike trail.
Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina have launched
a joint project, funded by the EU, on the revitalization
of an old railway route — a 200-kilometre railway track
linking Dubrovnik, on the Croatian coastline, with the
mountainous hinterland of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
This historic route, which navigates through a very
beautiful landscape, will be turned into a long-distance
cycling track, thereby earning tourist income for the
local populations on both sides of the border. This is
where our joint future lies — in things and endeavours
that connect us, together with our joint European destiny.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Serbia.
Mr. Milanović (Serbia): First of all, allow me to
wish Egypt a very successful presidency and to thank
you, Sir, for convening this meeting. I willl High
Representative Inzko back to the United Nations. Since
I am speaking last, I thank all previous speakers for
their statements.
The Republic of Serbia is firmly committed to
promoting comprehensive bilateral relations with its
neighbours and invests continuous efforts in creating
conditions for a new kind and quality of relations in the
Western Balkans and South-East Europe. As a next-door
neighbour, Bosnia and Herzegovina is the key partner
of my country in the pursuit of this important goal. The
possibilities, as well as the need and interests, are there;
what we need to do, however, is to mobilize additional
resources and renew our energies to bring about a better
future for all our peoples. The Government of Serbia
and Prime Minister Vučić in particular, have launched
22/23

05/05/2016

a number of initiatives recently, making important
breakthroughs in cooperation with partners from
Bosnia and Herzegovina and bringing us ever closer
to the common goal of each and every responsible
government in the region — reconciliation, mutual
trust, faster economic development and European
Union (EU) integration.
More than 20 years have elapsed since the signing
of the Dayton Peace Agreement, which put an end
to the killing and devastation wrought by a tragic
conflict and brought peace to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Agreement, which is in its third decade of
implementation, was an important stepping stone in the
process of reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the entire region. It provided a basis for restoring
trust among its constituent peoples and entities, which
is crucially important for the country’s future at this
point in time as well. And although it is always possible
to do more, significant results have been achieved in
the consolidation of society, economic development
and the cooperation of Bosnia and Herzegovina with
its neighbours and in its integration efforts, which, not
unlike elsewhere in the region, are expected to have a
catalytic effect on its road to full EU membership.
As a guarantor of the Dayton Agreement, Serbia
has made every effort to be the best possible neighbour
to Bosnia and Herzegovina; after all, relations between
the two countries have a ripple effect on the entire
region. Abiding strictly by the provisions of the
Dayton Agreement, my country is firmly committed
to preserving the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, for it is only in conditions
of full stability that Bosnia and Herzegovina can be a
neighbour whose pace of development will continue
to rise and constituent peoples will enjoy a better
quality of life tomorrow than they do today. We believe
that, as the homeland of many Serbs as well, Bosnia
and Herzegovina stands at the cusp of a better future,
that its regional integration will tighten and that its
infrastructure, its economy and effective administration
will continue to develop as it progresses along the road
to European integration.
Dialogue and agreements among the two entities
and the three constituent peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina stand out as the most important values and
achievements of more than two decades of the Dayton
Peace Agreement. Aimed at reaching consensus, they
are the only proper and effective instruments for
addressing the issues relevant for the present and future
16-12757

05/05/2016

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Always at a premium,
dialogues are particularly important in times of reform
when we seek to fulfil the criteria and reach the standards
in the process of European integrations, as they help us
bridge the differences that sometimes shape our vies
and positions. Proceeding from its own experience and
the experiences of others, my country is convinced that
Bosnia and Herzegovina and its political actors have the
will and energy to achieve, through mutual agreements,
solutions that will benefit and be acceptable to all. Such
agreements and their implementation will help improve
the understanding and trust among the Serbs, Bosniacs
and Croats and energize and provide additional impetus
to the European integration and reform processes.
We have been witness to a number of divergent
views and opinions in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
past period. Serbia considers them to be internal issues,
best addressed by agreements among its political actors
within the existing legal system of the country, in an
atmosphere of constructiveness and mutual respect.
My country has initiated a number of political
dialogues at the highest level, aimed at promoting
the development of a wide range of bilateral relations
with Bosnia and Herzegovina. A joint session was held
between the Government and Serbia and the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina in Sarajevo
last November. Serbian Prime Minister Aleksandar
Vučić took part in the Business Investment Forum at
Srebrenica on 11 November 2015, and the Government
of Serbia allocated sizeable financial resources, in the
overall amount of €5 million, to help carry out the
projects important for the town of Srebrenica and the
surrounding area. In view of the tragic events that took
place at Srebrenica and the suffering of that and many
other towns and villages in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
my country believes that partnership aimed at reaching
reconciliation and creating a better future is the best
platform for the promotion of good-neighbourly
relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina. On 12 April,
Prime Minister Vučić visited Mostar for the opening
of the Mostar Economic Fair, where he met all the
members of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Republic of Serbia is ready to continue to
work not only on maintaining but also on promoting

S/PV.7688

the achievements made in cooperation with the central
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which it
considers an important link in the quest to bring about a
stable and prosperous Western Balkans and South-East
Europe. Proceeding from the provisions of the Dayton
Agreement, Serbia is also committed to furthering
transparent relations with the Republic of Srpska and
to cooperating and expanding cooperatibn with the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Recently, Bosnia and Herzegovina submitted an
official request for admission to the European Union.
Serbia welcomes that step and expresses its readiness
to share its experience from the negotiation process.
Bilateral European Union integration consultations with
Bosnia and Herzegovina were held at the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia last February.
On that occasion, the interlocutors from Bosnia and
Herzegovina were handed a copy of Serbia’s replies
to the questionnaire of the European Commission,
which we hope will help Bosnia and Herzegovina in
its next step on its own road to Europe. Although the
two sides may be at different stages of the process,
they actively support one another and exchange views
and experiences, for which the memorandum of
understanding provides a convenient framework.
It is in my country’s ongoing interest to promote
economic cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In that context, we are pleased to note that the level of
the cooperation and the scope of trade are increasing
year in, year out. In 2015, trade exchange amounted
to €1.441 billion and, with about €900 million in
investments, Serbia is one of the largest investors in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, including in the areas of
infrastructure, energy and joint ventures.
Serbia is firmly committed to promoting reconciliation
and working towards a better future for all peoples of
the region. Relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina, my
country’s first neighbour, its stability and prosperity
are of paramount importance. We are ready to intensify
our contacts and cooperation and to invest additional
efforts in pursuit of peace, security and a better future,
to which all peoples of the region are entitled and which
they well deserve.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

16-1275723/23
