S/2011/200

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 March 2011
Original: English

Letter dated 28 March 2011 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey a letter dated 25 March 2011 from the President of
the Commission of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
Mr. James Victor Gbeho, requesting the transmission of the resolution of the
Authority of Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS on the situation in Côte
d’Ivoire, dated 24 March 2011 (see annex).
I would be grateful if you could bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

11-28246 (E) 310311

*1128246*

S/2011/200

Annex to the letter dated 28 March 2011 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security Council
Letter dated 25 March 2011 from the President of the Commission
of the Economic Community of West African States addressed to
the Secretary-General
Request for further United Nations action on the situation in Côte d’Ivoire
In line with our mutual preoccupation with the rapidly deteriorating political
and security situation in Côte d’Ivoire, the Authority of Heads of State and
Government of the Member States of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) devoted much attention to the subject at its 39th Ordinary
Summit, held in Abuja on 23 and 24 March 2011.
The Authority reasoned that, despite numerous mediation efforts, the outgoing
President, Mr. Laurent Gbagbo, has persistently refused to abide by the decisions of
ECOWAS, the African Union and the United Nations requesting him to cede the
reins of power to Mr. Alassane Ouattara, the universally acclaimed winner of the
28 November 2010 presidential run-off election. As a consequence, the Authority
decided that the time has come to enforce its decision of 24 December 2010 to use
all necessary measures, including the use of legitimate force, to ensure the transfer
of power.
To this end, the Authority took a number of decisions, among which was a
request to the Security Council on the following measures:
• Authorize the immediate implementation of the ECOWAS Authority decisions
of 7 and 24 December 2010
• Strengthen the mandate of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
(UNOCI) to enable it to use all necessary means to protect life and property,
and to facilitate the immediate transfer of power to Mr. Ouattara
• Adopt more stringent international sanctions against Mr. Gbagbo and his
associates
• Request the international community to ensure an enabling environment in
Côte d’Ivoire for the population and UNOCI to go about their duties without
any hindrance.
In view of the urgency of the matter, I would be most grateful if the request of
the ECOWAS Authority could be brought to the attention of the Security Council at
the briefing on Côte d’Ivoire scheduled for today, 25 March 2011.
A copy of the Authority’s resolution on Côte d’Ivoire (A/RES.1/03/11) is
attached for your kind attention.
(Signed) James Victor Gbeho
President of the Commission

2

11-28246

S/2011/200

Enclosure
[Original: English and French]

Resolution A/RES.1/03/11 of the Authority of Heads of State and
Government of ECOWAS on the situation in Côte d’Ivoire
The Authority of the ECOWAS Heads of State and Government, meeting in
Abuja from 23 to 24 March 2011 at its 39th Ordinary Summit;
Having exhaustively reviewed the rapidly deteriorating political, security and
humanitarian situation in Côte d’Ivoire provoked by the disputed run-off
presidential election of 28 November 2010;
Firmly condemning the wanton violence against civilians leading to
unacceptable loss of life and property;
Deploring the deliberate targeting of innocent Ivorians, ECOWAS citizens and
other foreigners, and also the attacks on personnel of the United Nations Mission in
Côte d’Ivoire;
Deeply concerned by the large waves of refugees fleeing across borders and
the swelling colonies of internally displaced persons;
Convinced that the current situation is a direct consequence of the refusal of
the outgoing President, Mr. Laurent Gbagbo, to cede power to Mr. Alassane
Ouattara, the universally recognized winner of the 28 November 2010 election;
Recognizing that the crisis in Côte d’Ivoire has now become a regional
humanitarian emergency;
Recalling the Decisions of the Extraordinary Summits of the Authority of
7 and 24 December 2010, particularly regarding paragraph 10 of the latter, which
states: “In the event that Mr. Gbagbo fails to heed (the) immutable demand of
ECOWAS (to hand over power), the Community would be left with no alternative
but to take other measures, including the use of legitimate force, to achieve the
goals of the Ivorian people”;
Bearing in mind that these Decisions have been endorsed by the African Union
and the United Nations;
Firmly decides that the time has come to enforce its Decisions of 7 and
24 December 2010 in order to protect life and to ensure the transfer of the reins of
power to Mr. Alassane Ouattara without any further delay;
To this end, requests the United Nations Security Council to authorize the
immediate implementation of the Authority Decisions of December 2010;
In this context, requests the United Nations Security Council to strengthen the
mandate of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI), enabling the
Mission to use all necessary means to protect life and property, and to facilitate the
immediate transfer of power to Mr. Alassane Ouattara;
Also requests the United Nations Security Council to adopt more stringent
international targeted sanctions against Mr. Laurent Gbagbo and his associates;

11-28246

3

S/2011/200

Directs the President of the ECOWAS Commission to explore all avenues of
providing the Government of Mr. Alassane Ouattara all the necessary legal and
diplomatic means to exercise its authority, including admitting the Government to
all meetings of ECOWAS;
Urges all Member States of ECOWAS to facilitate the accreditation of
Ambassadors and other representatives of Mr. Alassane Ouattara to their countries;
Further directs the President of the ECOWAS Commission to intensify
contingency plans to meet all eventualities, including the provision of humanitarian
corridors and the protection of civilians;
Instructs the President of the ECOWAS Commission to take all appropriate
measures to strengthen the ECOWAS presence in Côte d’Ivoire to facilitate the
discharge of the responsibilities of the Community;
Urges the United Nations to request the international community to ensure an
enabling environment for the population and the United Nations Mission to go about
their duties without any hindrance, and provide protection and welfare to the
refugees and internally displaced persons generated by the crisis;
Finally, invites the African Union Commission to urgently implement the
Decisions of the African Union Peace and Security Council of 10 March 2011 on
Côte d’Ivoire by despatching without delay the High Representative to the country
and establishing the joint African Union-ECOWAS facilitation team to ensure the
immediate transfer of power to Mr. Alassane Ouattara.
The Authority decides to remain seized with the situation in Côte d’Ivoire.
Done at Abuja, this 24th Day of March 2011
(Signed) Goodluck Ebele Jonathan
Chairman
For The Authority

4

11-28246
