S/2016/1093

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 December 2016
Original: English

Letter dated 21 December 2016 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
It is my honour to transmit to you a detailed summary of the report of the
United Nations Headquarters Board of Inquiry that I established to review and
investigate the 19 September 2016 incident involving a United Nations -Syrian Arab
Red Crescent humanitarian convoy in Urum al-Kubra (Big Orem), near the city of
Aleppo, Syrian Arab Republic (see annex). As widely reported at the time, the
convoy was delivering humanitarian assistance to a Syrian Arab Red Crescent
compound for distribution to some 78,000 persons in the area when it came under
fire, resulting in the death of at least 10 persons and the injury of at least
22 persons, and the destruction of vehicles and property.
The United Nations has a responsibility to determine to the best of its ability
the facts and circumstances of incidents in which its personnel are injured or killed,
or in which its assets are damaged or lost. It also investigates incidents that
negatively affect its operations or activities. Furthermore, in this case, there
appeared to be the possibility that a United Nations operation might have been
deliberately targeted in a sustained attack. Therefore, in my capacity as the chief
administrative officer of the Organization, I decided to establish a Board of Inquiry
to investigate the incident.
The Board of Inquiry was established on 21 October 2016 and included
experts in the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic, humanitarian operations,
international law, weapons systems and munitions. It was headed by Lieutenant General (retired) Abhijit Guha. The first meeting of the Board was held in New
York, on 31 October 2016. It conducted field visits from 10 to 25 November, on
1 December and from 5 to 9 December 2016. The Board was only able to conduct
field visits in the Syrian Arab Republic from 5 to 9 December, given that the
issuance of visas by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic was only
confirmed on 28 November. It was not permitted to visit the scene of the incident in
Urum al-Kubra, as the Government had indicated that it was unable to ensure the
safety of the Board members, given the ongoing military operations at that location.
The Board submitted its report to me, through the Deputy Secretary -General,
on 16 December 2016.
As with all United Nations boards of inquiry, the Board’s r eport is an internal
document and is not for public release. It contains information that was shared with
the Board in strict confidence. It also contains information, the disclosure of which

16-22709 (E)

231216

*1622709*

S/2016/1093

could prejudice the security or proper conduct of the Organizati on’s operations or
activities. I am aware, however, that my decision to establish the Board of Inquiry
has given rise to considerable interest. I have accordingly decided to release a
summary of the Board’s report, which is contained in the annex to the pr esent letter.
I would emphasize that this is the Secretariat’s summary of the Board’s report and
that it has not been prepared or approved by the Board.
The attack in Urum al-Kubra on 19 September was yet another horrific
episode of the tragedy in the Syrian Arab Republic. The Board concluded that the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent compound in Urum al-Kubra was subject to an attack
from the air by more than one aircraft and aircraft type. The Board noted that only
aircraft operating as part of the forces of the international coalition forces and
aircraft of the Russian Federation and of the Syrian Arab Air Force had the
capabilities needed to carry out an attack of this kind. Given that no party had
alleged the involvement of aircraft of the international coaliti on forces, the Board
concluded that their involvement was highly unlikely.
The Board indicated that it had received reports that information existed to the
effect that the Syrian Arab Air Force was highly likely to have perpetrated the
attack. It did not have access to raw data that would have enabled it to reach a
definitive conclusion on who carried out the attack. The Board also indicated that it
did not have evidence to conclude that the incident was a deliberate attack on a
humanitarian target.
We, and in particular the parties involved in the conflict, owe it to the
courageous humanitarian workers who risk their lives every day to help those who
are most in need in the midst of conflict to shed all possible light on what occurred
on that fateful day in September and to ensure that anyone guilty of wrongdoing is
held responsible.
It is of fundamental importance that humanitarian personnel and relief supplies
are respected and protected in times of armed conflict. In that regard, I appeal to all
parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic to do everything possible and to
take all possible precautions to ensure that their military operations do not kill or
injure humanitarian workers or damage or destroy humanitarian supplies.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

2/9

16-22709

S/2016/1093

Annex
Summary by the Secretary-General of the report of the
United Nations Headquarters Board of Inquiry into the incident
involving a relief operation to Urum al-Kubra, Syrian Arab
Republic, on 19 September 2016
1.
On 21 October 2016, I convened a United Nations Headquarters Board of
Inquiry to review and investigate the incident that occurred in Urum al -Kubra
(Big Orem), Syrian Arab Republic, on 19 September, which involved a relief
operation conducted jointly by the United Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
and which resulted in the death of and injuries to personnel of the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent and other persons, as well as damage to objects used for the relief
operation.
2.
I appointed as head of the Board of Inquiry Lieutenant -General (retired)
Abhijit Guha, a former military adviser in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and member of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations.
The other Board members were Catherine Bragg, former Assistant Secretary General for Humanitarian Affairs; Khawla Mattar, the Deputy Executive Secretary
of the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia and former Director of
the Damascus Office of my Special Envoy for Syria; Leila Benkirane, former Chef
de Cabinet at the United Nations Office at Geneva and former legal officer in the
Office of Legal Affairs; and Jeremy Smith, a weapons specialist.
3.
The Board held meetings in New York, Geneva, London, Ankara and
Washington, D.C., in which it met with representatives of France, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), the Russian Federation, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America.
The Board submitted to those States a standardized request for information on the
military-related elements of the inquiry, such as air and ground operations in the
vicinity of Urum al-Kubra at and around the time of the incident, and the civilmilitary coordination of the convoy, including measures taken to prevent or reduce
the risk of attacks on humanitarian assets.
4.
The Board was only able to conduct field visits in the Syrian Arab Republic
from 5 to 9 December 2016, given that the issuance of visas by the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic was only confirmed on 28 November 2016. The Board
travelled to Damascus, where it met with representatives of the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic, including the High Relief Committee, Syrian Arab Red
Crescent Damascus and the United Nations country team. At the Embassy of the
Russian Federation in Damascus, the Board also met with military officers from the
Russian military airbase in Humaymim. In west Aleppo city, the Board met the
Governor of Aleppo, members of the local relief committee and the commanding
general of the Russian Reconciliation Centre in Humaymim. The Board also
interviewed primary witnesses in west Aleppo. The Board was not permitted to visit
the scene of the incident in Urum al-Kubra, as the Government had indicated that it
was unable to ensure the safety of the Board members, given the ongoing military
operations at that location. In that regard, the Board noted that, by then, 11 weeks
had elapsed since the date of the incident, and at that point damaged vehicles had

16-22709

3/9

S/2016/1093

been removed and some destroyed structures had been repaired or rebuilt.
Subsequent actions had therefore adversely affected the integrity of the site of the
incident and, consequently, the availability of physical evidence. A visit to the site
therefore might not have yielded commensurate results. The Board accordingly
developed alternative methods of evidence collection.
5.
The Board met with the members of the High Negotiations Committee of the
Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition Forces and the National Coalition of Syrian
Revolutionary and Opposition Forces. The Board also met with representatives of
armed opposition groups. It interviewed primary witnesses (eye witnesses) in
Gaziantep and Reyhanli, Turkey.
6.
The Board also collaborated with the Operational Satellite Applications
Programme of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research, which
provided technical capabilities to analyse satellite imagery and ground ph otography.
7.
The Board used the following materials and methods to arrive at its findings:
(a) satellite images; (b) over 370 photographs and videos; (c) interviews conducted
by the Board of 16 persons who were either eye witnesses to the incident or who
were in the vicinity of Urum al-Kubra on the evening of 19 September 2016;
(d) interviews conducted by the Board of 19 secondary witnesses, including United
Nations personnel and representatives of armed opposition groups; (e) information
from Member States, including information on their air assets; (f) air tracks
provided by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic; (g) an oral briefing by the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic regarding their national investigation into
the incident, which was ongoing, together with copies of autopsy reports;
(h) information from the Syrian Arab Red Crescent; (i) documents from the United
Nations country team; and (j) open-source information.
8.
The Board declined to accept physical evidence, such as munitions remn ants
that were alleged to be from the site of the incident, given that the chain of custody
for the items could not be established.
9.
The Board placed great emphasis on evaluating each piece of data for the
reliability of the source and credibility of the information. The Board’s findings
were based on information and evidence that was corroborated by more than one
source. Materials received from Member States were used solely to corroborate
material collected by the Board or to gain a better understanding of the situation on
the ground. The Board did not base any of its findings solely on information
provided by only one Member State.
Urum al-Kubra
10. The town of Urum al-Kubra is located approximately 15 kilometres west of
Aleppo city. Its population was approximately 6,700 persons at the time of the
incident. Residents considered Urum al-Kubra to be relatively safe in the context of
the wider area and the Syrian conflict.
11. The Syrian Arab Red Crescent compound, the site of the incident, is located
approximately 1.5 kilometres east of the town of Urum al -Kubra. It consists of
mixed light industry and dwellings. The compound is located alongside highw ay 60,
the primary road between Aleppo and Idlib. Highway 60 was one of the two primary
lines of communication, the other being the M5 highway, which runs south to

4/9

16-22709

S/2016/1093

Hamah and Homs, that could be used by armed opposition groups to move military
materiel, equipment and personnel to front-line areas in Aleppo.
12. The Syrian Arab Red Crescent compound was well known as the main
warehouse in the area and had been used consistently for the delivery and storage of
humanitarian aid for distribution to Urum al-Kubra and other areas in the Atarib
district. The last United Nations-Syrian Arab Red Crescent-International Committee
of the Red Cross humanitarian operation to the area before the incident had taken
place on 21 July 2016, when aid was delivered for some 50,000 beneficiaries.
13. On the date of the incident, Urum al-Kubra was under the control of armed
opposition groups, with Jaysh al-Mujahidin being the predominant group in the
area. The Board was informed that other groups, including Nur al -Din al-Zanki, also
had a presence there. In addition, the Board received reports of a Jabhat al -Nusra
presence in the area.
Convoy
14. Requests to deliver humanitarian aid to Urum al-Kubra from Governmentcontrolled areas were consistently included in monthly request s to the Government.
In the case of the convoy concerned, a request to deliver humanitarian aid to Urum
al-Kubra was included in the inter-agency plan for the month of September that was
submitted by the United Nations to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Syrian
Arab Republic. The intention was to bring items from Government -controlled west
Aleppo, where the United Nations country team had its offices and supplies, to the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent compound in Urum al-Kubra, from where it would be
distributed to 78,000 beneficiaries in Urum al-Kubra and its surroundings; the aid
was to be contributed by the International Organization for Migration, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Population
Fund, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the World Food Programme and the
World Health Organization; and the operation was to be coordinated by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. The original intention was that the
International Committee of the Red Cross would also participate, but it informed the
United Nations shortly before 19 September 2016 that it could no longer take part,
given that it did not have sufficient stocks in Aleppo.
15. Based on the initial approval for the convoy, as communicat ed by the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs, contracts were entered into with two commercial entities to
transport the supplies. The United Nations, in consultation with the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent, then informed the Governor of Aleppo and the Ministry of Forei gn Affairs
of the implementation dates regarding the convoy. After approval of the dates, the
Aleppo Security Committee of the Office of the Governor monitored the loading of
the trucks from its commencement until its completion. The trucks were then seale d
in the presence of the members of the Aleppo Security Committee. The Governor
issued facilitation letters for the convoy to pass through Government -controlled
checkpoints after the loading was completed. This was done just after midnight on
19 September 2016.
16. In areas under the control of armed opposition groups, the relevant branch of
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent was responsible for obtaining assurances of safe
passage for convoys from the armed opposition groups concerned and making the
necessary arrangements with them. On 18 September 2016, the Syrian Arab Red

16-22709

5/9

S/2016/1093

Crescent Aleppo informed the United Nations that its branch in Urum al -Kubra had
obtained approval from Jaysh al-Mujahidin for the convoy to proceed. This was
confirmed in writing during the course of the following morning.
17. The convoy, which consisted of a total of 31 trucks, left western Aleppo city in
the morning on 19 September 2016. There were United Nations banners on the front
and sides of each truck. The convoy was accompanied by a United Nations team and
a team from the Syrian Arab Red Crescent Aleppo, until it reached the last security
checkpoint in the Government-controlled area. The United Nations team then
returned to its offices. It had originally been hoped that the team would be able to
accompany the convoy to its destination. However, it was reported that the
Governor of Aleppo had not given his approval for this and that it was then decided
that the team should not proceed any further. The Board was informed that the
Governor had twice verbally told the United Nations that its team could not proceed
beyond the last Government checkpoint. The Governor and the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic both denied this.
18. The team from the Syrian Arab Red Crescent Aleppo then acc ompanied the
convoy to the first checkpoint that was operated by armed opposition groups. From
there, accompaniment of the convoy was handed over from the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent Aleppo team to its Urum al-Kubra team, in the usual way.
19. From that checkpoint, the armed opposition group Jaysh al-Mujahidin
provided an armed escort to the convoy to its destination at the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent compound in Urum al-Kubra. The same armed group had been escorting
similar humanitarian deliveries in Urum al-Kubra for the previous two years. It also
informed and coordinated with other armed groups in the area.
20.

The trucks and their cargo were inspected at all checkpoints.

21. The Board was informed that Jaysh al-Mujahidin had requested that the
convoy move in groups of five, so that it would not block the flow of traffic on
highway 60. When the first group of trucks arrived close to the second checkpoint
that was operated by armed opposition groups, it was met by masked armed men
who wanted to take some of the supplies on the convoy. A dispute followed between
the men and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent Urum al-Kubra team. Following the
dispute, three trucks were diverted by the armed men. One of the trucks was fully
offloaded, while the remaining two were partially offloaded. The three trucks were
then released and allowed to proceed to the compound in Urum al -Kubra.
22. As part of the deconfliction process, separate communications were sent to the
Russian Federation and to the forces of the United States -led international coalition
to counter Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (international coalition forces)
confirming the date of the mission, its route, GPS coordinates, the number of trucks
and a map. Regular verbal and written updates were provided on the mo vement of
the convoy.
23. The convoy arrived at the Syrian Arab Red Crescent compound in Urum
al-Kubra at 1345 hours local time on 19 September 2016. The armed escort
provided by Jaysh al-Mujahidin ended at that point, and responsibility for the
security of the convoy passed to the local police, which had a station nearby.
Offloading of the trucks then began.

6/9

16-22709

S/2016/1093

24. The Board found that the United Nations had complied with all applicable
procedures relating to the arrangement and movement of the convoy. In pa rticular, it
had sought and obtained all the necessary approvals from all levels of the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and had coordinated all aspects of the
operation with the representatives of the Government. Appropriate coordination had
been carried out with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and the necessary assurances for
safe passage had been provided by the armed opposition groups in the area. All
necessary deconfliction measures were also taken before, during and after the
incident with all parties concerned.
25. The Board noted that it could not gain a full understanding of the coordination
measures employed by the Syrian authorities and that it was not evident from the
answers that it had received to its questions that the Syrian Arab Air Forc e was
informed of the convoy.
26. The Board found that the convoy was purely humanitarian in nature and noted
that there were no reports of any tampering with the trucks or the supplies other
than the full or partial offloading of the three trucks that wer e diverted.
Attack
27. The Board found that, between 1915 and 1945 hours local time on
19 September 2016, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent compound was subject to an
attack from the air, with multiple types of munitions deployed from more than one
aircraft and aircraft type. The munitions used included non -precision unitary bombs
and/or smaller blast-incendiary air-to-ground weapons, which could have been
missiles, rockets or sub-munition bomblets. The primary evidence for this
conclusion came from an analysis of satellite and ground imagery, videos and
eyewitness statements. Corroboration came from information provided by Member
States and witness interviews, as well as open-source research conducted by the
Board.
28. In reaching this conclusion, the Board considered and rejected the possibilities
that the incident had been caused by direct fire or ground assault, either by
Government forces or by armed opposition groups, or by ground -delivered
improvised explosive devices, or by indirect fire, either by Government forces or by
armed opposition groups. It also considered and rejected the possibility that it was a
staged event or a hoax.
29. A total of eight possible major impact points within and near the compound
were identified by the Board, with further multiple smaller impacts to the northwest.
The southwestern, southern and eastern walls of the compound were damaged and
buildings had collapsed. Extensive damage had also been done to a wall on the
opposite side of highway 60.
30. The Board found that 17 trucks from the convoy had been involved in the
incident. Eight of them showed significant fire damage, some having been
completely consumed. A car identified by witnesses as the one used by the Head of
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent Urum al-Kubra had also been involved in the incident
and was heavily damaged.

16-22709

7/9

S/2016/1093

31. At least 10 individuals died, including five drivers who had been part of the
convoy and the head of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent Urum al -Kubra. At least
22 individuals were injured, including a further five drivers.
32. Most of the humanitarian supplies carried by the convoy were damaged or
destroyed in the incident, with the losses of the United Nations country team
totalling almost $650,000. A further $96,000 of supplies was lost to the masked
armed men who diverted three of the trucks. The Board was not provided with any
information on the value of the losses sustained by the Syrian Arab Red Crescent or
by the contractors whose vehicles had been destroyed or damaged.
33. Initial reports that a medical clinic had been destroyed notwithstanding, the
Board found no evidence of a medical clinic neighbouring the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent compound.
34. The Board noted that it was possible that three other buildings, within 1,500
metres of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent compound, were also damaged on the
evening of 19 September 2016. One of them was 400 metres from the compound.
Attributability of the incident
35. The Board found that, while the incident was caused by an air attack, it was
not possible to identify the perpetrator or perpetrators.
36. The area immediately around the Syrian Arab Red Crescent compound had
been hit on at least two occasions in the period between 26 June and 1 September
2016, with two separate groups of buildings, located between 55 and 140 metres
away, having been attacked, most likely from the air. The Board considere d that the
location of the compound, on the outskirts of a populated area, in an industrial zone
and astride one of the two primary roads leading to southwestern Aleppo, made it a
realistic possibility that the buildings around it were used by armed opposi tion
groups prior to the date of the incident. The Board therefore considered that it had
most likely been attacked by pro-Government forces.
37. The Board noted that aircraft operating as part of the forces of the
international coalition forces and aircraft of the Russian Federation and of the
Syrian Arab Air Force all had the capabilities needed to carry out an attack of the
kind that had occurred on 19 September 2016, including at night. Armed opposition
groups did not have the capability to carry out air attacks.
38. The Board also noted that no party had alleged the involvement of aircraft of
the international coalition forces and, as such, their involvement was highly
unlikely.
39. The Board indicated that it had received reports that information exis ted to the
effect that the Syrian Arab Air Force was highly likely to have perpetrated the attack
and, furthermore, that the attack had been carried out by three Syrian Mi -17 model
helicopters, followed by three unnamed fixed-wing aircraft, with a single Russian
aircraft also suspected of being involved. However, the Board did not have access to
raw data to support those assertions and, in the absence of such data, it was unable
to draw a definitive conclusion. Moreover, the Governments of both the Russian
Federation and the Syrian Arab Republic denied all allegations of their involvement
in the incident.

8/9

16-22709

S/2016/1093

40. The Board noted in this connection that there were technical issues pertaining
to a hypothesis of the incident having been a result of a joint Syrian Arab Air ForceRussian Federation strike. The Board was informed that that the Russian Federation
did not conduct joint strikes. A high degree of interoperability and coordination
would be required for two air forces to operate in the same airspace, target ing the
same location.
41. The Board reviewed an excerpt of video footage, purported to be from an
unmanned aerial vehicle, showing an armed opposition group vehicle towing what
was claimed to be a heavy weapon alongside the convoy. In the video, the convo y
appeared to be stationary, parked on a dual-carriageway road. The recording paused
as the vehicle was alongside the convoy in the village of Khan al -Assal, more than
6 kilometres east of the site of the incident site. However, in the absence of any
other corroborating evidence, the Board indicated that it could not find any material
link with the incident.
42. The Board indicated that it did not have evidence to conclude that the incident
was a deliberate attack on a humanitarian target.
Other conclusions
43. The Board noted that, while humanitarian convoys, by their very nature,
operate in circumstances that expose them to a significant degree of danger, the
United Nations had complied with all applicable procedures, protocols, rules and
regulations to mitigate them.
44. The Board also noted that it had faced several constraints, in particular the
limited time available to it to investigate the incident, as well as with regard to the
integrity of the site after the incident and access to all pertinent information.
Member States were at times also constrained in their capacity to provide the level
of detail that the Board required, given that they had insufficient time to declassify
information to provide to the Board as evidence.

16-22709

9/9
