S/2010/86**

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 February 2010
English
Original: French

Letter dated 12 February 2010 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I refer to my letter of 6 August 2009 (S/2009/407) addressed to the Security
Council, in which I recommended that the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) should be renewed and noted that, three years after the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), it is timely to take stock of the
operational capacity of UNIFIL and conduct a comprehensive review, which would
include a comprehensive evaluation of the Maritime Task Force. The Security
Council, in its resolution 1884 (2009) of 27 August 2009, renewed the mandate of
UNIFIL for an additional year, noted that the review would be conducted “during
the coming months” and welcomed “receiving as soon as possible the conclusions of
the review of the operational capacity of UNIFIL”.
In accordance with my proposal, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and UNIFIL undertook to assess the operational effectiveness of UNIFIL, including
its force structure, assets and requirements, on land and at sea. The joint technical
review of the Department and UNIFIL has now been completed. It is forwardlooking, with the aim of ensuring that the mission’s assets and resources are
configured most appropriately to fulfil its mandated tasks. It is not a review of the
mandate, authorized strength or rules of engagement of UNIFIL.
The review should also be seen in the light of the Security Council’s
presidential statement of 5 August 2009 (S/PRST/2009/24), in which the Council
stressed the need for regular assessment of the strength, mandate and composition of
peacekeeping operations, with a view to making the necessary adjustments where
appropriate, according to progress achieved or changing circumstances on the
ground.
In September 2009, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and UNIFIL
initiated a two-stage review process. UNIFIL proceeded to analyse the current
situation in its area of operations, taking into account its mandated tasks and the
experience it had gained since the adoption of Security Council resolution
1701 (2006). It then determined appropriate forward-looking adjustments to the
Force structure as necessary in an effort to adapt the operational capacity of UNIFIL
to changes in the operational environment that have occurred since late 2006. In
mid-November 2009, UNIFIL submitted its initial findings and preliminary
recommendations to the Department.
** Second reissue for technical reasons (3 March 2010).

10-24147** (E) 030310

*1024147*

S/2010/86

In parallel, the Department held meetings at United Nations Headquarters with
countries contributing troops to UNIFIL (and to the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization) and briefed Security Council members at the expert level
(political and military) on the review process and on the initial findings of UNIFIL.
The Governments of Israel and Lebanon were kept informed of the review process.
UNIFIL also held preliminary meetings with troop-contributing countries and
Ambassadors of the permanent members of the Security Council in Beirut, as well
as separate meetings with the Lebanese Armed Forces and with the Israel Defense
Forces.
During the second stage of the review process, a United Nations Headquarters
mission visited UNIFIL from 6 to 12 December 2009 for a joint assessment of the
initial review findings of UNIFIL. The review conclusions were jointly finalized in
January 2010 by United Nations Headquarters and the UNIFIL Head of Mission and
Force Commander, Lieutenant General Claudio Graziano.
Troop-contributing countries and Council members have been briefed by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations on the outcome of the joint technical
review of the Department and UNIFIL. The review findings do not call for radical
changes to the Force, or the wider mission, and they do not significantly alter the
overall number of required military and civilian personnel. The review has,
nevertheless, reached a number of key conclusions which would have an impact on
the structure and configuration of the Force, coordination within the mission, and
relations with the parties, particularly the Lebanese Armed Forces.
The review recognizes that since the adoption of Security Council resolution
1701 (2006), there has been considerable progress in the implementation of the
mandated tasks of UNIFIL. This progress would not have been possible without
significant deployment of troops and maritime assets, involving substantial
resources, and based on the strong commitment of the Council and troopcontributing countries. The mission’s robust mandate and capabilities on the ground
continue to play an important role in maintaining stability in southern Lebanon.
The review reaffirms the essential nature of the liaison and coordination
function of UNIFIL, in particular the key role played by the tripartite mechanism. In
this regard, the review recommends that UNIFIL liaison and coordination
capabilities be strengthened to reinforce its work with the Lebanese Armed Forces
and the Israel Defense Forces, and focus on long-term confidence-building projects.
Additional liaison is also needed to assist the implementation of arrangements
agreed within the tripartite mechanism regarding Blue Line confidence-building
measures. The establishment of an office in Tel Aviv, as agreed by the Government
of Israel in February 2007, also remains of critical importance for UNIFIL.
The review proposes certain adjustments to the force structure, assets and
requirements of UNIFIL that are intended to strengthen its operational capacity and
effectiveness within its area of operations. The intention is to create a more taskoriented and mobile posture for the Force, including through the provision of a
Force reserve, which would be able to operate throughout the UNIFIL area of
operations. Recommendations are also put forward to improve UNIFIL capacity in
information operations, technical investigations and other specialized staff skills.
The review’s recommendations reflect the increasing significance of UNIFIL
activities along the Blue Line, highlighting the importance of accelerating the

2

10-24147

S/2010/86

visible marking of the Blue Line and completing the project for a technical road
running parallel to the Blue Line through the establishment of a Blue Line task
force. This task force would enhance the operational effectiveness of UNIFIL and
also serve to build confidence.
The Lebanese Armed Forces remain the key partner of UNIFIL. The review
highlights the need for the formalization of a regular strategic dialogue mechanism
between UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces to carry out analyses of ground
forces and maritime assets, and set a series of benchmarks reflecting the correlation
between the capacities and responsibilities of UNIFIL and the capacities and
responsibilities of the Lebanese Armed Forces, as well as take into account the
security situation in the area. This mechanism would help the Lebanese Armed
Forces to establish their needs and required operational capabilities for
implementing the tasks mandated in Security Council resolution 1701 (2006),
including securing its maritime borders, and facilitate the gradual assumption of
security responsibility in the UNIFIL area of operations and the Lebanese territorial
waters by the Lebanese Armed Forces.
The review entailed a comprehensive evaluation of the Maritime Task Force of
UNIFIL. At the request of the Government of Lebanon, the Maritime Task Force is
mandated to carry out a crucial dual role — to help the Lebanese navy to prevent the
unauthorized entry of arms or related material by sea into Lebanon by carrying out
maritime interdiction operations, and to provide training for Lebanon’s naval
personnel.
The review concludes that the Maritime Task Force remains an essential
element of UNIFIL and therefore recommends regular assessment of the relation
between maritime resources and the tasks to be accomplished, which would be done
by establishing a series of benchmarks reflecting the correlation between the
capacities and responsibilities of the Maritime Task Force and the capacities and
responsibilities of the Lebanese navy.
I wish to emphasize that the current deployment, assets and resources of
UNIFIL cannot be sustained indefinitely. It is the responsibility of the parties to take
advantage of the opportunity provided by the presence of UNIFIL, which has
provided a strong deterrent to the resumption of hostilities and has laid the
foundation for building a process that can achieve a permanent ceasefire and a longterm solution, as envisaged in Security Council resolution 1701 (2006). Lack of
progress in that process threatens to unravel the cessation of hostilities.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

10-24147

3
