206

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

right shall be protected by law and that no one shall be
arbitrarily deprived of his life,
Recalling also its resolution 34/ I 75 of 17 December
1979, in which it reaffirmed that mass and flagrant violations of human rights are of special concern to the United
Nations and urged the Commission on Human Rights to
take timely and effective action in existing and future cases
of mass and flagrant violations of human rights,
Recalling further its resolution 36/22 of 9 November
1981, in which it condemned the practice of summary or
arbitrary executions, and its resolutions 37/182 of 17
December 1982 and 38/96 of 16 December 1983,
Deeply alarmed at the occurrence on a large scale of
summary or arbitrary executions, including extra-legal
executions,
Recalling resolution 1982/ I 3 of 7 September I 982 of
the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and

Protection of Minorities, 92 in which the Sub-Commission
recommended that effective measures should be adopted
to prevent the occurrence of summary or arbitrary
executions,
Taking note of the work done by the Committee on
Crime Prevention and Control in the area of summary or
arbitrary executions, including the elaboration of minimum legal guarantees and safeguards to prevent recourse
to such extra-legal executions, 93 to be considered by the
Seventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, to be held from 26
August to 6 September 1985,
Convinced of the need for appropriate action to combat
and eventually eliminate the practice of summary or arbitrary executions, which represents a flagrant violation of
the most fundamc:ntal human right, the right to life,
1. Strongly deplores the large number of summary or
arbitrary executions, including extra-legal executions,
which continue to take place in various parts of the world;
2. Welcomes Economic and Social Council resolutions
1982/35 of 7 May 1982, in which the Council decided to
appoint for one year a special rapporteur to examine the
questions related to summary or arbitrary executions, and
1983/36 of 26 May 1983, in which it decided to continue
the mandate of the Special Rapporteur for another year;
3. Also welcomes Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/35 of 24 May 1984, in which the Council
decided to continue the mandate of the Special Rapporteur, Mr. S. A. Wako, for a further year and requested the
Commission on Human Rights to consider the question of
summary or arbitrary executions as a matter of high priority at its forty-first session;
4. Appeals to all Governments to co-operate with and
assist the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on
Human Rights in the preparation of his report;
5. Requests the Special Rapporteur, in carrying out his
mandate, to respond effectively to information that comes
before him, in particular when a su111mary or arbitrary
execution is imminent or threatened;
6. Considers that the Special Rapporteur, in carrying
out his mandate, should continue to seek and receive
information from Governments, United Nations bodies,
specialized agencies, regional intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations in consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council;
92 See E/CN.4/1983/4-E/CN.4/Sub.2/l 982143 and Corr. I, chap. XXI,
sect. A.

7. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all necessary assistance to the Special Rapporteur so that he may
effectively carry out his mandate;
8. Again requests the Secretary-General to continue to
use his best endeavours in cases where the minimum
standard of legal safeguards provided for in articles 6, 14
and 15 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 91 appear not to be respected;
9. Requests the Commission on Human Rights at its
forty-first session, on the basis of the report of the Special
Rapporteur to be prepared in conformity with Economic
and Social Council resolutions 1982/35, 1983/36 and
1984/35, to make recommendations concerning appropriate action to combat and eventually eliminate the practice
of summary or arbitrary executions.
10 I st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/111. Question of enforced
disappearances

or

involuntary

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/173 of 20 December 1978,
entitled "Disappeared persons", and its resolution 38/94
of 16 December 1983 on the question of enforced or involuntary disappearances,
Deeply concerned about the persistence, in certain cases,
of the practice of enforced or involuntary disappearances,
Expressing its profound emotion at the anguish and sorrow of the families concerned, who should know the fate of
their relatives,
Convinced of the importance of implementing the provisions of General Assembly resolution 33/ 173 and of the
other United Nations resolutions on the question of
enforced and involuntary disappearances, with a view to
finding solutions for cases of disappearances and helping
to eliminate such practices,
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights resolution 1984/23 of6 March 1984, 94 in which the Commission
decided to extend for one year the term of the mandate of
the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, and Economic and Social Council decision
1984/ I 35 of 24 May 1984, in which the Council approved
the Commission's decision,
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Working Group on
Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances for the humanitarian work it has done and to those Governments that have
co-operated with it;
2. Welcomes the decision of the Commission on
Human Rights to extend for one year the term of the mandate of the Working Group, as laid down in Commission
resolution 1984/23;
3. Also welcomes the provisions made by the Commission on Human Rights in its resolution 1984/23 to enable
the Working Group to fulfil its mandate with even greater
efficiency;
4. Appeals to all Governments to provide the Working
Group and the Commission on Human Rights with the
full co-operation warranted by their strictly humanitarian
objectives and their working methods based on discretion;
5. Calls upon the Commission on Human Rights to
continue to study this question as a matter of priority and
to take any step it may deem necessary to the pursuit of
93 See Official Records <>(the Economic and Social Council, 1984, Supplement No. 6 (E/1984/16), chap. VII.
q 4 lhid, Supp/emell/ /It> 4 (E/1984/14 and Corr.I), chap. 11, sect. A.

207

_____________
V_I._ Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committe_e_ . . _ -~-----

the task of the Working Group when 1t considers the
report to be submitted by the Group at its forty-first
session;
6. Renews its request to the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Working Group with all necessary
assistance.
JO I st plenary meeting
/4 December 1984

39/112. Seventh United Nations Congress on the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the responsibility assumed by the
United Nations in the field of the prevention of crime and
criminal justice under General Assembly resolution 415
(V) of I December 1950, in particular by convening the
quinquennial congresses on the prevention of crime and
the treatment of offenders,
Recalling its resolution 36/21 of 9 November 1981. in
which it requested the Secretary-General to take the necessary measures for the fullest implementation of the Caracas Declaration95 and for the appropriate preparation of the
Seventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolutions
1982/29 of 4 May 1982, in which the Council approved
the provisional agenda for the Seventh Congress, and
1984/45 of 25 May 1984 on the continuation of preparations for the Congress, as well as Council resolution 1984/
51 of 25 May 1984 on technical co-operation in crime prevention and criminal justice.
Taking note of Economic and Social Council decision
1984/154 of 25 May 1984, in which it accepted the invitation of the Government of Italy to hold the Seventh
Congress at Milan from 26 August to 6 September 1985,
Acknowledging that criminality, particularly violent and
organized crime, constitutes a serious threat to the development and security of nations.
Recognizing that constraints of an economic and technical nature impede many countries in their fight against
crime,
Reiterating the necessity for the international community to make concerted and systematic efforts to strengthen
technical and scientific co-operation in crime prevention
and criminal justice and to formulate fair, humane and
effective policies directed towards crime control in the
context of different political and cultural systems, economic and social development and social values and
changes,
Convinced of the important role played by the previous
congresses in promoting understanding, awareness and cooperation and in achieving further progress in this field,
Stressing the need to improve further regional, interregional and international co-operation and co-ordination
in order to intensify the struggle against crime,
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Government of
Italy for its offer to act as host to the Seventh United
Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders:
2. Reaffirms its hope that the Seventh Congress will
make an important and useful contribution to the solution
95 Resolution 35/171. annex

of problems related tl> crime prevention and criminal
justice:
3. Welcomes Economic and Social Council resolutions
1982/29 and 1984/45 and, in particula~. the recommendation that the Seventh Congress finalize new guiding principles on crime prevention and criminal justice in the context of development;
4. Welcomes also the recommendations made by the
Economic and Social Council in its resolution 1984/51 on
improved modalities of technical co-operation in crime
prevention and criminal justice;
5. Fakes note of the preparatory work carried out by
the Committee on Crime Prevention and Control, as the
preparatory body for the Seventh Congress, at its eighth
session and by the regional and interregional preparatory
meetings convened in co-operation with the regional commissions, interregional and regional crime prevention
institutes and interested Governments: 96
6. C·alls upon Governments. United Nations bodies.
the specialized agencies and other intergovernmental
organizations, as well as interested non-governmental
organizations in consultative status with the Economic
and Social Council, to participate in the Seventh Congress
and to intensify and expand their technical and scientific
preparations for it;
7. Invites the Economic and Social Council at its first
regular session of 1985 to approve the provisional rules of
procedure of the Seventh Congress;
8. Requests the Seventh Congress, under item 3 of its
provisional agenda, lo give urgent attention to the
strengthening of techmcal co-operation in crime prevention and criminal justice, in pursuance of the recommendations of the regional preparatory meetings and the Committee on Crime Prevention and Control;
9. Invites the Seventh Congress to pay particular attention to the question of illicit drug trafficking;
IO. Appeals to Member States to consider contributing
to the United Nations Trust Fund for Social Defence, in
order to enable the Fund to undertake activities of assistance to countries requesting it, and to allocate an appropriate portion of their resources to programmes for the reduction of crime and the improvement of criminal justice:
11. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
substantive and organizational work of the Seventh
Congress is fully adequate for its successful outcome:
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session, in accordance
with past practice, a report on the implementation of the
recommendations of the Sixth Congress, to be prepared for
the Seventh Congress in pursuance of paragraph 4 of Economic and Social Council resolution 1982/29;
13. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session his views and
recommendations on the implementation of the conclusions of the Seventh Congress;

14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session an item entitled "Crime prevention and
criminal justice: report of the Seventh United Nations
Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders".
/0 I st plenary meeting
14 December 1984
% See Official Records 0/'1/,, f.co1101111c and
nwn1 .\'o 6 (F'l984il6), c:hap Ill.

s,,. ,al Council. / 184. Su11p/c
1
