S/PV.7857

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7857th meeting

Tuesday, 10 January 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Wallström/Mr. Skoog/Mr. Thöresson . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Sweden)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Gebeyehu
Mr. Fekl
Mr. Alfano
Mr. Kishi
Mr. Abdrakhmanov
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Seck
Mr. Kyslytsya
Sir Alan Duncan
Ms. Power
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Conflict prevention and sustaining peace
Letter dated 4 January 2017 from the Permanent Representative of Sweden to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2017/6)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-00612 (E)
*1700612*

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Conflict prevention and sustaining peace
Letter dated 4 January 2017 from the
Permanent Representative of Sweden
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2017/6)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, ministers and other distinguished
representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.
On behalf of the members of the Security Council,
I should like to welcome the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, who is taking part in a formal
meeting of the Council for the first time in his new
capacity. In the short time since he has taken up his
post, the Secretary-General has made an active effort
to informally engage with the Council’s members — a
much appreciated gesture. Let me express the hope that
the Council will continue to build the closest and most
productive cooperation possible with the new SecretaryGeneral in carrying out its primary responsibility of
strengthening international peace, security and stability.
We should support the Secretary-General’s already
expressed intention to pursue a surge of diplomacy for
peace. An open and mutually reinforcing relationship
between the Secretary-General and the Council, based
on trust and mutual respect, can form a foundation for
this effort.
In a world that is increasingly interconnected, and
where conflict and insecurity continue to undermine
the lives of millions, we must recognize that no one
can resolve the problems we face when acting alone.
Working together, though sometimes difficult, we may
just have a chance to rescue the future for who are at
present without hope.
I should like to take this opportunity to express
gratitude and pay tribute to Mr. Ban Ki Moon, who
carried out his duties as Secretary-General over the
course of many years in a dignified manner.
2/108

10/01/2017

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Cuba, Cyprus, Denmark, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Finland, Georgia,
Germany, Guatemala, Haiti, Hungary, India, Indonesia,
Iraq, Ireland, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel,
Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, the Marshall Islands,
Mexico, the Federated States of Micronesia, Morocco,
Namibia, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, the Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, the Republic
of Moldova, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Slovenia, Slovakia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Switzerland, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey, the United
Arab Emirates, Venezuela and Viet Nam to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
to participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. João
Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations; and Ms. Alison August
Treppel, Executive Secretary of the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism of the Organization of
American States.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/6, which contains a letter dated
4 January 2017 from the Permanent Representative of
Sweden addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting
a concept paper on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: May I first thank you,
Madam, and the Swedish presidency for convening
this meeting and allowing me to have my first formal
presence in the Security Council, discussing what
I believe must be the priority of everything we do
together — preventing conflicts and sustaining peace.
I believe that the massive attendance at this meeting
proves that, indeed, this message is something that we
all fully recognize.
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

The United Nations was established to prevent war
by binding us in a rules-based international order. Today,
that order is under grave threat. Millions of people in
crisis look to the Council to preserve global stability
and to protect them from harm, but the enormous
human and economic cost of conflicts around the world
shows how complex and challenging this is. Yet we
spend far more time and resources responding to crises
rather than preventing them. People are paying too high
a price. The Member States are paying too high a price.
We need a whole new approach.
It has proved very difficult to persuade
decision-makers at the national and international levels
that prevention must be their priority — perhaps because
successful prevention does not attract attention. The
television cameras are not there when a crisis is avoided.
Most of today’s conflicts are still essentially internal,
even if they quickly take on regional and transnational
overtones. They are fuelled by competition for
power and resources, inequality, marginalization and
exclusion, poor governance, weak institutions and
sectarian divides. They are exacerbated by climate
change, population growth and the globalization of
crime and terrorism. With so many factors at work,
it takes very little to trigger a crisis that can engulf a
country or a region, with global consequences.
But while the causes of crisis are deeply interlinked,
the United Nations response remains fragmented.
The interconnected nature of today’s crises requires
us to connect our own efforts for peace and security,
sustainable development and human rights not just in
words but in practice. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions on sustaining peace demonstrate
strong intergovernmental support for an integrated
approach. The challenge now is to make corresponding
changes to our culture, strategy, structures
and operations.
We must rebalance our approach to peace and
security. For decades, this has been dominated by
responding to conflict. For the future, we need to do far
more to prevent war and sustain peace. The reforms I
am setting in motion aim to achieve this. I have started
with the decision-making processes in the Secretariat.
The newly established Executive Committee will
increase our capacity to integrate all pillars of the
United Nations under a common vision for action.

S/PV.7857

I have appointed a senior adviser on policy, whose
main task will be to map the prevention capacities of
the United Nations system and to bring them together
into an integrated platform for early detection and
action. This work will enable us to link the reform of
our peace and security architecture with the reform
of the United Nations development system, while
respecting the specific areas of competence of the
Security Council and the General Assembly. We need
the support of both organs for our efforts to build and
sustain peace across the continuum, from prevention,
conflict resolution and peacekeeping to peacebuilding
and long-term development.
The primary work of conflict prevention lies with
Member States.
(spoke in French)
The United Nations system as a whole must stand
ready to assist Governments in implementing Agenda
2030, strengthening governance and institutions, and
promoting the rule of law and all human rights: civil,
political, social, economic and cultural rights. The
Human Rights Up Front initiative, which also seeks to
integrate the issues of peace and security, human rights
and sustainable development, will allow us continue
to strengthen the capacities of the United Nations in
this field.
Humanitarian agencies and development actors
need to work together to help States prevent crises and
strengthen the resilience of their societies. The current
fragmented system does not give us the capacity to
address the root causes of conflict.
It is essential to ensure that women and girls
participate fully in building inclusive and resilient
societies. Where gender equality permeates the
social fabric and women and men face difficulties as
equal partners, societies have a much better chance
of achieving stability and preserving human dignity
and prosperity.
It is also crucial to resolve the global scourge
of youth unemployment, not only to ensure their
development but also to prevent instability and social
conflicts and to reduce violent extremism. Combating
youth unemployment should not just be an absolute
priority in national development policies, but also a
priority in international cooperation.

17-006123/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

(spoke in English)

10/01/2017

As societies become multi-ethnic, multireligious
and multicultural, we will need greater political, cultural
and economic investments in inclusivity and cohesion,
so that people appreciate the benefits of diversity rather
than perceiving it as a threat. All groups need to see that
their individual identities are respected, while feeling
that they belong as valued members of the community
as a whole. Civil society has a role to play in raising the
alarm when such respect is threatened or lost.

Together, we need to demonstrate leadership and
strengthen the credibility and authority of the United
Nations by putting peace first. Ending the boundless
human suffering and the wanton waste of resources
generated by conflict is in everyone’s interests. The
Council, working with the Peacebuilding Commission,
all other parts of the United Nations system and regional
organizations, can enable faster preventive action when
the warning signs are there. The cost of inaction is
simply too high.

We must commit to a surge in diplomacy for peace,
in partnership with regional organizations, while
mobilizing the entire range of those with influence,
from religious authorities to civil society and the
business community. We will launch an initiative to
enhance our mediation capacity, both at United Nations
Headquarters and in the field, and to support regional
and national mediation efforts. I ask the Security
Council to make greater use of the options laid out in
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations. I am
prepared to support the Council through the use of my
good offices and through my personal engagement.

War is never inevitable. It is always a matter
of choice: the choice to exclude, to discriminate, to
marginalize and to resort to violence. By restoring trust
between Governments and their citizens and among
Member States, we can prevent and avoid conflict.
But peace, too, is never inevitable. It is the result of
difficult decisions, hard work and compromise. We
should never take it for granted, but should prize and
nurture it in every country, at every time. Prevention is
not merely a priority, but the priority. If we live up to
our responsibilities, we will save lives, reduce suffering
and give hope to millions.

Too many prevention opportunities have been lost
because Member States mistrusted each other’s motives,
and because of concerns over national sovereignty. Such
concerns are understandable, in a world where power
is unequal and principles have sometimes been applied
selectively. Indeed, prevention should never be used to
serve other political goals. On the contrary, prevention
is best served by strong sovereign States, acting for the
good of their people.

Allow me to repeat the appeal I made 10 days ago
in my first message as Secretary-General: Let us make
this year, 2017, a year for peace. I think it would be
naive to say that 2017 will be a year of peace, but at
least it is our obligation to do everything we can to
make it a year for peace.

In taking preventive action, we need to avoid
double standards. But that does not mean there are no
standards at all. Preventive action is essential to avert
mass atrocities and grave abuses of human rights. And
we can achieve that only through reasoned discussion,
based on facts and the pursuit of truth. Prevention must
consistently be seen as a value in itself. It is an essential
means of reducing human suffering and enabling people
to reach their full potential.
International cooperation for prevention, in
particular translating early warning into early action,
depends upon trust between Member States and in
their relations with the United Nations. I stand ready
to foster a more trusting relationship and to improve
communications with the Council, with consistency,
candour and transparency. Disagreements about the
past cannot be allowed to prevent us from acting today.
4/108

The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sweden.
I thank the Secretary-General very much for
reminding us of the achievements of the United Nations
over the past 70 years, and for laying out his vision of
a United Nations equipped to respond to the conflicts
and instability that today affect the lives of millions.
A close and proactive working relationship between
the Secretary-General and the Security Council is the
cornerstone of the Organization’s ability to deliver
lasting peace and security. We look forward to forging
a strong and trusting relationship with the SecretaryGeneral, not least to improve the United Nations
capacity to take early action to prevent violent conflict.
We have discussed conflict prevention many times
before in the Chamber — and I am sure many around
the table will make that point — but progress has been
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

meagre. I would like to say some words about how that
needs to change.
The year 2016 exposed the urgent need for a global
recommitment to multilateral solutions to conflict and
to collaborative security, specifically to the prevention
of conflict. The horror in Syria and Yemen, and
situations such as the instability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, dominate the Council’s work.
Can we afford an ever-growing list of crises slipping
into violent conflict and needless human misery?
The United Nations humanitarian and peacekeeping
instruments have come under immense pressure, with
$22.2 billion in humanitarian appeals and over 100,000
United Nations peacekeepers. Meanwhile, research
shows that measures to peacefully prevent conflict cost,
on average, just a tenth of post-conflict recovery efforts.
Investing in prevention is not only morally right; it is
the smart, economically sound and sustainable thing
to do.
Prevention requires addressing the root causes
of conflict and instability before they reach the front
pages or the Council’s agenda. It calls for inclusive
nationally led processes that build strong institutions
and that are supported by a whole-of-organization
commitment. The sustaining peace agenda, together
with the Sustainable Development Goals, provides the
platform and the master plan.
At the same time, Chapter VI of the Charter
of the United Nations — on pacific settlement of
disputes — requires the parties to a dispute to seek
solutions through peaceful means, such as negotiation,
conciliation or judicial settlement. We have the tools.
What we need now is a new political consensus in
support of prevention. Let me highlight some areas for
priority actions that can underpin it.
The first, as the Secretary-General has said, is to
make prevention a priority for the whole United Nations
system: hold each entity accountable for its part in
contributing and ensure that the United works closely
with other international, regional and subregional
actors. A good example is the current joint efforts with
regard to the Gambia by the Economic Community of
West African States and the United Nations Regional
Office for West Africa and the Sahel.
The second is to improve the capacity of the United
Nations to recognize and address the root causes and
drivers of conflict by working together across the

S/PV.7857

United Nations system’s pillars, mandates and agencies.
In that regard, we are encouraged by the steps that
the Secretary-General has already taken to make the
Secretariat work more efficiently.
The third is to improve system-wide analysis and
welcome independent advice from the SecretaryGeneral, including on new and emerging threats and
risks, such as climate change, to improve our collective
strategic planning and response. We would like the
Secretary-General to tell us what we need to know, not
only what we want to hear.
The fourth is that we need to harness the agency
of women to create sustainable peace through inclusive
processes. Experiences shared through a network of
female peace mediators, which I have also initiated,
confirm the importance of inclusiveness.
Finally, we need to recognize that, in the words of
the Secretary-General, there can be no humanitarian
solution for a political crisis. Humanitarian action can
never be a substitute for political dialogue and mediation.
We should heed the Secretary-General’s call for
a surge in diplomacy for peace. In order to do so,
Sweden commits to contributing to a Security Council
that empowers the Secretary-General to take timely,
decisive and effective action to resolve disputes and
prevent conflicts before they begin. I hope that other
Council members can join us in adopting that approach.
We will do our utmost to create an atmosphere of open,
respectful and honest dialogue around the Council
table.
We have heard the Secretary-General’s call for
effective conflict prevention. We know that for him to
be effective, he needs the political support of Member
States. Let us resolve to put peace first.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.
I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): Please accept,
Madam, President, my most sincere wishes of success
for Sweden’s presidency. It is deeply symbolic that the
year 2017 starts with a renewed focus on prevention,
jointly facilitated by Sweden — a nation with an
impeccable record of promoting the values of the

17-006125/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

United Nations — and the new Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. António Guterres, a trusted leader and
a symbol of the Organization’s ideals. May I remind
the Council that the first-ever United Nations office
on prevention was established in my region, Central
Asia, 10 years ago. Now it is time for the rest of the
Organization to follow suit.
Clearly, the prevention of conflicts requires a
complex approach that, in fact, requires a paradigm
shift. Being seized with addressing the crises of the day
might be a good excuse to avoid adopting audacious
visions and taking bold steps. Global economic
uncertainty, political disagreements and narrowly
formulated national priorities might prevent us from
fostering dialogue and trust in international relations.
Still, the United Nations has a duty to ensure a safe
and prosperous future for all, and fulfilling it requires
practical steps to build a world free of the virus of war
and conflict.
In March last year, my President, Mr. Nursultan
Nazarbayev, published the manifesto entitled “The
World. The 21st Century”, a far-reaching document
combining a realistic take on the world with an
ambitious vision based on unity rather than on
division, and on cooperation rather than on rivalry. On
1 January, on the first day of Kazakhstan’s tenure in the
Security Council, President Nazarbayev unveiled his
policy address on sustaining a global partnership for a
secure, just and prosperous world, copies of which are
available in the Chamber. Dwelling on the principles
of the manifesto, the policy address puts forward seven
points related to making Kazakhstan’s contribution to
the work of the Council as meaningful and constructive
as possible.
In the context of today’s agenda, the President’s
address makes it clear that, without genuine dialogue,
preventing conflicts and sustaining peace are
unattainable. At the global level, it requires setting
a goal of building by 2045, the United Nations
centenary, a world free of nuclear weapons. Such a very
practical decision will send a message that political
leaders — and the nations they represent — are strong
enough to destroy invisible walls and build bridges for
the common good. The policy address emphasizes the
need to do much more at the regional level. In line with
our commitment to strengthen peace and security in
Central Asia and Afghanistan, we will endeavour to
develop a regional model of peace and cooperation,
taking special care to address the root causes of the
6/108

10/01/2017

ongoing conflict in Afghanistan and the prevention of
the proliferation of terrorism and violent extremism.
Rivalries, lack of trust and unity of purpose,
injustice, as well as stark economic and social
inequalities and underdevelopment, prevent the global
community from achieving progress in the Middle
East. As a nation committed to dialogue and mediation,
we are ready to host talks in Astana to help pave the
way for restoring peace in Syria. We also believe
that dialogue between political leaders and religious
authorities, as the Secretary-General has mentioned,
should be intensified with a view to finding lasting
political solutions to eradicate the threat of terrorism.
We invite all Member States to jointly draft an Astana
code of conduct for international counter-terrorism
operations as a step towards the creation of a global
anti-terrorist coalition or network. The adoption of a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism
as soon as possible will undoubtedly be a major
prevention measure.
We endorse the Secretary-General’s remarks
on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) as a
key prevention tool. My President’s policy address
emphasizes the role of the security-development
nexus in preventing wars, protecting human rights and
building a safer and prosperous future. The SDGs are a
direct and significant contribution to the 2045 Vision.
Astana, the capital of Kazakhstan, will host EXPO2017 this summer, and we hope that that event, along
with obvious benefits such as greater international
cooperation in the area of sustainable energy, will
produce added value in the form of stronger collective
commitment to security through development.
During Kazakhstan’s tenure in the Security
Council, we will support efforts to make the Council
and the entire United Nations better equipped for
the challenges and opportunities of the twenty-first
century. To enhance the level of trust between States
and generate the political will required, the President of
Kazakhstan proposed to convene Council meetings at
the level of Heads of State and Government on a regular
basis. We believe that this is a timely and highly relevant
initiative to achieve a paradigm shift in the Council.
As far as the United Nations machinery is
concerned, we welcome the recommendations of
the United Nations-commissioned reports on peace
operations (see S/2015/446) and the peacebuilding
architecture (see S/2015/490). A systemic approach
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

should be further developed to identify and prevent
emerging crises, take into account new factors, such
as cybercrime and the deployment of weapons in outer
space, and pay foremost attention to development and
human rights.
We strongly believe that the Security Council
should have a direct oversight role in the peace
continuum, including through greater cooperation with
the Secretary-General. Regular joint consultations,
both formal and informal, between the Security
Council and the Secretary-General continue to create
important opportunities for cooperation, prevention,
conflict resolution, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
long-term development.
I conclude by voicing my support once more for the
vision of Secretary-General António Guterres. As the
honest broker, bridge-builder and messenger of peace,
he should play the crucial role in conflict prevention at
the earliest stages, by bringing to the attention of the
Security Council any matter that, in his opinion, may
threaten the maintenance of international peace and
security. Article 99 of the Charter of the United Nations
is very clear on that point.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Italy.
Mr. Alfano (Italy): Allow me to commend the
Swedish presidency for organizing today’s debate.
My gratitude also goes to the Secretary-General for
his ambitious programme of action. As we begin the
year, I look forward to an open, productive and fruitful
working relationship in the Security Council.
This is Italy’s first open debate since its election
to the Council. We are sharing our mandate with our
Dutch partners in the best spirit of European unity and
solidarity. As a Mediterranean country, Italy brings to
the Council its natural disposition to build bridges to
draw together all sides.
We believe that inclusiveness is key to effective
multilateralism and to addressing our common
challenges. In Libya and Iraq, we must work together
and spare no effort to achieve reconciliation and support
for legitimate institutions. In Syria, we need a greater
investment in inclusive dialogue among all the parties.
Italy also attaches great importance to the successful
outcome of the Cyprus settlement talks. I commend
the brilliant efforts of the Secretary-General in this
regard. In addition, let us not forget tensions in Africa,

S/PV.7857

such as those seen today in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Unquestionably, if we truly want peace, conflict
prevention and diplomacy must prevail over military
solutions. We must preserve the primacy of political
will over the misery of military might. The principles
and the framework to achieve this shift already exist;
we do not need to reinvent them. Allow me, however, to
recall a few of these principles.
Conflict prevention and the primacy of political
solutions are at the heart of two crucial United Nations
reviews — one on the peacekeeping and peacebuilding
architecture, the other on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. The sustaining peace agenda stresses the need
for a holistic approach covering the pillars of security,
human rights and development. The 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development also places great emphasis on
the strong link between peace and development. What is
now needed more than ever is a common effort to move
from vision to action. I therefore want to stress three
important objectives for our collective efforts, taking
full advantage of the Secretary-General’s peace agenda.
Our first objective should be comprehensive reform
that adapts the United Nations peace system to the new
global challenges. Such reform requires an integrated
approach to peace and the development of a United
Nations machinery that is fit for the new purpose, which
might entail a revision of the Secretariat structure or
a new distribution of roles and responsibilities. The
Secretary-General should not hesitate in his functions to
bring emerging crises to the Council’s attention before
they escalate. Reform must also address strengthening
local ownership and partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations, such as the European Union
and the African Union.
Secondly, we need to encourage the effective use
of early-warning indicators of violence, radicalization,
extremism and assaults on human rights, religion and
culture. Terrorism attacks our fundamental values and
spreads fear. We must not be fearful because people in
fear are not free. Fighting terror and fear means fighting
for our freedom.
Thirdly, we must be focused on the root causes of
instability. I will offer just a few examples as an input
to the debate. Climate change is a growing root cause
of conflict. We have made progress in shaping a global
response, in Paris and in Marrakech, but it is now time

17-006127/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

to deliver. Ending hunger and achieving food security is
another critical area, especially owing to its connection
to disruptive South-South and South-North migrations.
Large movements of people can be both an outcome
and a root cause of conflict. However, if well managed,
they can become an opportunity for peace, growth and
development. These issues, along with many others,
also appear in the programme of the Italian presidency
of the Group of Seven.
In conclusion, we are determined to build peace
for tomorrow. That is not just the motto of our year in
the Security Council; it also describes the resolve that
will drive our actions. We will work to build consensus
together with the Secretary-General, our partners in the
Council and the broader membership.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Ethiopia.
Mr. Gebeyehu (Ethiopia): Let me congratulate
Mr. António Guterres on his assumption of his duties as
the new Secretary-General. I would also like to express
appreciation to his predecessor, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for
his tireless efforts in leading the Organization over the
past decade. Mr. Ban will always be remembered for
his important contribution, inter alia, in facilitating
the adoption of the transformative 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the signing of the Paris
Climate Agreement. Both are indeed critical for
conflict prevention and sustaining peace, which are
objectives that our new Secretary-General has made
major priorities.
Madame President, we wish to congratulate you on
the major initiative you have taken and endorse your
proposal on the role of the Secretary-General.
The timing of today’s high-level open debate cannot
be more appropriate in the light of the unprecedented
challenges facing the United Nations in the maintenance
of international peace and security. The credibility of
the Organization, and particularly the Security Council,
is undoubtedly on the line because it has not risen to the
occasion to effectively and decisively respond to those
challenges. It is at this critical juncture that SecretaryGeneral Guterres is taking office, and his leadership
role will be absolutely imperative in bringing new
impetus to the search for solutions to the many conflict
and crisis situations around the world today.
The fact that he was appointed not only through a
process more transparent than those of the past but also
8/108

10/01/2017

with the unanimous support of the Security Council and
the General Assembly, must make it possible for him
to proceed in carrying out his heavy responsibilities
with confidence. We are hopeful that, with his wisdom
and rich experience in leadership, both in his own
country and at the United Nations for much of the past
decade, he will be able to effectively guide the work of
the Organization.
However, we know full well that he can only
deliver the vision that he has laid out if he has the full
support and cooperation of all Member States. This
is all the more extremely critical at a time when the
United Nations is indeed needed more than at any time
in the past. It has never been clearer that the United
Nations, as the only universal organization we have,
has the indispensable role of addressing the many
global challenges of our time, including in the area of
peace and security.
That is why I would like to take this opportunity to
pledge Ethiopia’s unwavering support and cooperation
to the Secretary-General in the effective discharge of
his heavy responsibilities. Ethiopia has indeed been
playing active role in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts in Africa. In this regard, we are
ready to work with the Secretary-General as he embarks
on his agenda for peace with a view to addressing some
of the difficult conflict and crisis situations bedevilling
our continent.
In view of the enormous peace and security
challenges we are facing today, conflict prevention
must be given high priority. The concept of sustaining
peace is also perfectly aligned with this important
priority, having brought a paradigm shift in the manner
in which we deal with peace and security issues. The
three major reviews on peace and security together
with the concurrent resolutions 2282 (2016) and 70/262,
adopted last year by the Council and the General
Assembly, respectively, have indeed placed prevention
and sustaining peace at the core of the United Nations
activities in the area of peace and security.
It is encouraging to note that Mr. António Guterres
has made what he has called “diplomacy for peace” his
top priority, and we believe this is perfectly in line with
the conflict-prevention and sustaining peace agenda.
His firm and independent leadership on that matter,
based on the principles and purposes of the Charter
of the United Nations, will certainly go a long way
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

towards restoring the standing and credibility of
the Organization.
In that regard, the Secretary-General’s active
engagement in preventive diplomacy, mediation and
peaceful resolution of disputes through the judicious
exercise of his good offices will be critical to addressing
some of the most difficult conflict situations.
Undoubtedly, his efforts need to be supported by putting
to use all available tools, including early warning
instruments and the application of rigorous analyses to
emerging crisis situations, which will help him draw the
attention of the Security Council, in line with Articles
33 and 99 of the Charter of the United Nations.
No matter what the Secretary-General may try to
do, his efforts will be in vain without the full backing of
the Security Council. That is why the need to enhance
the working relations between the Security Council and
the Secretary-General cannot be overemphasized. It is
self-evident that there is room for a lot of improvement
and we need to continue to be innovative if we are to
achieve the desired objective.
Addressing institutional fragmentation and ensure
coherence across the entire United Nations system
is also absolutely essential to ensuring that conflict
prevention and sustaining peace are placed at the
heart of the Organization’s work and activities. In that
regard, we are encouraged by the Secretary-General’s
strong commitment to pushing for the implementation
of the key recommendations of the three major
reviews on peace and security with a view to creating
a comprehensive, modern and effective operational
peace architecture.
The United Nations cannot address the myriad
international peace and security challenges alone, which
underlines the need to enhance strategic partnerships
with regional and subregional organizations across
the whole spectrum of conflict cycles, including
prevention, peacekeeping and special political missions,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding. In that regard,
we appreciate the strong commitment expressed by
the Secretary-General to the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union. We sincerely
hope that he will contribute to its further enhancement,
building on the important momentum generated by
his predecessor. In that context, we also look forward
to his forthcoming visit to Addis Ababa towards the
end of this month to attend the twenty-eighth African
Union Summit.

S/PV.7857

Finally, we have no illusion that the coming period
will be smooth sailing for the Secretary-General. There
are no easy solutions to the complex peace and security
challenges of our time. However, we believe that he not
only has the right vision and strong leadership qualities,
but also the wisdom and experience to navigate this
difficult period and deliver results. Those qualities
have been exhibited today as well. I wish to conclude
my remarks by wishing him every success.
The President: I now call on the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America and
Member of President Obama’s Cabinet.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
you, Madam President, for taking up this important
cause, as you have done throughout your career. Let me
also take this occasion to welcome our new members:
Sweden, Italy, Bolivia, Ethiopia and Kazakhstan. We
look forward to working with each of them.
I welcome Secretary-General Guterres for his first
briefing to the Security Council. We knew he would
hit the ground running, but I am not sure that we knew
that he would be doing so at an Olympic pace, so we
congratulate him on his energy and the ambitious
vision that he has brought to the cause of conflict
prevention, conflict response and, as he put it, the cause
of sustaining peace. I think that it is really important
that he has wasted no time reforming the capacity of
the United Nation to be more nimble in the face of the
crises that confront us.
This debate is also timely for me personally, as
it will be one of the last times that I have the honour
of representing the United States in the Chamber. For
the past eight years since he took office, President
Barack Obama has been committed to showing United
States leadership here at the United Nations. The
United Nations matters as the only global institution
dedicated to finding solutions to transnational threats
and challenges that all of us face. The Security Council
remains at the forefront.
The Council matters because 100,000 troops
and police are deployed worldwide on the basis of
our resolutions and our words. The Council matters
because we make international law, we set standards,
we authorize the use of force, we enable the delivery of
life-saving humanitarian aid, and we impose financial
sanctions and arms embargoes to address threats to
international peace and security. We help set the rules for
how States should behave. The Council matters because

17-006129/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

when we come together, as others have noted, we can
respond to crises in ways no other institutions can.
But let us compare those capabilities with the
reality of the world around us — the reality of suffering
in places like Syria, South Sudan, Yemen, Libya, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi, Nigeria
and Mali. It is obvious that we, as the Council, can do
better. The question becomes this: When we have the
tools, the authority and such a strong partner in the
Secretary-General, what is holding us back? Why are
we not delivering more? I want to make four points to
explain how we, as members of the Security Council,
can show leadership to narrow the gap between what
this institution can achieve and where it has fallen
short, particularly as it relates to prevention.
First, if we are serious about preventing conflict,
the important principle of State sovereignty cannot
be a straitjacket to keep the Security Council and the
Secretary-General from taking necessary action to
respond to urgent, life-threatening crises. No Member
of the United Nations would suggest that we dispense
with respect for State sovereignty or that it is not an
essential bedrock of the international order. It is. The
United States aspires to a world of States that, as the
Charter of the United Nations States, should “live
together in peace with one another as good neighbours”.
Countries must respect one another. It is a very
simple proposition. But sovereignty cannot be a shield
to prevent outside scrutiny over actions taken in
defiance of the principles in the Charter of the United
Nations. We have seen too many countries invoking
State sovereignty as a means of securing full impunity
for themselves — impunity to do what they want to their
own people, in defiance of the Charter, and impunity to
do what they want to do, ironically, to their neighbours,
in defiance of the Charter. In 2014, Russia violated the
sovereignty of another State Member of the United
Nations and current member of the Security Council,
Ukraine, by invading and then attempting to annex
Crimea, which Russia holds to this day. Yet Russia has
suggested in the Chamber — and probably will again
today — that failure to respect State sovereignty is the
main driver of conflict, even as Russia has used its veto
to insulate itself from consequences in the Council for
trampling on Ukraine’s sovereignty.
The perversion of sovereignty undermines our
work in less obvious ways. Let us take peacekeeping.
We generally authorize peacekeepers only when
10/108

10/01/2017

members of the Council see an imminent risk of mass
violence — too often, as has been noted, after attacks
have started. We are supposed to deploy Blue Helmets
to help people, but in some cases Council members
have suggested that peacekeepers should not do
anything without checking first with the Governments
that are responsible for harming their citizens, thereby
warranting the deployment of peacekeepers in the
first place.
In South Sudan, the Council authorized the urgent
deployment of the Regional Protection Force (RPF) for
the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan (UNMISS) last August to help restore security
in the capital. The Government accepted the force.
Five months later, not a single RPF soldier has been
deployed, even as Government forces have continued
killing civilians, used sexual violence as a systematic
weapon of war, and positioned themselves to carry
out large-scale mass atrocities. And the Government
routinely blocks UNMISS patrols, to a point where
UNMISS had to ask its permission to evacuate Chinese
peacekeepers — permission that was not forthcoming,
although the soldiers’ lives hung in the balance. That
was sovereignty of a perverse kind being exercised when
one of our own peacekeepers was in grave jeopardy.
Yet there has been no further action by the Council
showing South Sudan’s leaders that such obstruction
has consequences.
I would like to anticipate the rebuttal to what I
am saying. Some will accuse the United States of also
invoking sovereignty when it is convenient. And in the
past, the United States has on occasion taken actions
that contradicted the principle that people should be
able to choose their own path. As President Obama
made clear when he took office, the United States
strives to lead by example. Sometimes we still fall short
of what we could achieve through deeper multilateral
cooperation. Indeed, we have a long-standing debate in
our Congress about international human rights treaties,
in which some argue that sovereignty precludes
ratifying treaties such as the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities, even when United States law
already enshrines the treaty’s standards. We strongly
believe that we are better off — and better — when
we strengthen the rule-based international order, and
that means living by the norms that protect all of our
common security and common humanity.
Secondly, if we are to sustain peace we first have to
tell things as they are. We as diplomats have developed a
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

lexicon of bureaucratic jargon that allows us to sidestep
the issues that we are supposed to be tackling. Our
statements in the Council fill up with empty phrases
at the moments that demand the greatest precision
and clarity. The result is that we often leave Security
Council meetings without even knowing what each of
us stands for. I recall all the times that our statements
in the Council have used the passive voice. We say that
dialogue must be pursued, violence must be ended, a
ceasefire must be respected. How? By whom? Who has
to do what? Let us be precise. We convene emergency
meetings of the Council to discuss attacks by one party
on another, but instead of doing the obvious — telling
that party to stop — we dodge. We use the phrase
“all parties” when we actually mean “one party”. We
resort to lines such as “There is no military solution”,
rather than identifying the actors who are pursuing a
military solution.
Of course, words alone are not enough to stop
suffering on the ground, but identifying who is
responsible for abuses and violations of the Charter
of the United Nations, in public, in the Council, is at
least a modest form of accountability and an antidote to
impunity. It may have some deterrent effect. It at least
puts those responsible for violence on notice that we are
watching. Now, I acknowledge that naming names can
be harder for some countries than it is for a permanent
member of the Security Council such as the United
States. I completely understand those countries that
say that they are afraid of retribution if they call out a
larger, more powerful country for its actions. But that
is precisely the reason to speak up, because all Member
States are collectively more secure in a world where big
and small Governments alike are held accountable for
their actions.
Similarly, many on the Council focus on the
importance of consensus. Again, for diplomats that
is an understandable impulse and, as I said at the
outset, we are so much stronger when we are united.
But if our only goal is consensus, the risk is a lowestcommon-denominator solution. That balance is tricky.
In November, for example, when the Council renewed
the mandate of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism to investigate the use of chemical weapons
in Syria (see S/PV.7815), the United States spent weeks
in painstaking negotiations with Russia on the terms.
There was a similar negotiation process with China on
the toughest-ever sanctions imposed on the Democratic

S/PV.7857

People’s Republic of Korea after the Kim Jong Un
regime conducted two nuclear tests this year (resolution
2321 (2016)). But in both cases the resolutions were
valuable, not only because the Council adopted them
unanimously but because of their impact — attributing
responsibility for chemical-weapons use in Syria
and cutting off sources of revenue to the nuclear
and ballistic-missile programmes of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
We can contrast that with the recent Council
resolution 2336 (2016), on Syria, aimed at monitoring
evacuations from eastern Aleppo. We can trumpet
reaching consensus on that resolution, but we have to
be careful not to miss the point. The resolution was
adopted at the very end of a merciless military assault
on Aleppo by Russia and the Al-Assad regime, after
Russia had twice used its veto to block calls for a
ceasefire that would have saved countless lives. I want
to be clear today that we are rooting wholeheartedly
for the efforts that Russia and Turkey are making to
achieve a ceasefire, and we agree with Russia that
we in the Council should do what we can to support
that effort. Anything that could save lives or reduce
violence is something that we should look at and offer
to support. But again, consensus is not the measure of
our success. That measure is our impact and whether,
given the articulation of a ceasefire, the Al-Assad
regime has in fact stopped bombing civilian areas,
notably the Damascus suburbs and Idlib, where such
attacks continue as we sit here.
Thirdly, we as Member States should empower the
Secretary-General and his team to do their jobs. Part of
that means encouraging the Secretary-General to bring
issues to the Council’s attention, and the United States
therefore strongly supports the Secretary-General’s use
of Article 99 of the Charter, so that he can more actively
warn the Council, early and often, when he believes it
is warranted. Of course, that means that the SecretaryGeneral deserves respect for the decisions he takes in
order to manage the Organization.
Let us consider the issue of sexual exploitation
and abuse in peacekeeping missions, which SecretaryGeneral Guterres has already made a top priority
through the creation of a new task force. That is an issue
where we ought to agree that the Secretary-General
must be able to do everything possible to stamp out this
scourge, including by repatriating the units responsible
for widespread and systematic abuses. Resolution 2272
(2016), adopted last year, endorsed the then-Secretary-

17-0061211/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

General’s decision to use that authority. But we should
remember that during those negotiations, several
Council members focused instead on how to limit the
Secretary-General’s powers to send troops home. We
should think about that — countries that responded
to the issue of sexual exploitation by trying to tie the
Secretary-General’s hands. That was their focus, not
the protection of potential victims.
A similar principle should apply for holding
peacekeepers accountable for implementing their
mandates. We were all very concerned when UNMISS
personnel were either incapable of or unwilling to
respond to calls for help after South Sudanese soldiers
attacked the Terrain compound in July. If, however, we
demand more from the United Nations in sustaining
peace, we must respect the Secretary-General’s
decisions — including his personnel decisions — to
strengthen systems that fall short. The United States
claims no special exemption here when it comes to
empowering the Secretary-General. We supported the
selection of António Guterres precisely because he was
independent-minded and prepared to stand up for the
principles of the United Nations Charter and against
bullying and lawlessness among Member States.
I would like to make a final point about how we can
push ourselves to use our capabilities as the Security
Council in order to promote peace. We have to look for
ways to hear from the actual people whose lives our
decisions affect. Here in the Council, or over at the
General Assembly, it is still out of the ordinary to hear
a voice that is not that of a diplomat or bureaucrat. So
our discussions become sterile. We lose sight of the
human stakes that should drive our work. One might
think that the unprecedented number of trips that the
Security Council has taken in recent years would help us
understand what actual people are facing — and they do
help. But during those trips, believe it or not, we spend
too much time sitting in formal, scripted conversations
in conference room after conference room. Incredibly,
some Member States here in New York want even less
access for representatives of civil society to come in and
share different perspectives. They fight accreditation
requests to the Non-Governmental Organization
Committee of the Economic and Social Council in
order to block non-governmental organizations from
being part of United Nations deliberations.
As Permanent Representative for the past three
and a half years, I know that the Council’s richest,
most meaningful exchanges have come when we have
12/108

10/01/2017

heard from real people — when Nadia Murad Basee
Taha, a Yazidi woman trafficked by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), implored the Council to
take action because ISIL, in her words, was using rape
“to ensure that women could never again lead a normal
life” (S/PV.7585, p.6); or when Dr. Zaher Sahloul
returned from eastern Aleppo to relay the pleas of the
city’s doctors that wounded children be allowed to be
evacuated; or when Jackson Niamah, a Liberian healthcare worker, briefed the Council (see S/PV.7268), at the
height of the Ebola crisis, on the anguish of turning
away infected patients and their children for a lack
of supplies and beds. When we on the Council show
leadership and put people at the centre of our decisions,
the effect is powerful. It can change minds.
We, as Council members, have helped keep people
safe by adopting resolutions to cut off financing for
terrorist organizations and to rally the world to stop the
flow of foreign terrorist fighters. We helped enforce
a rule against the use of chemical weapons when
we adopted a resolution to dismantle the Al-Assad
regime’s stockpile of chemical weapons. We helped
protect people from ethnic killings by deploying
peacekeepers to the Central African Republic when a
genocide seemed imminent. We helped set up a novel
United Nations mission to fight the Ebola outbreak in
West Africa, after delivering a wake-up call by holding
our first-ever emergency meeting on a public health
crisis here in the Council. The point is that the Council
is essential. It is an essential tool for promoting a more
peaceful world. But we need to work far harder and
dig deep within ourselves to make sure that we use the
capabilities at our disposal to help those who need us.
Mr. Fekl (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the initiative of the President to hold a
debate today on an issue of great importance for the
international community. France also welcomes the
effort of the Secretary-General to place the maintenance
of international peace and security, and conflict
prevention in particular, at the heart of his agenda.
Furthermore, France thanks him for the presentation
of his first report to the Council today (see S/2017/6,
annex). In a chaotic and uncertain world, we now need
more than ever the benchmarks and the multilateral
framework that the United Nations alone can provide.
We look forward to working with the SecretaryGeneral, especially on this crucial issue, in the years
to come. Our debate today provides an opportunity to
frame the action for future years under his mandate.
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

On this occasion France wishes to convey three key
messages. The first message and priority is, of course,
to strengthen prevention and to continue to invest in
peacekeeping. Prevention is one of the foundational
objectives of the United Nations, as was recalled
by earlier speakers. In Article 1 of the Charter, the
founders of the Organization set the objective to take
effective collective measures to prevent and remove
threats to peace. France supports all initiatives aimed
at strengthening the prevention and mediation role of
the United Nations. We do that because the nature of
the crisis situations to which the Council must respond
has changed, becoming increasingly intercommunal,
transnational and asymmetrical.
How do we support such initiatives? We do it
first by better anticipating the risks of crises with
the help of an early warning system. That is the case
today in the Gambia, for example. The challenge is to
collectively improve the ability of the Council, which
is an irreplaceable body, to anticipate crises and take
action. The Secretary-General plays a key role in that
respect. It is essential that the Secretary-General, as
he is authorized to do under Article 99 of the Charter,
alert us to any situation that he feels could jeopardize
international peace and security. Similarly, the
regular reports of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights and of the Special Adviser on the Prevention
of Genocide are extremely useful for our work. The
Security Council must make more systematic use of the
information provided via those channels.
We must also strengthen our collective response
through mediation and good offices. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the agreement that was signed
on 31 December as a result of the efforts of the
Congolese bishops provides a good example. France
provided its full support to that initiative and worked
toward the swift adoption of a presidential statement
by the Council that fully supported that agreement
(S/PRST/2017/1).
As we know, better prevention sometimes translates
to greater pressure. Sanctions, and sometimes even the
mere threat of resorting to sanctions, constitute one of
the tools of the Security Council. Sanctions have made
it possible to bring parties back to the table, to stop the
spiral of violence and to stabilize explosive situations
that would have completely degenerated otherwise.
In Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia, for example, sanctions
have been useful in supporting the peace process and
they were lifted once a more lasting phase of stability

S/PV.7857

has been achieved. Sometimes our efforts find their
limit, as in Burundi where mediation work has been
hindered by the refusal of the Government to engage
in a constructive dialogue with international partners.
The difficulty encountered in prevention efforts is
to find the means to act, even when there are just hints
of probable deterioration, without being blocked by
arguments relating to the non-interference in internal
affairs and the respect for the sovereignty of States. The
Council must be able to act whenever it is necessary.
Overcoming that dilemma and those risks is, among
other reasons, why France has taken the initiative to
propose a limitation on the use of the right of veto in cases
involving the risk of mass atrocities. When prevention
fails and violence worsens, it is our responsibility to
stop its escalation and to intervene. This is what France
has done, at the request of its partners, in both Mali and
the Central African Republic.
In that context, peacekeeping operations are an
essential Security Council tool to promote a return to
peace and to enable consolidation. When a crisis unfolds,
security must be restored quickly so as to allow for a
political settlement. We know that without security, no
real progress is possible. Such operations must be able
to benefit from resources that fit the requirements of the
environment in which they operate and must be able to
rely on political processes through robust and flexible
mandates. The United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic provide very clear
illustrations of the problem.
The second message and priority is that we must
help vulnerable countries develop their own capacities,
and we must address their vulnerabilities upstream. In
order to do that, we must make further progress in the
integration of the actions of the various components
of the United Nations system. We advocate a crosscutting and integrated approach that combines security,
humanitarian, political and development actions over
time with a continuity of the prevention, maintenance
and consolidation of peace.
The following is a simple and widely shared
observation: peace and development are linked. Many
conflicts and civil wars are rooted in development and
governance issues, the very issues that lie at the heart of
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in particular

17-0061213/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

Goal 16. In order to prevent conflicts, we must enable
the most vulnerable countries to deal with the fragility
brought on by crises and terrorism. To that end, we
should work to combat unemployment, in particular
youth unemployment; address the lack of public
services and public infrastructure; put in place a system
of inclusive governance and robust administration;
promote a judicial system that enables everyone to
have access to quality justice; ensure respect for human
rights; and ease tensions over natural resources.
France is a resolute supporter of the 2030 Agenda,
which is why we were among the first to present our
national programme for the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals at the High-Level
Political Forum in July.
Wherever France is engaged militarily, we
simultaneously undertake cooperation and development
assistance in all of the areas mentioned. And that has
produced results. Acting on the entire spectrum of
issues has enabled the establishment of a constitutional
process and the holding of elections in the Central
African Republic; the training of security and police
forces in Mali and in Niger; and crisis recovery and the
return of growth in Côte d’Ivoire.
Allow me also to stress the role of climate change.
While it is not a direct cause of conflict, it exacerbates
vulnerabilities, aggravates their most immediate
causes, and threatens progress. And, even if it is not
yet a cause today, in the future climate change may
itself become a direct cause of conflict. It strikes the
poorest populations and the most fragile States hardest.
Sub-Saharan Africa and small developing islands
are the primary victims. That is why the effective
implementation of the Paris Agreement is a necessity
and a matter of urgency for peace and security. Major
regional initiatives such as the Great Green Wall for the
Sahara and the Sahel deserve our full support.
The third priority concerns linkages among the
various tools, depending on their contexts and the level
urgency. Under the auspices of the Secretary-General,
the cooperation of the United Nations with external
actors must also be strengthened, and we know that
it will be. I am thinking of the national authorities,
whose ownership of prevention and development
activities is essential, but also of international,
regional and subregional organizations, including the
European Union and the African Union, which are
major partners of the United Nations. Finally, I am
14/108

10/01/2017

thinking of international financial institutions, such as
development banks, civil society and private partners.
The framework sketched today must find concrete
and immediate application in our response to the
challenges posed to peace and security. To conclude,
I would like to emphasize a few crises that we ought
to prioritize.
The resolution of the Syrian crisis will require an
exemplary partnership and full mobilization of the
members of the Security Council in support of the
inter-Syrian negotiations. Such negotations will have
to be fully integrated in the framework of the United
Nations process, in line with the Geneva Communiqué
and resolution 2254 (2015).
Libya will require special vigilance, given the
increased risk of civil war. The mediation work of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya is essential in
that regard, to support the efforts of the Government of
National Unity to be inclusive.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
support of the United Nations and the Security Council
for a full and swift implementation of the 31 December
agreement is necessary for the success of the ongoing
process. The coming weeks will be crucial in that regard.
In Mali, the Security Council must do still more to
enable the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali to accomplish its mission
and to provide it with the necessary personnel and
equipment. We must also maintain the pressure on the
parties in order to ensure a swift implementation of the
Algiers Agreement, which is urgent.
We are at a pivotal moment. While the demand for
conflict prevention and the links between peace and
development have become clear, it is now up to the
international community, above all the United Nations,
to translate that will into action. The Secretary-General
will always be able to count on the initiative and support
of France of his actions in this regard, whether in the
field or in the Security Council.
Sir Alan Duncan (United Kingdom): It gives me
enormous pleasure to be able to sit here on behalf of
the United Kingdom and extend a warm welcome to
Mr. António Guterres as the new Secretary-General.
On a very personal level, I recall the work that he
and I did together when he was the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and I was the
United Kingdom’s Minister of State for International
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Development. I am glad that such cooperation can
continue in both of our new roles. I hope that the
United Kingdom’s generous aid budget, much of which
used to go in the direction of the Office of the High
Commissioner, will not be forgotten.
Mr. Guterres assumes his role at a time of
widespread instability and the existence of far too many
long-running conflicts across the world. The United
Kingdom firmly believes in the role of the United
Nations in upholding the fundamental principles of a
rules-based international order, which must underpin
our understanding of what is right and what is wrong
in the world.
I would also like to thank the Swedish presidency
for convening today’s open debate. You and I, Madam
President, have also worked together in the past, when
you were Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Sexual Violence in Conflict. I salute your
continuing efforts to place conflict prevention and
gender at the centre of your foreign policy.
Ever since the inception of the United Nations, the
United Kingdom has been at the forefront of decisive
action by the United Nations to prevent conflict. On this
very day, 71 years ago, London hosted the first meeting
of the General Assembly. On the agenda in 1946 were
two issues that we still face today: sustaining peace,
and supporting refugees driven from their homes by
the scourge of war. Both seven decades ago and today,
the work of the United Nations on those issues — and,
of course, many more — remains fundamentally about
addressing conflict.
However, we should recognize that while the issues
may seem the same seven decades on, the response of
the United Nations certainly is not. We have tools at
our disposal that our predecessors never had. We have
tools for conflict prevention, mitigation, mediation,
stabilization and recovery. Thus, the challenge is
how to use such tools effectively and, often, many of
them at the same time. We therefore fully endorse the
Secretary-General’s vision for an inclusive approach
to conflict prevention, peace and development — the
peace continuum — and his commitment to achieving
the reforms needed to deliver it. The United Kingdom
sees five key building blocks in the realization of
that vision.
First, there is development. We share the SecretaryGeneral’s view that development is fundamental to
addressing the drivers of conflict. That is why our own

S/PV.7857

aid budget is increasingly focused on the world’s most
fragile places. The New Deal for Engagement in Fragile
States laid the foundations for achieving the global
goals of the United Nations. Together, we now must
build on those foundations and harness the political and
security tools of the United Nations.
Secondly, we need to equip ourselves with the
expertise needed to take action sooner. Two obvious
steps are improving situational awareness, which
builds on New Zealand’s recent work, and supporting
senior United Nations officials when they flag risks and
challenge the Council to respond. The recent briefing
on South Sudan by Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, is an excellent example.
Thirdly, we need to recommit to making greater
use of Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations,
including enabling the Secretary-General to make full
use of the tools at his disposal, such as his own good
offices and expert mediation by his envoys and others.
Fourthly, we need to encourage regional
responsibility, because, try as we might to seek
solutions from New York, the best solutions are
often found at the local level. We should continue to
support regional organizations that show leadership in
preventing conflict. That includes organizations that
span multiple regions. For example, the Commonwealth
has dedicated Commonwealth Day and the ensuing
year to peace-building, with a focus on practical action
among its 52 member States.
Finally, we must ensure that United Nations
deployments are fit for purpose. That means that they
must be properly prepared and equipped, with each
mission tailored to the task at hand. It means that the
Council must be prepared to focus its resources in
order to deliver those effective missions. It means that
we must deliver what we are calling “the three P’s”, as
agreed upon at the Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial
in London in September 2016: better mission planning,
more pledges of personnel and equipment, and
improved performance.
The tools of the United Nations provide the best
means to prevent conflict and lay the foundations for
sustained peace. However, we must deploy the right
tools at the right time. In many cases, that means that
we should deploy them sooner — warning rather than
reacting, and mediating rather than peacekeeping. That
is why the peace continuum is so important. It requires

17-0061215/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

10/01/2017

us to develop greater awareness of possible flashpoints
so that we can chart a more peaceful course.

United Nations Trust Fund for Human Security since
its establishment in 1999.

We agree with the Secretary-General that if
this great Organization is to continue to achieve its
objectives, it must be simpler, more decentralized
and more flexible. I am confident that between the
Secretariat and Member States, we have the knowledge,
skills and will to make that happen. Today, I reiterate
the pledge of the United Kingdom that we will fully
support that effort, just as did 71 years ago.

Japan has been consistently committed to
peacebuilding and in particular to capacity- and
institution-building. In Timor-Leste, Japan has
supported State-building efforts through development
assistance, as well as the dispatch of our self-defence
forces and civilian police personnel. We have also exerted
leadership as the Chair of the Working Group on Lessons
Learned of the Peacebuilding Commission. Japan will
continue to be a leader in institution-building — the
backbone of sustainable peacebuilding.

Mr. Kishi (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking you, Madam President, for organizing and
personally presiding over this open debate with a very
timely subject. I would also like to welcome SecretaryGeneral Guterres to the Security Council.
We thank the Secretary-General for sharing with
us his determination today. We are very happy to have
him as Secretary-General of the United Nations. He has
our full support.
During the past two years, various review processes
have brought to our attention the importance of conflict
prevention. Conflicts in Syria, Yemen and many parts
of Africa demonstrate the cost of insufficient efforts
in conflict prevention. The Security Council has a key
responsibility in dealing with immediate conflicts.
However, it should also demonstrate results in conflict
prevention — a far less costly endeavour — by making
the best use of such tools as Security Council missions
to the field. We would like to see a Security Council
that is a leader not only in resolving conflicts, but
also in preventing them. We must weave the concept
of sustaining peace into every aspect of United
Nations activities.
Japan fully embraces this challenge. We believe that
peace is a long-term process and our emphasis has always
been on the comprehensiveness and seamlessness of
our assistance. Human security is an important pillar of
Japan’s foreign policy. Based on this concept, Japan has
consistently provided human-centred, comprehensive
and preventive assistance through harmonized efforts
with various aid bodies. In Mindanao, the Philippines,
we have provided assistance to track-two dialogues,
as well as track-one peace negotiations, based on this
principle. Our official development assistance provided
peace dividends by addressing poverty, high youth
unemployment and social injustice on a preventive
basis. We have also contributed $410 million to the
16/108

We listened to the statement of the SecretaryGeneral carefully. We welcome his serious plan of action
and look forward to discussing his initiatives further.
We will provide our utmost support. We hope he will
actively employ his good offices to address conflicts
and disputes, including those in the Middle East region.
We look forward to working closely with him in the
Security Council. We also encourage his proactive use
of situational awareness and horizon-scanning briefings
as means to reinforce conflict prevention. We ask that
he please make full use of his power to bring matters
to the attention of the Security Council, pursuant to
Article 99 of the Charter of the United Nations. We
look forward to his frequent presence at the Council’s
informal consultations.
Japan would like to underline that United
Nations reform is needed to sustain peace effectively.
Institutional silos must be removed and coordination
must be reinforced for a seamless and holistic approach
to sustaining peace. This will involve not only increased
efficiency and cohesion between the Department of
Political Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Peacebuilding Support Office,
but far greater coordination among actors across all
three pillars of United Nations engagement. We are
encouraged by his track record of reform at the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and his promotion of the humanitarian-development
nexus. We welcome his initiative to reform the
Secretariat, so that he can better perform his functions
particularly in conflict prevention and sustaining peace.
Japanese diplomacy centres on being a proactive
contributor to peace. As a member of the Security
Council, we will work closely with the SecretaryGeneral and Council members through a proactive
and results-oriented approach. Japan pledges to serve
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

as a responsible Council member and a dependable
partner to the new Secretary-General in promoting
international peace and stability.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): We appreciate your
initiative, Madam President, to bring to the attention of
the Council one of the most critical topics in the field
of peace and security. We share the ideas outlined in
your concept note (S/2017/6, annex). We carefully read
your manifesto on Sweden taking a Security Council
seat and wish to assure you, Madam, of our full support
of Sweden’s priorities, which soundly resonate with
our own.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s views on
the ways to collaborate with the Council. We are
pleased to note that the approach presented today by
Secretary-General Guterres fully coincides with the
position expressed by him as Secretary-General-elect
at the informal meeting with the Council convened last
November on Ukraine’s initiative.
It is not only symbolic that our meeting today
coincides with the date the General Assembly was
first convened in London in 1946. Seven decades ago,
the founding Members faithfully believed that the
Organization had to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war. The task is yet to be accomplished.
It is sad to acknowledge that the world has not
become much safer. Some of those who signed the
Charter tend to liberally interpret its principles for
their own convenience. As a result, the international
community has to deal again and again with
conflicts — conflicts that broke out because of the
erosion of rule of law, gross human rights violations
and a lack of international institutional capacities to
bring those responsible to account.
Being a lawyer myself, I want to stress Ukraine’s
firm and unequivocal position that international law
is one for all. It applies to all United Nations Member
States equally and without exclusions. There are no big
or small States before the law, rich or poor, more or less
equal. International law is one for all with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations at
the forefront.
The Syrian conflict is probably the most brutal
armed conflict of recent times. We have witnessed
the inability of the Council to react appropriately to
the butchery and slaughter that had been happening in
Aleppo and other areas of Syria due to six consecutive

S/PV.7857

vetoes from the same permanent member. What is the
result? Aleppo is bombed into dust, many innocent
lives are lost, the declared ceasefire is barely holding
and prospects for a settlement are yet to be seen. It was
the Council’s collective responsibility to prevent such
a course of events from happening and to put an end
to that conflict. The Council has, unfortunately, failed
to do so. We still believe that ongoing efforts will bear
results and that a sustainable ceasefire will pave the way
for the start of meaningful political dialogue in Syria.
In the contemporary globalized world, none of
the conflicts that we are facing is too distant. The
international community has spent enormous resources
in helping to rebuild war-torn societies and to assist
people in need. Moreover, Europe is also not immune
from conflicts.
Ukraine has been countering military aggression
for nearly three years, one that has taken on all forms
of hybrid warfare. What has happened? The General
Assembly has adopted resolutions condemning the
aggression and the occupation of Crimea. In the
attempts by the Security Council to stop the military
aggression, we were again blocked by the same
permanent member. We expected the former SecretaryGeneral to provide his good offices, but he did not
go beyond expressing concern. Something similar
happened in Georgia in 2008. The Security Council
members, and especially the permanent members, have
a special responsibility — both the founding permanent
members and the most recent one, the Russian
Federation, which acquired the status of occupying
Power in General Assembly resolution 71/205, adopted
in December 2016.
The Security Council, which was established after
the Second World War, during which time Europe
had been the primary battlefield, must again today
pay special attention to the stress on international
peace and security caused by conflicts on that
continent — something that was inconceivable, even
during the time of the former Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, which was a permanent member of the
Security Council before the Russian Federation.
Prevention is a powerful tool and bold tactic, and
we are particularly encouraged by the special emphasis
that the Secretary-General placed on that tool in his
statement today. The United Nations has to use all
its potential to prevent the outbreak, resurgence and
prolongation of armed conflicts. We welcome the

17-0061217/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

concepts of sustaining peace and a people-centered
approach that were reflected in various decisions
adopted by the Council and the General Assembly last
year. Prevention is but one of the hallmarks of Ukraine’s
foreign policy. It covers all three United Nations pillars:
peace and security, development and human rights.
With regard to human rights, it was through
Ukraine’s initiative in 2010 — years prior to the coming
of war to our country — that the Human Rights Council
adopted the first-ever thematic resolution (resolution
14/5) on the role of prevention in the promotion and
protection of human rights. As it is well known, gross
human rights violations are often a precursor to the
outbreak of a military conflict. It is also a certainty that
the Government of an aggressor country violates the
human and civil rights of its own citizens, thereby getting
a free hand to launch an assault on its neighbours. In
September 2016, the Human Rights Council reinforced
the message to bolster the work on the prevention of
human rights violations by adopting another resolution
(resolution 33/6), sponsored by 74 States, including by
the members of the Security Council. Yet in November
2016, we saw desperate attempts by some Member
States that are at the same time aggressors to prevent
the Third Committee of the General Assembly from
addressing human rights violations in certain countries.
Conflict prevention is the most effective way to
avert human suffering, as well as the least expensive
tool in conflict resolution. Unfortunately, all too often,
Member States tend to keep their heads in the sand,
until it is too late. That pattern must be changed in
order to ensure that Srebrenica, Rwanda and Aleppo do
not happen again. The Secretary-General should play
a special role in prevention. We are looking forward
to his proactive, unbiased and independent action,
which includes bringing the most worrying situations
to the attention of the Security Council. That function
of the Secretary- General is envisaged in the Charter
of the United Nations but has, unfortunately, been
underutilized for many years. That is why we welcome
the intention of the Secretary-General to increase the
capabilities of the Secretariat in strategic information
analysis. It is crucial also for the Secretary-General to
give a new breath of air to Article 99. We expect that
those initiatives will also result in more substantive
and informative reporting on the issues on the
Council’s agenda.
Another important but unused tool at the SecretaryGeneral’s disposal is his good offices and other political
18/108

10/01/2017

enablers. Those means are rarely seen in play, whether
it be a matter of conflict-prone or de facto conflictaffected States like Ukraine. We sincerely believe
that the new Secretary-General can skilfully manage
the entire content of the toolbox given to him by the
Charter, and he should not hesitate to use it wherever
necessary. One more area of interaction between the
Secretary-General and the Council is peacekeeping,
in which Ukraine continues to be a reliable partner of
the Organization. The role of the Secretary-General
in further improving the way in which that adaptable
instrument and flagship activity of our Organization is
utilized cannot be overestimated.
Preventing conflicts from entering into a vicious
spiral of violence often depends on the ability of the
Organization to deploy the necessary resources at the
earliest stage. In that regard, the Secretary-General
can and should play an important role. In cases
where the deployment of a peacekeeping mission is
requested, the Council can benefit from an early and
comprehensive assessment of the situation on the
ground and recommendations on possible mandates for
a peacekeeping operation from the Secretary-General.
That should be done by default, once the request has
been received by the Secretariat, thereby enabling the
Council to take an informed and timely decision.
In conclusion, conflict prevention can be
successful only as the result of the collective efforts of
all stakeholders within and beyond the Organization.
We believe that the United Nations should continue
to build and enhance its strategic partnership with
regional organizations that share the principles set
forth in the Charter and respect the rules and norms
of international law. We welcome the close cooperation
and partnership that the United Nations has established
with the European Union and the African Union. We
also see potential in establishing closer United Nations
interaction with the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) aimed at contributing
to OSCE peace activities on the ground.
We trust that the new Secretary-General and the new
leadership of the Secretariat will be true custodians of
the principles of the Charter and able to take a proactive
approach to conflict prevention and resolution.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation thanks Sweden for convening and presiding
over this debate, as well as for the concept note
(S/2017/6, annex), which was prepared and circulated in
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

a timely manner. We also thank the Secretary-General
for his outstanding statement. It is very encouraging for
us to see that in his New Year’s message, coinciding
with the beginning of his new mandate, he has made the
issue of peace a priority for 2017, which is a matter that
depends on all of us.
We also appreciate the importance that he attaches
to diplomacy and mediation as fundamental tools in the
search for peace and the prevention of new conflicts.
Moreover, we especially welcome his willingness to
work to develop a comprehensive, modern and effective
peacebuilding architecture in order to bring about longterm development and strengthen the prevention and
peaceful settlement of conflicts. The broad review that
was made in the United Nations in 2015 has been very
clear with regard to the need to prioritize the prevention
of conflicts.
Uruguay believes that it is important to maintain
the momentum created by the concurrent adoption of
Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) and General
Assembly resolution 70/262 on 27 April 2016 on the
review of the peacekeeping architecture, so as to
continue to produce constructive input concerning
peacebuilding throughout the United Nations system.
We should nevertheless ask ourselves what tools
are available to us in order to prevent conflict. First, we
have the United Nations Charter and institutions, as well
as regional and subregional organizations. The work of
prevention requires a political commitment on the part
of relevant actors in order to address situations that,
owing to their character, pose the risk of a resurgence
of or a return to conflict.
In the region to which my country belongs, there
exist regional and subregional organizations that
have contributed successfully to preventing potential
conflicts through mechanisms such as good offices and
mediation, among others.
The Security Council, under the Charter, is
entrusted with a responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Preventive diplomacy
efforts on the part of the Council are relevant, as it is
the system’s principal organ for the maintenance of
peace. But to that end, it is key that all of its members,
not just some of them, have early access to the relevant
information with regard to possible breaches of
the peace.

S/PV.7857

In this regard, Uruguay supported last
year New Zealand’s initiative to hold periodic
situational-awareness meetings with the various
departments and offices of the Secretariat. Uruguay,
as a traditional troop-contributing countries, knows
first-hand of the challenges that arise in the field
during and after conflict. The work that our Blue
Helmets have done and will do can very often be
considered as early peacebuilding. This coincides with
the view expressed in the review of the peacebuilding
architecture, namely, that peacebuilding tasks are not
limited to post-conflict situations but are in fact part
of a continuum encompassing the period before, during
and after conflict.
The three pillars of the United Nations are
interdependent and mutually reinforcing. Therefore, it
is possible to build peace only when there is respect for
human rights in developed societies that respect the rule
of law. The root causes of conflicts must be overcome
by putting into practice the various instruments at the
disposal of the United Nations. Fighting organized
crime, terrorism, extreme poverty, discrimination and
other scourges affecting societies should be a priority.
The maintenance of peace is a complex process that
covers a broad range of tasks and actors and that requires
integration and coordination with the Government of
the country involved, leading to dialogue and peace
processes that are inclusive and representative of society
as a whole. In this regard, we would like to stress that
the role of women is essential in order to ensure peace.
Uruguay reiterates its commitment to international
peace and security. Sustainable peace is everyone’s
business. It is the goal towards which we must work
together in order to translate into action that which
we so often preach in speeches, resolutions and
other documents.
The President: As we discuss the importance of
sustaining peace, we are appalled to hear that another
suicide attack has taken place today, this time in a
civilian-populated area in Kabul. I strongly condemn
the attack, which resulted in many deaths and injuries,
and we offer condolences to the victims and their
families as well as our support to the Government and
the people of Afghanistan.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
commends Sweden for the initiative of holding today’s
open debate on conflict prevention and sustaining
peace and welcomes you, Foreign Minister Wallström,

17-0061219/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

to New York to preside over this meeting. China
salutes Secretary-General Guterres as he assumes his
new functions, thanks him for his statement and looks
forward to his greater engagement in the promotion of
the cause of the United Nations and the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Peace is the common aspiration and lofty goal of
humankind. However, today’s world, far from being
peaceful, is marred by alternating escalation in regional
hotspot issues, the spread of terrorism and brewing
traditional and non-traditional security challenges.
A comprehensive and durable peace remains
elusive. How to effectively prevent conflict and build
sustainable peace is an important issue facing the
United Nations and the vast majority of its Member
States. I wish to emphasize the following points.
First, it is essential to forge a correct security
concept. In today’s world, countries are interconnected
and affect each other in terms of security. No single
country can achieve absolute security purely on its own,
nor can any country reap security from the insecurity
suffered by others.
The international community must firmly uphold
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations; foster a common, integrated, cooperative
and sustainable new security concept; build a global
partnership based on dialogue instead of confrontation
and partnership instead of alliance; bring to the fore
the crucial role of the United Nations and its Security
Council in putting an end to wars and maintaining peace;
and build a common security architecture based on
equity, justice, joint contributions and shared benefits.
Secondly, efforts must be made to promote
common development. As peace and development are
interdependent and mutually reinforcing, the causes of
security threats such as war, conflict and terrorism all
can be traced back to poverty and underdevelopment,
and, as such, relevant solutions are also to be found in
development. It is important to effectively implement
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development; forge
a global governance concept based on the principle of
achieving shared growth through joint reflection and
by pooling our strengths; seek development prospects
through openness, innovation, inclusiveness and mutual
benefit; properly tackle global challenges such as
climate change and the refugee crisis; help developing
countries to enhance their ability to eliminate poverty
20/108

10/01/2017

and achieve self-development; and, ultimately, achieve
common development and promote durable peace.
Thirdly, preventive diplomacy and peacebuilding
must be strengthened. It is important to maintain a
general direction towards peaceful peaceful solutions
to disputes. Differences should be resolved through
political means such as dialogue and negotiations.
It is imperative to help countries emerging from
conflict enhance their own abilities in the areas of
political security, economic development and social
integration, thus solidifying the foundation for peace.
United Nations organs such as the General Assembly,
the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission must implement
their respective functions and leverage their respective
advantages, working synergetically to uphold the
sovereignty of the countries concerned and respecting
their views and focusing on their needs.
Fourthly, the diversity of civilizations must be
respected. There is no superior civilization, culture
or religion. There must be mutual respect and equal
treatment among all civilizations, cultures and
religions. The United Nations should advocate a culture
of peace by affirming that harmony can be achieved
through diversity and strength attained by embracing
inclusiveness and differences. The United Nations
should actively promote dialogue and exchanges
of mutual learning among different civilizations,
cultures and religions. Countries and the international
community at large must work together, practice
openness and inclusiveness, and seek common ground
while respecting differences, so as to make dialogue
among civilizations a bridge to greater friendship
among nations and a linchpin of world peace.
China is a defender and a builder of world peace
and has made positive contributions to the promotion
of peace, progress and the development of humankind.
At the series of summits held on the occasion of the
seventieth anniversary of the United Nations, China’s
President, Xi Jinping, called for carrying forward the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and for the building of a new international
relationship with cooperation and a win-win philosophy
at its centre and the forging of a community with a
shared future.
China is ready to work hand in hand with the rest
of the international community for the maintenance of
world peace and achieving shared development.
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Sweden has begun its two years of labour
on the Security Council by taking the Chair of the
presidency at the very start. We wish it every success.
We are sure that in the conduct of our work the land of
Dag Hammarskjöld, Olof Palme and Jan Eliasson will
exemplify the excellent foreign policy traditions that
we know of old.
We welcome the participation of Secretary-General
António Guterres in his first Security Council open
debate. It is significant that the new Secretary-General
began his work with the appeal for peace that he voiced
on 1 January. We share the basic premise of his brief,
which is that the pursuit of peace should permeate
every area of our Organization’s activities, from
ending hostilities to concluding negotiations designed
to achieve political solutions to conflicts. He made
important observations in his impressive statement
today, and we should all vigorously support his message
that 2017 must be a year for peace, not just in words but
in our practical actions.
The United Nations and its Security Council play a
significant role in preventing conflicts. We agree that
their successful, timely prevention depends to a large
degree on combining all the tools in the United Nations
arsenal — Chapters I and VI of the Charter, along with
a number of additional decisions, including resolution
2171 (2014), on conflict prevention. The time has come
for a dispassionate look at what has not worked and why,
and to draw the appropriate conclusions. Right now, at
the beginning of a new Secretary-General’s term, is the
perfect moment for that.
However, we should not forget that every situation
requires a delicate, unbiased approach and patient
efforts to arrive at a settlement that is unique to it.
A one-size-fits-all model does not work. We believe
firmly that we cannot base early prevention on some
randomly chosen combination of various indicators of
conflict, which can leave the door open for potential
misuse. An artificial emphasis on separate mechanisms
available to the United Nations — even in such
important areas as the protection of human rights or
the Sustainable Development Goals — is even less
appropriate. The non-transparent assessment methods
of specific separate entities should not be used as a
basis for general preventive action.
With regard to the concept of sustaining peace,
we see it as the acknowledgement by all national

S/PV.7857

participants of the processes for sharing responsibility
for peace, tackling the underlying causes of conflict and
reconstructing and developing their own Governments
as well as preventing potential crisis situations. The
term was first used in resolution 2282 (2016), on
reforming our peacebuilding architecture, which
aimed to adapt foundational documents to modern
realities. At the same time, the mandates of the various
bodies and the fundamentals of their work remained
unchanged — that is, the primary responsibility both
for preventing and dealing with the consequences of
conflict is borne by the States themselves, and the
parameters of international support, should it prove
necessary, depend on the States’ decisions.
Conflict prevention is sometimes presented as if
it were some kind of new, all-inclusive priority for the
United Nations. But the fact remains that this task was
established by the Charter 70 years ago. Why it has not
been implemented as it should have is a good question.
Perhaps it is about political will, or the lack of it. We
all agree that prevention is cheaper and more effective
than cure, but deciding on a diagnosis is another matter
altogether. It is worth recalling here that Member States
still disagree about the former Secretary-General’s
proposed possible indicators for the inevitability of
a crisis. History has often shown, for instance, that
crises can arise in countries where there are no human
rights violations or lack of development. And yet for
some reason external interference in the affairs of other
States and in support of coups has not been mentioned
as a cause of crises, although it is the consequences of
just such issues that we are currently dealing with in a
whole slew of cases.
We should also take a fresh look at the coordination
of international efforts at conflict prevention. It is
essential to ensure that we make more active use of
the potential for prevention offered by regional and
subregional organizations. Of course, Member States
also expect constructive support from the United
Nations Secretariat. We hope that in their preparation
of relevant reports, its staff, while not forgetting the
Security Council’s primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security,
can analyse the issues intelligently and share their
experience in resolving them. Those reports can be
useful if they are put together professionally and
impartially. It is also important to ensure that they
focus on the practical impact of the measures proposed.

17-0061221/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

We are ready to take into account any initiatives
from the Secretariat in the area of conflict prevention
or raising awareness of potential threats, but they
must add value, taking into account the approaches of
Member States and the main parties to a conflict. That
applies particularly to the Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism, which does not take full account
of the real causes of that dangerous phenomenon and
ignores the primary role of States in combating it. And
that issue should not overshadow the more urgent global
problem of an unprecedentedly serious terrorist threat,
which we need a genuinely collective effort to fight.
That is why we propose coming together and acting
in genuine unity within the framework of a broad
anti-terrorist coalition, as Russia’s President Vladimir
Putin discussed in his address to the General Assembly
at its seventieth session (see A/70/PV.13). We all need
to be guided not by ambitions but by our shared values
and interests, based on the Charter of the United Nations
and other applicable norms of international law, as
well as our international partnership agreements, the
most important of which is the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. For our part, we affirm our
commitment to strengthen the preventive potential of
the United Nations for combating crises, as reflected
in the Russian Federation’s foreign policy concept,
updated in November.
In conclusion, I would like to draw attention to the
fact that we can speculate as long as we want as to how
many conflicts could be avoided if the United Nations
intervened in time, but the fact remains that a significant
number of them have been the result of irresponsible
external interference in the affairs of other States,
including the overthrow of legitimate regimes. We
have no right to squander the credibility of the United
Nations on such adventurism. All our actions should
be carefully verified and, most importantly, enjoy the
support of all parties to a conflict.
I cannot omit to comment briefly on two statements
made today, the first being that of the United States.
We are already accustomed to the fact that the notion
of American exceptionalism extends to procedural
issues, as evidenced by a contempt for time limits that
shows disrespect for others. It has been harder to get
used to the random citations of history. Speaking of
sovereignty, one cannot help recalling that it has been
the gross violation of such by the United States that
has put a number of countries in difficult situations
that we have had to deal with over and over again. The
22/108

10/01/2017

United States invasion of Iraq not only destabilized
the Middle East but gave birth to the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant. Its gross violations of Syria’s
sovereignty have resulted in the further spread of the
terrorist threat. The overthrow of the Government in
Libya has had terrible consequences not only in Libya
itself but for the entire African continent. The flood of
refugees into Europe from Syria and Libya has been a
direct result of Washington’s adventurist policies. The
deplorable situation in South Sudan has a great deal to
do with Washington’s years of attempts to overthrow
the regime in Khartoum. The crisis in Ukraine would
not have happened if the United States and its allies
had not begun telling Kyiv which agreements it could
subscribe to and when. The outgoing administration of
Barack Obama is desperately seeking people to blame
for its failures in both domestic and foreign policy. It is
regrettable that even the Security Council has become
a forum for such futile efforts.
Very briefly, the statement of the representative of
Ukraine contained obvious legal and political errors.
Kyiv should stop firing on the civilian residents of the
Donbas region and should fulfil the Minsk agreements,
which will soon be two years old. First and foremost,
it must launch a direct dialogue with the citizens of
Donetsk and Luhansk.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to once again wish Secretary-General António Guterres
every success.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome His Excellency SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and to express Egypt’s full
support for his work under his important mandate. I
would also like to express our appreciation to Sweden
for convening this debate, which addresses a central
aspect of the future role of the United Nations in
maintaining international peace and security.
In the light of the emerging and unconventional
challenges in our world — including the proliferation
of extremist organizations, organized crime, migration
and environmental challenges — we need to develop
a creative approach to address them. Given the nature
of those challenges, an overlap between conflict
prevention,
conflict
resolution,
peacebuilding,
peacekeeping and sustainable development is inevitable
The comprehensive reviews carried out in 2015 have
given us a clear understanding of the impact of those
challenges on the role of the United Nations and on the
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

concepts governing peacebuilding and sustainability.
The subsequent resolution 2282 (2016) constituted the
political framework for such a conceptual development.
One of the most important conclusions to be drawn
from those reviews is the imperative to abandon the
concept of crisis or conflict management and to adopt
an approach that seeks to either prevent conflicts
before they occur or to find a sustainable resolution by
addressing their root causes. We must also take into
consideration that there is no one-size-fits-all solution
to all conflicts.
To that end, we call for improving the Secretariat’s
analytical capabilities to suggest and propose detailed
solutions commensurate with the nature, dimensions
and varying contexts of every conflict. Egypt believes
that such a flexible analytical approach would help the
Organization and the Security Council to determine the
best means to address each stage of a conflict, whether
by deploying or amending a mandate, by withdrawing
a peacekeeping operation or a special political mission,
by resorting exclusively to mediation, by imposing or
lifting a sanctions regime or by giving precedence to
the efforts of regional and subregional organizations.
The concept of sustainable peace is the ultimate
goal of the work of the United Nations in maintaining
international peace and security. According to that
concept, the Organization must be able to adopt a
political and programmatic framework, especially in
countries and regions emerging from conflict. The
political framework calls for continued and long-term
regional and international support of the political
process in order to achieve political stability and
security, as a prelude to the programmatic framework.
That framework should invest in national capacitybuilding to manage national reconciliation processes,
to recover economic activity and to improve the ability
of Governments to meet the basic education and health
needs of their citizens.
It is only natural for women and young people to play
a central role in all phases of planning, implementation
and follow-up of all sustainable peace processes as a
means to move from conflict to peace. We believe that
such an approach gives an objective and comprehensive
meaning to the concept of national ownership.
Assistance programmes should focus on building
the national institutions and capacities that will
enable transformative efforts to achieve sustainable
peace. Therefore, the United Nations must adopt a

S/PV.7857

new approach when determining the priorities of such
assistance programmes. National forces must be able to
set those priorities, instead of them being imposed by
donor countries.
The magnitude of the challenges to sustainable
peace requires a shift in the United Nations system
at the cultural, structural and administrative levels.
Resolution 2282 (2016) comprises a pragmatic
framework for improving the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Peacebuilding Support Office and
the Peacebuilding Fund, in order to ensure consistency
between the programmatic and political frameworks
of sustainable peace. Given the overlap between
political, security, economic and institutional aspects
of sustainable peace, the Peacebuilding Commission
must play a role that varies depending on the nature
of each conflict. Therefore, the Commission must
demonstrate the necessary flexibility to deal with every
conflict separately.
Predictable funding for efforts to sustain peace
represents another main challenge. We need to adopt
funding mechanisms based on a broad partnership
among the United Nations, international financial
institutions and bilateral donors. Those mechanism
sshould take into consideration a degree of risk as a
by-product of investment in sustaining peace. The
Peacebuilding Fund can play an important role in that
regard, and all donor countries should be encouraged to
provide it with long-term funding.
We look forward to the upcoming report of the
Secretary-General on resolution 2282 (2016). We stress
the need for that report to include a comprehensive vision
of how to improve the role of our Organization and the
tools available to it to contribute to sustaining peace,
based on the outcomes of the previous comprehensive
reviews. That would represent a new agenda for peace
that coincides with the passing of 25 years since the
issuance of the Agenda for Peace report (S/24111) by
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali. The challenges of our day
are different from those existing when the report was
issued in 1992. but the goal remains the same. It is the
need for the United Nations to regain its important role,
as enshrined in the Preamble to the Charter. We hope
that the new Secretary-General will be able to formulate
that comprehensive vision and to garner international
commitment for such a vision.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I apologize that Senegalese Foreign Minister

17-0061223/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mankeur Ndiaye, who had planned to participate in
the debate, had to attend a limited summit yesterday
in Abuja to discuss the situation in Gambia. He has
asked me, on behalf of Senegal, to congratulate the
Government of Sweden for this month’s presidency
of the Security Council, which began directly after its
accession to the Council. We are pleased to participate
in this public debate that Sweden has decided to devote
to the crucially important topic of conflict prevention
and sustainable peace. Senegal attaches particular
importance to that theme as it applies to the Sahel
region of Africa, a region that is, unfortunately, marked
by terrorism and violent extremism — scourges that
my country resolutely seeks to combat alongside the
international community.
I also wish to thank and congratulate the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, Mr. António Guterres,
whose important statement helped us better understand
the matter under review. Senegal will spare no effort
to work with the Secretary-General to contribute to
making 2017 a year of peace, as the Secretary-General
has proposed.
The Security Council needs a paradigm shift in
order to redefine our working priorities and strategies
for promoting international peace and security. We
need to invest more in prevention by addressing at
the earliest possible stage the underlying causes of
conflict throughout the globalized world, in particular
in Africa. Let us make no mistake — the effectiveness
and efficiency of our efforts, and thus the credibility
of the Organization, will essentially depend on our
capacity to detect in a timely manner, better analyse
and thereby prevent threats old and new to international
peace and security.
We have many tools at our disposal to that end,
but what often lacks is political will, undermining
early action, in particular on the part of the Security
Council. As a result, we act late and react after the fact,
frequently to little effect and always at high cost. The
reviews of peacekeeping operations, the peacebuilding
architecture and the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), on women, peace and security, all found
that prevention needs a new impulse. The crosscutting dimension of the preventive approach requires
the development of synergies among those three
complementary reviews so as to develop consistent
strategies to promote lasting peace, bolstered by
political sols that take the protection and promotion of
24/108

10/01/2017

human and national rights into due account, which is
the only guarantee of real human security.
In that context, the role of the Security Council,
the principal organ entrusted with international peace
and security, is obvious, but we must acknowledge that
the paucity or lack of unity and political often paralyse
this organ, as noted throughout 2016. That is why the
Secretary-General’s call to make 2017 a year of peace
strongly resonates with us. The leadership and work
of the Secretary-General as the moral authority of our
Organization, supported by his special representatives
and envoys, must be underscored, given their potential
impact on Security Council decisions and the actions
of parties to a conflict. Article 1 and Chapters VI and
VII of the Charter of the United Nations are at the
Secretary-General’s disposal and must be resorted to.
To return to a statement that you made, Madam,
and that we endorse, investing in prevention costs
one-tenth of the price of post-conflict operations,
but we are all aware that few resources are devoted
to prevention activities, as opposed to those spent
on peacekeeping operations. The Organization must
therefore abandon the practice of managing rather than
preventing crises. That is why peacebuilding, which is
the key to prevention, remains a secondary activity and
still lacks sustained and predictable financing, despite
the existence of the Peacebuilding Fund.
The adoption on 27 April 2016 by the General
Assembly and the Security Council of the simultaneous
resolutions 70/262 and 2282 (2016), respectively,
on the review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, was important in that it indicated a
willingness to transform our approach in that area. We
hope that the political will necessary can be mustered
to translate that collective commitment into specific
action so as to correct the anomalies and gaps that
have been identified to date. That requires first and
foremost the effective generation and allocation of
predictable resources for essential prevention and
mediation support activities. After that, we must
adopt a comprehensive and consistent approach that
takes due account of the links between sustainable
development, peace, good governance, human rights
and the rule of law, as enshrined in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, in particular Goal 16 on
peaceful societies.
Furthermore, we recall that the United Nations
is not the only actor in the area of peace and security
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

and therefore cannot carry this heavy burden alone. In
line with Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter,
it must strengthen its cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations and encourage the
development of regional responses to crises. Indeed,
given their proximity to conflicts and enhanced
knowledge of local realities and conflict dynamics,
regional and subregional organizations can help to
better define appropriate intervention policies.
In that regard, Senegal supports the recommendations
made in the report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations on strengthening the prevention
and peacekeeping capacities of the African Union. The
African Union, as a strategic partner of the United
Nations in this area, has a certain capacity to provide
first responses to crises in Africa, but it suffers one
major handicap that undermines its efforts to that
end, namely, the acute problem of funding peace
operations in Africa. Resolution 2320 (2016), adopted
last November under the Senegalese presidency,
therefore invites the United Nations to provide greater
support to the laudable efforts of the African Union
by sharing the financial burden of deploying African
peacekeeping operations.
It is clear that the key challenge facing the United
Nations as António Guterres takes office is connected
to its capacity to anticipate and better understand the
causes of old and new conflicts, better detect new and
asymmetrical threats, and prevent crises and conflicts,
as stipulated in Article 1 of the Charter. It was in that
spirit that Senegal launched an initiative in the Security
Council on the issue of water, peace and security by
convening, on 22 April 2016, an Arria Formula meeting
on this issue under the auspices of His Excellency
President Macky Sall, and, on 22 November 2016,
an open debate on the same theme (see S/PV.7818).
Through that initiative, supported by a preventive
approach to hyrdodiplomacy, Senegal sought to sound
the alarm in the Security Council about twenty-first
century security challenges linked to shared water
resources in the context of their increasing scarcity. My
country wishes to see that resource shared in a peaceful,
efficient, fair, and lasting manner. Peace and security
throughout the world, particularly in Africa, with its 50
continental rivers and border lakes, depend on it.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): I congratulate you, Madam, and
your entire team on the outstanding manner in which
you are leading the Security Council this month.

S/PV.7857

I wish to welcome Secretary-General António
Guterres and inform him that we are impressed by
his leadership, his skills and his desire to ensure that
2017 is a year of peace in the United Nations. When
Mr. Guterres assumed his post, President Evo Morales
Ayma sent him a message in which he told him that
“I share your concerns and commit myself to helping
you in all your tasks aimed at building a peaceful
world as the highest priority so that the current and
future generations can enjoy a life free of conflict,
war and intolerable unilateral interventions that
only cause destruction and irreparable damage and
claim innumerable victims, refugees and migrants”.
Bolivia participates in today’s debate as a
plurinational State and country of Latin America and
the Caribbean — a region in the process of resolving its
last remaining armed conflict and which has declared
itself free of nuclear weapons — and as a member of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the Group of
77. It participates as a country that has constitutionally
declared itself a pacifist State that promotes the culture
of peace and the right to peace, and that rejects all
wars of aggression and as a territory with no foreign
military bases.
There is a common understanding that the United
Nations system should focus on the need to prioritize
prevention and mediation in order to break the vicious
circle of conflict. The report of the High-Level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446)
highlighted the primacy of policy and stated that lasting
peace was possible with political solutions and not with
military or technical engagement alone. We affirm
the need to effectively and efficiently consolidate the
Peacebuilding Commission, which takes full advantage
of the benefits of its diverse membership. We also
acknowledge the work done by the Commission since
it began its activities in various countries on its agenda.
We commend the swift progress of the Commission, in
particular, in building on the principle of the national
ownership of processes, the need for capacity-building
and the recognition and indication of the importance of
economic recovery and the development component in
the process of building peace.
Dynamic partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations must be established and
strengthened. In addition, regional efforts should
receive the necessary attention and support. We stress
the need to have integrated, coherent peacebuilding

17-0061225/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

strategies and programmes that are in line with the
strategies and programmes of host countries in order to
ensure national ownership. We are concerned about the
fragmentation among the various intergovernmental
organizations in the area of peace and security. Each
of them is a piece of the peacebuilding puzzle and such
fragmentation has been a significant hindrance to peace
operations on the ground where peacebuilding occurs.
We agree with the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy that efforts should continue in
order to strengthen and take full advantage of the
capacity of the United Nations in areas such as conflict
prevention, negotiation, mediation, reconciliation,
judicial settlement and, of course, the jurisdiction of
the International Criminal Court, inter alia, the rule of
law and peacekeeping and peacebuilding to assist with
effective conflict prevention and peaceable resolution
of protracted conflicts. In addition, the strengthening
of cooperation and coordination links among United
Nations organs, as well as the balance that should be
maintained among them, are essential.
The Security Council should not encroach upon the
domain or usurp the functions of the General Assembly,
the Human Rights Council or the Economic and Social
Council. At times, the Security Council suffers from
bipolar disorder. The Margarita Declaration of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries states that the
Security Council has been too hasty in threatening
or authorizing the use of force in some cases and has
remained silent and inactive in others. We must reiterate
and stress that the work of the Security Council should
be carried out with commitment and respect for the
sovereignty, independence, unity, territorial integrity,
non-interference in countries’ internal affairs and
equality of all States.
My remarks refer to the architecture of our
Organization and the Council’s work. Nonetheless,
we would be dishonest if we did not acknowledge
that the United Nations architecture depends on other
structures that have a direct link to and have caused
such conflicts. It is our duty to change those structures.
Let me share a brief story written by Eduardo Galeano,
a Latin American born in Uruguay. He wrote:
“Pastor Miguel Brun told me that some years
ago he was with Indians from the Paraguayan
Chaco. He was part of an evangelizing mission. The
missionaries visited a cacique who was renowned
for being very wise. The cacique, who was rotund
26/108

10/01/2017

and reserved, listened intently to the religious
propaganda that was read to him in the language
of the Indians. When the reading was finished, the
missionaries waited. The cacique took his time.
He said, ‘It scratches. It scratches a lot and very
well’. Then he said, ‘but it scratches where it does
not itch.’”
The conflict prevention, mediation, reconciliation
or judicial settlement efforts that we make at the highest
level will not be sufficient if we do not address the
structural and root causes of the conflicts or, scratch
where it itches. We are living in a very interesting
era of transformation, with certainties, such as the
leadership of our Secretary-General and uncertainties.
What will be under threat in the coming months and
years? Multilateralism, a system of checks and balances
that allows problems to be resolved peaceably, is under
threat. We must acknowledge that we living in an era of
change that will have a direct impact, not only on the
relevance of our Organization or on multilateralism as
such, but also on global conflict.
Let me read a quote from a recent analysis given
by the Vice-President of my country, Álvaro García
Linera, on the world in which we live today. He said:
“In today’s world, neoliberal globalization
is the ultimate goal — a political, ideological
objective capable of channelling collective hope for
a common future that would meet all of the possible
expectations of well-being. However, that goal has
been shattered into a thousand pieces. Now, there is
nothing that exists to replace it that can articulate
such expectations. There is now a fearful focus on
our own borders and a return of a type of political
tribalism fuelled by xenophobic rage in a world that
now belongs to no one; a return to protectionist
States and, if possible, States surrounded by
walls, along with a global malaise that will result
in the destruction of working- and middle-class
economies caused by the global free market”.
Against that backdrop, what are the structural
threats to maintaining international peace and security?
The first threat is interventionism. We wonder whether
or not we would be witnessing the grave situation in
the Middle East and North Africa if it had not been for
interventionism — the unilateral policy that violates
United Nations principles governing regime change?
Would we be seeing today’s conflicts had it not been
for neocolonialism and the back-door policies of areas
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

of influence and related to the way in which the world
was divided? Perhaps the fact that one State, the United
States of America, has declared itself exceptional and
indispensable is not a threat to international peace
and security. And what about other States? Are we
not indispensable too? The vision of a First World and
a Third World is a fallacy. There is only one world
and the threat of climate change is a genuine one,
which means that we have common but differentiated
responsibilities. The fight against climate change is the
same fight for the rights of Mother Earth.
Without a doubt, inequality is another major threat
to international peace and security. A recent Oxfam
report states that nearly 50 per cent of global wealth
is concentrated in 1 per cent of the population. That
is a threat to international peace and security. But
not just that: the ownership of wealth is in the hands
of transnational corporations, and unfortunately the
United Nations has failed to internationally regulate the
influence of transnationals.
Also, in order to understand the threats of conflict
to peace and international security, we have to ask
ourselves who owns the natural resources, as the
Secretary-General has said. Is not the dispute over who
owns natural resources that is the real cause of many
conflicts? And who holds the reins of the financial
system? How many domestic or international conflicts
have been caused by the current architecture of the
financial system? What is the relation of the external
debt and conflict in the countries of the South? Is it
not true that the military strength concentrated in just a
few Powers — with their outrageous military spending
and their nuclear weapons, which are one of the greatest
dangers to the survival of the planet — is a threat to
international peace and security? Is it not also a threat
to international security that technology, knowledge
and science are in the hands of just a few?
The United Nations, as we all know, is not a club
in which to have a good time. It is the most important
and indispensable forum for solving those problems.
The best way to keep our Organization relevant is to
transform it, to revolutionize it.
Allow me to conclude my statement by reiterating
that we, the peoples of the United Nations, are here,
as our Charter states, to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war that has brought untold sorrow
to humankind.

S/PV.7857

The President: There has been significant interest
in today’s debate, and I have a lengthy list of speakers.
I hope that this indicates a strong interest in Member
States to reposition prevention and peace, placing it
at the heart of the work of the United Nations, and to
express their support for multilateralism as well as for
the new Secretary-General.
In order for all Member States that wish to take the
floor to have an opportunity to do so, I wish to remind
all speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes so that the Council can carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber. I would also add that, although it is sparsely
used in the Security Council, applause is actually
not prohibited.
I also wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a very large number of speakers.
I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Poland.
Mr. Waszczykowski (Poland): I am honoured to
address the Security Council at this open debate on
conflict prevention and sustaining peace. I would like
to thank you, Madam President, for convening this
timely debate. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for outlining his vision for a renewed focus on
conflict prevention.
In recent years, we have witnessed a number of
increasingly complex and protracted conflicts and, at
the very same time, probably the worst humanitarian
crises since the end of Second World War. Given the
particularly fragile security landscape in many regions
of the world, we have to acknowledge that efforts aimed
at resolving existing conflicts are not enough. To ensure
durable and equitable peace for all, it is imperative
that the international community identify and tackle
the root causes of conflicts in a more accurate and
timely manner.
I therefore deeply believe that conflict prevention
should remain at the core of United Nations activities
to maintain peace and security around the world.
Despite the progress that has been made in the field, the
multiplication of conflicts and crises in the course of
the past 20 years clearly shows that prevention remains
critically underprioritized. That has to change in order

17-0061227/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

to allow conflict prevention to surface as a priority
tool in various United Nations policies and strategies
dealing with conflicts worldwide.
As one of the founding Members of the United
Nations, Poland has been involved in United Nations
peacekeeping operations since 1953. Since then, more
than 70,000 Blue Helmets from Poland have served in
diverse United Nations missions — from the shores of
Haiti, where Polish soldiers helped to rebuild a nation,
to the heights and deserts of the Middle East, to the
Balkans, where Polish Prime Minister and United
Nations human rights envoy Tadeusz Mazowiecki urged
the international community to stop the horrifying
ethnic cleansing and human rights violations taking
place there,
Poland has always been committed to bringing
assistance to those seeking reconciliation and the
restoration of peace. Driven by the universal values of
peace, stability and prosperity, which lie at the core of
Poland’s foreign policy, my country does not want to
be considered a simple consumer of security, but as a
reliable security provider. Currently, we are making
efforts to increase our participation in United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
Conflicts can, and should be, prevented or
mitigated by early, well-suited political and diplomatic
engagement. In that context, we deeply believe that the
Security Council has a critical role to play in preventing
conflicts and sustaining peace. One of the reasons
we are gathered here at today’s open debate is our
common willingness to address the question: How can
the Security Council fully capitalize on opportunities
for preventive action? Accordingly, I would like to
highlight some areas where Poland believes progress
and attention are particularly needed.
First, we believe that the Security Council already
possesses appropriate prevention tools for effective
action, but it is vital that those tools be used more
often. Horizon-scanning briefings by the Secretariat,
interactive dialogues, video teleconferences, and
briefings by the Department of Political Affairs
not only can contribute to the earlier recognition of
warning signs, but also facilitate taking action before
those signs deteriorate into open conflict.
Secondly, we think that the Security Council’s
visiting missions should take prevention aspects into
consideration in a more effective way. With reference
to the regional dimension, Poland highly values
28/108

10/01/2017

the dedicated work of the Ad Hoc Working Group
on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa.
The Working Group fulfils its mission and ensures
continued thematic focus on emerging situations prior
to the Council’s consultations or formal meetings.
We would like to strongly advocate using such tools
more frequently and the broadening of their scope to
encompass other regions of the world.
Finally, Poland believes that the Security Council
should not be hampered by the use of the veto in taking
action aimed at stopping or preventing situations
involving war crimes or crimes against humanity.
Conflict prevention is an activity of a truly
comprehensive nature. First, it requires the involvement
of a wide range of actors — not only national, regional
or subregional actors, but also different components
of the whole United Nations system. In that regard,
we fully support the actions of the United Nations
Development Programme aimed at supporting national
dialogue processes, local peace committees and
confidence-building measures. In addition, we reiterate
our strong support for the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda.
We are also convinced that the United Nations
needs better and more coherent coordination of
work among the Security Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission and various United Nations missions in
the field. In that context, we believe that enhanced
consultations between the Security Council and the
troop-contributing countries would contribute to the
adoption of a responsive stance towards unstable,
peace-threatening conditions. Moreover, I would
like to underline that conflict prevention requires a
cross-pillar and cross-sectoral approach. A coherent
implementation strategy across the human rights, peace
and security and sustainable development spheres
is essential.
I would also like to emphasize the importance of
effective national conflict-prevention policies based
on activities such as strengthening the transparency
and accountability of State institutions, fighting
corruption and promoting good governance. Good
governance in pre- and post-conflict settings is one
of the crucial factors that help to defuse tensions and
prevent escalation.
Finally, we have to remember that all United
Nations activities undertaken to maintain international
peace and security, such as conflict prevention,
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

mediation, peacekeeping, peace enforcement and
peacebuilding, need to go hand in hand. Those
activities cannot be undertaken in isolation, but must
be part of a truly comprehensive approach aimed at
ensuring the development of what Secretary-General
Guterres described in his visionary statement as the
“peace continuum”.
As I mentioned at the beginning of my statement,
Poland welcomed the Secretary-General’s declaration,
which highlighted conflict prevention as one of his
priorities. We believe that, through mediation, good
offices and shuttle diplomacy, the Secretary-General
can alleviate tensions and foster peaceful relations
between States. Under the Charter of the United
Nations, the Secretariat also plays a significant role
in the process, as it can bring both early warning and
in-depth analysis of emerging crises to the Security
Council for its attention.
We need to acknowledge that the maintenance of
international peace requires both bold decisions and
concerted actions. I therefore call for the enhanced
responsibility of all actors involved in the process.
Policy makers, representatives of civil society, experts
and the media should set all possible wheels in motion
to strengthen our current “peace” diplomacy. We should
jointly endeavour to ensure that every activity in the
field is based on a solid and realistic perspective.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Latvia.
Mr. Rinkĕvičs (Latvia): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this very important debate
on conflict prevention and sustaining peace. My
congratulations and best wishes go to the Swedish
presidency and for your membership in the Security
Council. My best wishes also go to Secretary-General
Guterres. He can count on Latvia’s support.
The United Nations was created because the world
had paid too high a price for the absence of a credible
international system. However, the potential of the
United Nations for preventing the outbreak, continuation
or resurgence of conflicts has not been used effectively.
Far too often the United Nations has been unable to
prevent conflicts, build peace or stop atrocities. All too
often resources have been spent on responding to and
managing crises instead of preventing them.
In 2017, many complex violent conflicts around the
globe persist. All of those conflicts not only threaten

S/PV.7857

the principles of the international order and the global
rules-based system, they also fundamentally affect
the security of our world. Most importantly, those
conflicts have a devastating impact on millions of
civilians. All recent reviews of the United Nations’
peace and security pillar call for the strengthening
of preventive diplomacy. The United Nations must
develop an effective culture of prevention. Tools for
prevention have long been available, including in the
Charter of the United Nations. We need to move from
mere commitment to concrete action — individually
and collectively as the international community.
I appreciate the Secretary-General’s energetic
engagement today and his vision for a more effective
United Nations. I would like to thank him personally
for placing conflict prevention at the centre of the
United Nations agenda. In that context, we look forward
to the implementation of his initiatives announced
on 3 January that will enhance the United Nations
performance in the peace and security pillar, and will
strengthen the arrangements for information and crisis
management. The success of his strong appeal for peace
from his first day in office largely depends on all of us.
We expect that he will use all the tools at his disposal
to preserve the rules-based international order and to
restore it where it has been broken.
The best way of preventing conflicts is to solve
existing ones in the most efficient way. All Member
States of the United Nations are the guardians of this
international system and the Charter of the United
Nations. Member States of the Security Council have a
particular responsibility. With the privilege of being a
permanent member of the Council and having the veto
power also comes the responsibility to use that power in
the interests of common peace and security. The Council
has not always lived up to that special responsibility.
In the case of Syria, the Council has not been
and is not able to stop the State from committing
crimes against its own population. The failure to act
promptly to prevent or stop the conflict and to demand
accountability has brought with it immense human
costs. The brutal horrors of five years of the ongoing
bloodshed in Syria haunt our consciences as human
beings and diplomats.
Accountability is an essential part of any political,
reconciliation and peace process in Syria. In the
framework of the General Assembly of the United
Nations, Latvia strongly supported the creation of the

17-0061229/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Those Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under
International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011, contained in resolution
71/248, which seeks to assist the investigation and
prosecution of the serious crimes committed in Syria
and to ensure justice for all victims. Latvia has also
called for referring the case of Syria to the International
Criminal Court, which the Council has been unable to
do. I repeat that call now.
Through the Charter of the United Nations, all
Member States have committed to the renunciation of
the illegal threat or use of force, and to settling their
disputes by peaceful means. In the case of Ukraine,
the Council was not able to prevent and stop the act of
aggression, which triggered the commission of further
crimes. Russia’s actions in Ukraine are a blatant violation
of international law and pose a serious challenge to the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. We
must return to the former rules-based security order
in Europe. The peaceful resolution of the conflict in
Ukraine, one that respects Ukraine’s independence and
territorial integrity, must be a priority.
In order to maintain international peace and to
ensure that the United Nations remains an organization
in which people trust and believe, Security Council
members must move beyond their domestic interests in
the name of genuinely addressing global challenges. We
must also further strengthen early warning measures.
In that regard, the respect for international law, the
protection of human rights and the rule of law are key.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands.
Mr. Koenders (Netherlands): First of all, allow
me to congratulate you, Madam President, and Sweden
on its membership in the Security Council and for
immediately taking the initiative to hold this important
debate on conflict prevention and sustaining peace. I
also congratulate the other newly elected members of
the Council: Bolivia, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan and Italy.
I am happy to be here together with my colleague
Mr. Alfano, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Italy,
who has already made reference to the Italian-Dutch
cooperation in the context of our split term in the
Council. I fully support the statement delivered by
Mr. Alfano on behalf of Italy, and we also do so in the
spirit of European cooperation.
30/108

10/01/2017

We welcome Sweden’s initiative to organize this
debate. It comes at a pivotal moment in time, a moment
of major geopolitical upheaval and competition, dubbed
a “tipping point”. It is a moment when history seems
to cast doubt over the Charter’s promise of peace just
when it is needed more than ever before, for instance,
in Syria, Yemen and South Sudan. It is a moment
when I think the citizens of all those countries feel
forgotten and do not understand why more action is not
undertaken to assist them and promote their interests
in the Council as well. Moreover, in countries like my
own, people want to see concrete results.
At this moment in time, it is up to us all to lay the
groundwork for a reinvigorated multilateralism, for a
coalition of States from all regions that can effectively
relink effectiveness and legitimacy, thereby enabling
the United Nations to be “fit for purpose” for this
new era again. That means an Organization equipped
and ready for action at all stages of a conflict, as the
Secretary-General mentioned in his briefing. It also
means putting prevention up front. The entire United
Nations system, as well as Member States, should
develop a prevention-up-front mindset and action mode.
Previously, I have likened the United Nations to an
orchestra which, at times, sounds shrill and somewhat
out of tune. Indeed, we have not always been able to play
the music the way it was meant in the original score,
that is the Charter. Why is that so? It is certainly not
because the United Nations is just a club for people to
get together, talk and have a good time. On the contrary,
the professionalism of the United Nations workforce is
beyond any doubt. That includes, first and foremost,
our new top-level conductor — the new SecretaryGeneral, whose credentials and dedication are beyond
any doubt. Neither is it because the necessary elements
for a perfect performance are not there.
On the contrary, the potential of the unique
and rich United Nations toolbox, all United Nations
organizations, funds and programmes combined,
working globally and across the entire spectrum of
issues — from climate to development, disarmament,
peace and security — is enormous. Together they
can truly perform miracles, and they have on many
occasions. The examples are there. Let us consider
Liberia, where the United Nations mission and the
development and peacebuilding organizations work
together seamlessly under the strong vision and
leadership of the country itself.
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

But United Nations organizations do not always
coordinate as closely as they should. I did not come here
to point fingers. My own experience has shown me how
complicated it can be. We have seen different degrees
of success in Côte d’Ivoire, Mali and elsewhere. But let
us make one thing clear — we have to be explicit about
what we want, our goals and ours means, and we must
translate our words into action. We should also learn
from these cases.
The different pillars of the United Nations
system can work better together. We have said that
for many years. Whether there is an imminent crisis
to be contained, fragile peace to be sustained, or
preventive action has to be taken — for lasting peace,
it is necessary that all the United Nations organizations
work in concert. When they work together with one
goal in mind there are results on the ground. They can
each have their own comparative advantage and yet still
deliver as one. I am glad, therefore, that the SecretaryGeneral has put forward a concrete agenda for the
implementation of the sustaining peace resolutions. We
support him wholeheartedly in his efforts to streamline
and de-silo the United Nations peace architecture. I
would like to stress four points here.
First, we are glad to see that the most recent
quadrennial comprehensive policy review gave
the Secretary-General the mandate to shake up the
development section of the orchestra. That will be
vital for the concrete implementation by countries of
essential agendas set out by his predecessor — the
Paris Agreement and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. As the Secretary-General said, achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals is a key prevention
tool, and we could not agree more. The Sustainable
Development Goals are instruments not only for
inclusion but also of peace, making it possible to address
structural weaknesses well before people see no other
alternative but violence. And in my view, that requires
looking much more precisely at country-specific
analysis and conflict dynamics and bottlenecks. Here
also, the silo mentality is hindering us. It is up to all of
us — Member States, donors and the Secretary-General
alike — to hold these parts of the system accountable
and to give the Secretary-General the time necessary
to carry out those reforms. Only one criterion remains:
results on the ground in each country, for the people.
Secondly, the proposed strengthening of the
Executive Office of the Secretary-General as a centre
for effective strategic conflict analysis and planning is

S/PV.7857

an important step, especially in a time of regionalization
and internationalization of internal conflicts in a very
violent way. An empowered core group of United
Nations decision makers across the system will help
guide the system as a whole, develop strategies to
deal more effectively with imminent crises, and play a
coordinating role in the prevention of violent conflict.
It could help bring preventive diplomacy back up front,
where it should be, based on objective norms — as was
mentioned by a number of representatives — and build
trust in the key role of the Council and the SecretaryGeneral. And of course, the responsibility to protect
and to end impunity, as norms that we have put forward,
should obviously be analysed in an objective manner.
Thirdly, the Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism of the former Secretary-General successfully
generated national strategies and United-Nations-led
capacity-building support. The Office of the SecretaryGeneral catalysed global efforts to prevent violent
extremism. The Global Counter-Terrorism Forum is a
case in point. We kindly ask our new Secretary-General
to continue to remind us that the prevention of violent
extremism is the only truly strategic answer to the
horrors of worldwide terrorism working in the social
fabric of our societies.
Fourthly, a deadlocked Council does not mean the
United Nations has to be broken winged. In situations
where the Council does not act, the Secretary-General
can still employ his good offices and other tools to
foster mediation and dialogue between the parties in
emerging crises. This has happened in the past. The
often discrete and behind-closed-doors efforts of the
Secretariat made a huge contribution in countries like
Nigeria, Bangladesh, Burkina Faso and Nepal. I believe
that the new Secretary-General can build on that and
continue to play that important role using his vast
experience. The Secretary-General needs our support
in that respect. We should strengthen the Mediation
Support Office and United Nations early-warning
capacity at the local level as well. The United Nations
regional offices have done essential work behind the
scenes to prevent conflicts. The work of Said Djinnit
is a case in point; I believe that, to a large extent, he
prevented a civil war in Conakry, Guinea, two years ago.
Preventive diplomacy up front means the Security
Council should also play its part. It has done so
successfully in the past, as is illustrated by the situation
in many countries. In that respect the Council’s early
engagement was helpful. Now, however, the Council

17-0061231/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

needs to maintain its engagement in order to secure a
positive outcome. That also requires the proactive use
by the Secretary-General and others of Article 99 of
the Charter. Visits to countries and missions allow the
Council to gather first-hand information and to support
peace, mediation and peacebuilding processes. We
welcome the Council’s more frequent use of visits. The
recent visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
a case in point.
In our view, a stronger compact is needed in
that orchestra between the Security Council and the
Secretary-General when it comes to sustaining peace.
They can combine their respective responsibilities
and act more in unison — in joint approaches or
consultations, including with regional actors. In our
view, greater use could also be made of the advice of
the Peacebuilding Commission. That could include
inviting them to brief on specific situations. The same
goes for the instrument of international contact groups,
which is useful in the event that a country is identified
as a potential site of crisis. That could be supported
further, if possible, by benign neighbouring countries
and the relevant regional organizations.
Lastly, there is deterrence. Much of conflict
prevention focuses on dialogue. However, prevention
is not only about carrots. Sometimes, as Theodore
Roosevelt advised, it is a question of speaking softly
but carrying a big stick. It is part of the toolbox. The
Security Council has seldom made use of the most
coercive measures to prevent conflict; but we cannot
completely avoid it.
In conclusion, allow me to reaffirm the continued
support of my country in the implementation of the
agenda for prevention. In today’s volatile world, our
global orchestra is not short of tour dates. We should
be better prepared to play the full symphony together.
Although it will not be easy, we should start rehearsing
to achieve the true sound of lasting peace, in concert.
We will only get there if we all start putting prevention
up front. The Netherlands stands ready to do its part.
The President: I now call on the Permanent
Representative of Rwanda and Member of President
Kagame’s Cabinet.
Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): At the outset, I
would like to commend you, Madam President, and
your delegation for the excellent manner in which the
delegation of Sweden has prepared this open debate. It
was a fully inclusive process that allowed all delegations,
32/108

10/01/2017

through the timely circulation of documents, to prepare
early. We truly appreciate that.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, for his briefing. His briefing and
decision to place conflict prevention and sustaining
peace at the centre of the United Nations mission
are a testimony to his commitment to make conflict
prevention a reality. Indeed, today’s debate is about our
ability to deliver on our collective promise, which was
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations more
than 70 years ago, to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war. Despite that promise, however,
conflicts have been not only persistent and relapsing.
Today, there is a continued inability of our
Organization to credibly and accurately predict,
pre-empt and/or rapidly respond to conflicts.
Nevertheless, increasing discussions of this nature
and the decision to put this debate at the forefront of
the Security Council’s agenda for this year raise hope
for the possibility of reducing the number of missed
opportunities in the future. While today’s threats
to peace have become more complex, with intricate
new trends and types, more room for multilateral
and multifaceted actions against those threats have
also emerged, including partnering and working with
regions through existing partnerships.
In Africa, experience in conflict prevention has
shown that the African Union has on several occasions
been better positioned in terms of knowledge, proximity
and the capability to mobilize and respond quickly.
Moreover, that ability often enables us to circumvent
some of the burdensome, procedural processes of
United Nations interventions. We therefore believe
that the partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union could be a collaboration framework
through which conflict prevention in Africa can be
discussed and from which practical measures can
be taken.
In their solemn declaration adopted in Addis Ababa
in May 2013, when African Heads of State embraced
Agenda 2063, African leaders, inter alia, expressed
their determination to achieve the goal of a conflictfree Africa and pledged not to bequeath the burdens
of conflicts to the next generation of Africans. They
also undertook the goal of ending all wars in Africa by
2020. Conflict prevention is therefore, as we speak here
today in the Security Council, the primary priority of
the African Union. It is through that road map that the
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Security Council could collaborate closely with Africa
in order to effectively contribute to conflict prevention
on the continent through practical steps. Allow me to
highlight some of the steps that we suggest.
First, the international community should engage in
strategic dialogues with Africa, including in the United
Nations system, on global policies and practices that
negatively impact Africa and its people. In our view, the
holding of regular dialogues between the African Union
Peace and Security Council and the United Nations
Security Council on the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts at all levels, as well as on other
strategic issues, is of prime importance. We believe that
increased cooperation between these two peace and
security bodies would enhance complementarity and
lead to effective coordination, while at the same time
minimizing the duplication of efforts.
Secondly, we believe that shifting attention in
addressing the underlying causes of conflicts, while
at the same time increasing the capacity to streamline
efforts to intervene when civilians are endangered,
including the ability to recognize and disseminate the
signs of impending or potential conflict, would increase
our collective preventive capabilities and help the
United Nations live up to its full potential. We believe
that early warning and response capabilities are critical
requirements for effective early prevention.
Thirdly, linked to that is the implementation
of outstanding components of the African Peace
and Security Architecture, including the full
operationalization of the African Standby Force.
Fourthly, in order to achieve a conflict-free
continent, we should also seek to address the illicit
inflow of arms and weapons into Africa, with a focus
on stopping suppliers and recipients of such weapons
from promoting and sustaining illicit business in arms
and weapons.
Last but not least, we need to ensure that our postconflict reconstruction and peacebuilding capabilities
are properly deployed in order to ensure the institutional
capacities that prevent relapses into conflict. On that
point in particular, let me say that as a member of the
African Union Peace and Security Council and a major
contributor of peacekeeping troops, Rwanda pledges its
full support for putting conflict prevention at the centre
of United Nations action.

S/PV.7857

Allow me to say a few words on sustaining peace.
As we all know, Rwanda would be a different country
today if the post-genocide Government had not invested
in forging a new Rwanda, if it had not been successful
in ensuring inclusivity and equal opportunities for all
its citizens, if it had not overcome divisions, if it had
not engaged reconciliation and restorative justice, and
if it had not worked to build trust in State institutions.
That alone is an indication of every State’s primary
responsibility in conflict prevention, including creating
an environment that is conducive to the enjoyment of
human rights and success in promoting and protecting
rights and ensuring accountability for their violation.
It is our hope that this year, which is starting
with such a central and critical debate, will mark a
turning point as we embark on the implementation of
the Sustainable Development Goals, which provide
concrete ways to sustain peace and development and,
as the Secretary-General put it, to make them a key
prevention tool.
Mr. Choi Jong-moon (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I wish to express my best wishes to the new
members of the Security Council. I would also like to
thank the Swedish presidency for selecting the topic
of “Conflict prevention and sustaining peace” for
today’s debate.
My special appreciation goes to Secretary-General
António Guterres for his informative briefing at his
first address to the Council.
We are at a critical moment vis-à-vis the
international security landscape. The nature of today’s
global conflicts has become increasingly complex and
intractable, while terrorism and violent extremism are
spreading to each and every corner of the world. In
turn, that has created the worst humanitarian situation
of our time, which calls for a new way forward.
At a time of such global turbulence, it is significant
that the Security Council and the General Assembly
adopted landmark resolutions last year, laying out a
road map towards a more peaceful future by welcoming
a new vision of sustaining peace. That entails taking
down the fragmentation and duplication that are
prevalent across the United Nations system, while
pursuing a holistic approach that integrates peace and
security, human rights and development. It reflects the
renewed awareness that conflict prevention should be
the centrepiece of all the United Nations engagements.
In this connection, Korea welcomes the Secretary-

17-0061233/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

General’s strong emphasis on prevention as a guiding
raison d’être of his stewardship of the Organization
from the very outset of his term, in particular his
outlining a surge in diplomacy for peace.
It is no coincidence that all three of the recent
global reviews on peace and security, including the
High-Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations,
highlighted the essential role of conflict prevention
and sustaining peace. The Secretariat has made some
progress in implementing the recommendations of these
reviews, but more needs to be done to make United
Nations peace operations fit for purpose. In striving
for a way forward to close the implementation gap and
to advance the international community’s capacity to
effectively prevent conflicts and sustain peace, Korea
recommends the following.
First, the Council should make better use of its
investigatory tools under Article 34 of the Charter
of the United Nations. Secondly, the Council should
implement and continue to build on the language in
its resolutions 2086 (2013) and 2333 (2016), which
specifies the Council’s role in peacebuilding efforts.
Thirdly, greater engagement with the Ad hoc Working
Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa
could facilitate action on potential conflicts. And last
but not least, the Council must make more proactive
use of the advisory function of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC).
In fact, Korea is expected to become the next Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission. In this new capacity,
Korea hopes to contribute to securing sustainable
peace across the globe in a constructive way. Korea is
of the view that scaling-up inclusive capacity-building
and greater coordination through PBC initiatives are
effective means to prevent conflicts and sustain peace.
Enhanced coordination between the Council and the
PBC is essential in this regard.
As the Council is well aware, over the past decades,
the Republic of Korea, together with the Council, has
been making all-out efforts to prevent the nuclear
programme of North Korea and thereby achieve the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. However,
even at this moment, while we are gathered in this
Chamber to discuss ways to secure sustainable peace,
North Korea continues to develop its nuclear and missile
capabilities, blatantly violating relevant Security
Council resolutions. It is critical that the Council
34/108

10/01/2017

continue to be engaged with this issue to sustain peace
in this region.
In conclusion, as the presumptive next Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Korea will work closely
with the Council, Member States and other partners
to create a platform whereby the United Nations can
effectively sustain peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Ms. Ganjanarintr (Thailand): I am honoured to
speak on behalf of 10 States members of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), comprising
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Viet Nam and my own country,
Thailand.
ASEAN congratulates the new non-permanent
members of the Council and wishes them success
throughout their terms. We also welcome the presence
of the new Secretary-General. ASEAN will render him
our full support and close cooperation in the fulfilment
of his mandates. We thank Sweden for organizing this
debate on conflict prevention and sustaining peace, one
of the most pressing issues in maintaining international
peace and security.
As embodied in the ASEAN Community Vision
2025, ASEAN is a people-centred, rules-based and
peace-loving community. We adhere to the principles
of international law governing the peaceful conduct
of relations among States, including refraining
from the threat of the use of force, of inclusivity and
responsiveness, which ensure our peoples enjoy human
rights and fundamental freedoms, and of tolerance in
the spirit of unity in diversity. ASEAN believes in a
comprehensive approach to security that addresses
existing and emerging challenges in a timely manner,
and in resolving differences and disputes by peaceful
means while strengthening confidence-building
measures and preventive diplomacy.
This year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the
ASEAN Bangkok Declaration, which established
ASEAN to promote regional peace and stability
through abiding respect for justice and the rule of law
in the relationship among countries of the region and
adherence to the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. For the ASEAN community, maintaining and
enhancing peace, security and stability and further
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

strengthening peace-oriented values in the region is
one of the most important purposes of the Organization,
as reflected in the ASEAN Charter. Without peace,
security and stability, it would be difficult to attain other
important goals of the ASEAN community. Therefore,
conflict prevention and sustaining peace remain one of
the most fundamental of ASEAN’s priorities since its
establishment in 1967.
ASEAN-led platforms, such as the ASEAN
Regional Forum and the East Asia Summit, have
provided venues for regular dialogue on political and
security-related matters in the Asia-Pacific region since
1994 and continue to play a central role in the regional
stability architecture.
For ASEAN, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, in particular Goal 16 regarding peace
and justice, can serve as important guidelines for
conflict prevention efforts. Building resilient inclusive
societies and a development agenda that addresses the
root causes of the conflict and that provides economic
opportunities in post-conflict communities are key
factors that lead to sustaining peace.
ASEAN has a comprehensive approach to
promoting traditional and non-traditional security in
the region. Guided by the Sustainable Development
Goals, the ASEAN community is working together to
provide political, economic and social security for all
member States. We are a region of diversity, but we are
striving to build our strengths based on our common
interests and mutual understanding, which is the best
way to prevent conflict.
Beyond our region, ASEAN member States are
active contributor to United Nations peace operations
worldwide. Under the framework of the ASEAN
Defence Ministers Meeting/ASEAN Defence Ministers
Meeting Plus, ASEAN Member States have pledged
to enhance cooperation in peacekeeping through the
ASEAN peacekeeping centres network. The ASEAN
Institute for Peace and Reconciliation is also a valuable
contribution to conflict prevention and sustaining
global peace.
All these actions are consistent with the ASEAN
Community Vision 2025 and related blueprints, which
ASEAN adopted in 2015, and our regional commitments
under the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in
Southeast Asia. They are also in line with the 20162020 Plan of Action to Implement the Joint Declaration
on Comprehensive Partnership between ASEAN and

S/PV.7857

the United Nations, where we look forward to the
continued development of an effective partnership
with the United Nations to enhance our capabilities in
preventive diplomacy and post-conflict peacebuilding.
It is ASEAN’s view that the Council and the
Secretary-General should work closely to make conflict
prevention and sustaining peace a reality. Regular
dialogues should be promoted to ensure that all views
are heard and that a swift and coordinated response to
emergency situations is implemented. We encourage
the new Secretary-General and Council members, as
well as other relevant United Nations organs, including
the Peacebuilding Commission, to continue to enhance
cooperation to promote coherence and complementarity
between United Nations peace and security efforts
and development. To this end, ASEAN fully supports
the efforts to create synergies and multiply positive
impacts laid out in previous United Nations milestones,
such as the 2015 reviews of the United Nations peace
and security architecture.
Considering the role of regional organizations as
stipulated in Chapter 8 of the Charter of the United
Nations, ASEAN’s contribution to the maintenance of
international peace and security has been constructive
and consistent with the spirit of that Chapter. We
therefore encourage the United Nations to engage with
regional organizations and all concerned parties at the
earliest possible stage to address emerging threats.
In conclusion, ASEAN believes that strong political
will, robust leadership and sufficient resources must be
consistently provided to ensure that peace is sustained
and conflict does not erupt, escalate or relapse.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Finland.
Ms. Sipiläinen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Group of Friends of Mediation
and its two co-Chairs first.
I would like to congratulate Sweden on organizing
this very timely debate. We also welcome the fact that
the Secretary-General as been present with us today.
The Group of Friends of Mediation brings together
44 United Nations States Members from various regions
and eight international and regional organizations. With
a broad representative capacity, the Group has made
a significant contribution to the efforts to increase
international awareness on mediation. In addition to
its other activities, the Group of Friends of Mediation

17-0061235/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

has initiated four General Assembly resolutions on
mediation, which were adopted by consensus. The
resolutions have contributed to strengthening the
framework of mediation and the mediation-support
functions of the United Nations, as well as the
development of the mediation capacities of various
mediation actors, while encouraging them to use the
Guidance for Effective Mediation. The resolutions
have also encouraged enhanced cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations.
The most recent General Assembly resolution
(resolution 70/304) on mediation, adopted in
September 2015, recognized the contribution made
by the 2015 reviews of the United Nations peace and
security architecture, in particular their attention to
the importance of conflict prevention and sustaining
peace, including the use of mediation. It acknowledged
the good offices of the Secretary-General and the
importance of seeking long-term, inclusive political
solutions for sustaining peace.
Taking into account increasing humanitarian
concerns and needs on the global level and specific to
many regions, the 2016 ministerial breakfast meeting
of the Group of Friends of Mediation provided an
opportunity to discuss how best to respond to the call
for global leadership to prevent and end conflicts, as
highlighted in the report (A/71/353) of the SecretaryGeneral on the Outcome of the World Humanitarian
Summit. The Group of Friends of Mediation strongly
believes that strengthening the role of mediation in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and
resolution, and sustaining peace, is a cost-effective tool
for the United Nations in its work towards peace and
security. We also acknowledge the need to empower
more women to serve as mediators. For that, sustained
political support, coherence, cooperation, systematic
efforts and adequate resources will be needed. The
Group of Friends of Mediation welcomes the new
Secretary-General’s commitment to advance diplomacy
for peace and stands ready to support his work and
efforts that strengthen the role of mediation in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts and sustaining
peace.
I would also like to make several remarks in
my national capacity. Finland aligns itself with the
statement to be made on behalf of the European Union.
36/108

10/01/2017

Let me again thank Sweden for this debate, because
the time to improve the United Nations ability to
prevent conflicts more effectively is now. The Security
Council, the Secretary-General and all Member States
must grasp this momentum and turn it into concrete
action. I am very pleased to see that the SecretaryGeneral has already taken a proactive role in the area
of conflict prevention and shown great initiative with
his recent decisions on improving the United Nations
performance.
The three reviews — on peace operations,
peacebuilding, and women and peace and
security — and their concrete implementation can truly
transform the United Nations peace and security sector.
Recommendations from the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446)
continue to be valid and should be implemented without
delay. Securing solid funding for both the primacy of
politics and the sustaining peace agenda, including
mediation and special political missions, are of high
importance. Equally important is for Member States to
support and contribute to peacekeeping, as it is a central
element of the United Nations peace and security sector.
The Security Council, and the United Nations
as a whole, needs to strengthen its own capacities to
undertake prevention, including by conducting better
horizon-scanning exercises, developing and making use
of early-warning tools, better assessing the root causes
of conflicts and addressing them in a timely manner,
upholding universal human rights and leveraging
sustainable development by implementing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. Technology and
innovations can help in that task. More efforts should
also be invested in dialogue with those countries that
are experiencing a fragile situation.
Finland wishes to see mediation as a tool for conflict
prevention at the forefront of the United Nations work.
Mediation and conflict prevention are the most costeffective instruments to work towards peace. Finland’s
broad approach to mediation includes national dialogue
and other formal and informal processes that contribute
to more inclusive peace processes, and thereby to lasting
solutions. We continue to support non-governmental
actors, including religious and traditional leaders’
engagement in peace processes. It is also time to
recognize the value of United Nations special political
missions. We, the Member States, should provide the
political and financial support that they need.
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7857

We urge the Council and the Secretary-General to
pay particular attention to the active role of women in
conflict prevention. Women remain the single-greatest
underutilized resource in more effective peacebuilding.
Experience shows that empowering women and
supporting their full and active participation in
peace-related, political and economic decision-making
can lead to more inclusive and lasting agreements.

closely linked security, human rights and development
agenda is also reiterated in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and reflected throughout
Germany’s chairmanship of the Group of 20 (G-20)
in 2017. In February, the G-20 Foreign Ministers will
therefore be discussing sustaining peace and possible
contributions thereto. Sustaining peace should be our
guide for the next decade.

The Security Council holds a special responsibility
in conflict prevention. One concrete line of action
to that end would be the commitment of all Council
members to support timely and decisive action by the
Council to prevent or end mass atrocities and to refrain
from the use of the veto in those situations.

Secondly, we need sound early warning and analysis.
We need a factual and common understanding of the
current crisis situations, their root causes and drivers.
On the national level, Germany has invested heavily in
conflict prevention and stabilization. We have reformed
our internal structures to align with the realities of
the twenty-first century, sharpened our analytical
tools and refined our stabilization approach in crisis
situations. We are currently developing new national
guidelines on crisis prevention, conflict management
and peacebuilding with the help of international
organizations, all branches of Government, academia
and civil society.

Finland continues to stand ready to support
the Council and Secretary-General Guterres in
strengthening the mutual partnership, as well as making
conflict prevention the United Nations top priority.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Rücker (Germany): Germany aligns itself with
the statement to be made on behalf of the European
Union later today.
I thank Sweden for having initiated this timely
and crucial debate, and I warmly welcome SecretaryGeneral Guterres, wish him success and thank him for
his resolve to put conflict prevention and peace first.
With regard to the United Nations and the Security
Council’s role in conflict prevention and sustaining
peace, I would like to make three points.
First, sustaining peace is key. In 2016, the General
Assembly and the Security Council adopted landmark
resolutions (resolution 2282 (2016) and General
Assembly 70/262, respectively) that acknowledged
that sustaining peace should be the goal of all national
and international prevention policies, in order to end
violence, guarantee sustainable development and
allow for the protection of human rights. Sustaining
peace necessitates a comprehensive approach and
is a shared task and responsibility involving all the
relevant stakeholders. That includes new partnerships,
inter alia, with regional organizations — as has been
mentioned — as well as with civil society. And it
entails an inclusive approach in which all members of
society, especially women, have a role to play. In that
regard, resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, should guide our activities. The concept of a

With a view to the United Nations, we strongly
support Secretary-General Guterres’s resolve to make
the Organization more effective and more efficient.
We hope that these and further changes will enable
the United Nations to keep conflict prevention and
peace as a top priority. We would also like to see the
development of an integrated policy-planning capacity,
stronger analytical capabilities and enhanced situational
awareness at Headquarters as well as in the field. We
hope for active engagement in scenario development
and mediation throughout the entire United Nations
system.
The Security Council should also prioritize
prevention at every stage of conflict, focusing on
reconciliation efforts, mediation, security-sector reform
and good governance. For example, it could resume
regular horizon-scanning sessions to discuss, prepare
for and respond to emerging crisis situations. The
Security Council should also continue its discussions
on regional and thematic issues that can have a serious
impact on peace and security, such as climate change
and migration. Furthermore, the Security Council
could capitalize more efficiently on work done in the
United Nations system, for instance by the special
procedures of the Human Rights Council, as a wealth of
information is there, or through the work of the United
Nations on sustainable development. In particular, the

17-0061237/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

Security Council should interact more closely with the
Peacebuilding Commission.
Thirdly, and lastly, we need to move from early
warning to early action. While it is important to have
the analysis and the structures right, none of this can
bear fruit if we are not ready to invest in preventive
tools. Germany is therefore committed to further
strengthening the crisis-prevention capabilities and
overall efforts of the United Nations.
In addition to being one of the largest contributors
to the budget of the Organization, we also tripled our
contribution in the field of prevention in 2016. For
instance, we contributed more than $4 million to the
United Nations Mediation Support Team and more than
$20 million to the Peacebuilding Fund, and we have
also increased our contributions to UN-Women.
On the ground, Germany is also actively engaged
in crisis prevention and peacekeeping. For instance, our
stabilization and peacekeeping efforts in the context
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali support the political
trajectory that will eventually define a sustainable
settlement in Mali. We also encourage others to
invest more in stabilization projects so that legitimate
authorities in precarious situations may be able to
sustain peace in their countries.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm Germany’s strong
commitment to and support for the United Nations.
Germany looks forward to working closely with the
new Secretary-General and the Security Council to
advance conflict prevention and sustain peace.
The President: We still have a very long list of
speakers, and I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are again kindly
requested to circulate the text in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, and the Swedish presidency of the
Security Council for having organized this debate
on conflict prevention and sustaining peace. I should
like also to welcome the Secretary-General, António
Guterres, as this is the first time he is participating
in a Security Council debate in that capacity, and to
commend him for the leadership he has shown since
38/108

10/01/2017

his first day in office and the drive to reform and adapt
the Organization to the demands of the twenty-first
century.
This open debate is timely and takes place at a
moment of transition in the United Nations. Brazil
would like to echo the new Secretary-General’s appeal
for all of us to put peace first in this new year. To that
end, prevention must come first, and calls to prevent
conflict and sustain peace must be translated into
concrete deeds.
As conflicts multiply and become more complex,
the major weakness of the United Nations remains its
inability to prevent conflicts. The best way to protect
civilians, who are the main victims, is to focus primarily
on prevention. Secretary-General Guterres accurately
remarked that the United Nations was born from war
and that we must now focus on peace. Not long ago,
the United Nations went through a process of reviewing
its activity with a view to adapting the Organization
to the challenges faced regarding the maintenance of
international peace and security. The recommendations
contained in the three resulting reports hinged on one
common element: the primacy of politics.
These documents highlight the fact that United
Nations engagement needs to adopt a comprehensive
approach to sustaining peace that should also focus on
conflict prevention. I wish to underscore in particular
the findings of the Advisory Group of Experts on the
Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture, which paved
the way for the notion of sustaining peace. This concept,
enshrined in General Assembly resolution 70/262 and
Security Council resolution 2282 (2016), on the review
of the peacebuilding architecture, encompasses the
dimension of conflict prevention and marks an evolution
in relation to the original paradigm of peacebuilding,
which focused exclusively on countries emerging from
conflict.
It has long been the Brazilian view that the United
Nations engagement to promote peace and security
should go beyond addressing the immediate causes and
drivers of conflict, sending peacekeeping operations
and providing aid relief. Strategies to sustain peace must
also focus on the structural prevention of the outbreak
of, or relapse into, conflict, including by fighting
poverty, ensuring youth employment and gender
equality, promoting socioeconomic development,
building full-fledged institutions, and promoting
national reconciliation, improved governance and more
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

inclusive societies. These actions should be carried
out in close coordination with national authorities and
taking into account the priorities established and the
need for national ownership at all stages. Without falling
into the trap of securitizing development, enhanced
coordination between the United Nations development
system and the architecture to sustain peace should be
pursued.
As for the steps to be taken to ensure more effective,
complete prevention by the Security Council and across
the wider United Nations system, Brazil is of the view
that better coordination and cooperation between the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding commission is
needed. As we have stated on various occasions, Security
Council members must take full advantage of the role
of the Peacebuilding Commission and contribute to an
improved United Nations engagement. In this regard,
we welcome the adoption of the review of the working
methods of the Peacebuilding Commission, which calls
for enhanced cooperation between these two bodies. The
revised working methods foresee that in preparation for
briefings of the Security Council, the Commission may
consider visits to the fields, including, when invited by
the Council, joint visits with the Security Council. It
is our opinion that the Council would benefit from the
long-term perspective of the Commission in those joint
visits. Peacekeeping operations and special political
missions should also adopt the long-term perspective
required for sustaining peace.
On a more operational level, the Council could do
more to prioritize prevention in its activities. Regular
horizon-scanning exercises focused on potential
hotspots and cross-cutting thematic concerns should be
resumed. This can certainly be done in a way that helps
to stave off conflict rather than stoke tensions. As for
how to increase the focus on prevention, the incoming
Secretary-General has rightly outlined the measures
needed: address the root causes through a balanced
approach to the three pillars of the United Nations.
Such an endeavour will require enhanced coordination
between the Security Council, the Economic and Social
Council and the General Assembly.
The Secretary-General will also have an important
role in preparing the report to be presented to the
General Assembly at its seventy-second session on
options to increase, restructure and better prioritize
funding allocated to peacebuilding activities, including
through assessed contributions. That should also be
considered as we strive to strengthen special political

S/PV.7857

missions, which have been doing important work to
prevent and mediate conflict and to sustain peace, but
lack the predictable and sizable financial support of
peacekeeping operations.
In his New Year address, the Secretary-General
rightly underscored that trillions of dollars are spent on
waging war. Allow me to add that billions are also spent
in peacebuilding operations worldwide. Resources
should be more efficiently invested in strengthening
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture
and special political missions, which can play an
invaluable role in prevention. As Ambassador Gert
Rosenthal underscored in the report (see S/2015/490)
of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of
the Peacebuilding Architecture, peacebuilding is an
inherently political process. The Security Council and
the General Assembly have already shown political
will by agreeing on a framework for peace. We need
a strategic plan for the implementation of General
Assembly resolution 70/262 and Security Council
resolution 2282 (2016). I hope that the high-level event
entitled “Building Sustainable Peace for All: Synergies
between the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and Sustaining Peace”, to be held on 24 January, will
afford us an opportunity to demonstrate the renewed
commitment of Member States, the United Nations and
other stakeholders to building lasting peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to congratulate Minister Wallström and
Sweden on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council. I also congratulate the other new members
of the Council, namely, Kazakhstan, Italy, Ethiopia
and Bolivia.
The convening of this open debate is very timely,
as conflicts around the globe are increasingly complex
and the United Nations faces new challenges that test
its capacity to respond effectively and appropriately.
Nevertheless, that is the current situation in 2017, as the
Secretary-General rightly pointed out in his statement.
Prevention is not simply a priority, but the priority. We
have the benefit of the studies that have already been
mentioned here on the peacebuilding architecture,
on maintaining peace and, of course, on the issue of
women and peace and security, all of which reaffirm
the importance of focusing our efforts on prevention
and the sustainability of peace.

17-0061239/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

In 2015, we adopted the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, with the commitment to
leaving no one behind, with a particular emphasis of
combating the causes of many conflicts. We also have
the resolve and the political will of the new SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Guterres, as clearly evidenced by his
plan of action and in what was reiterated this morning.
Preventing conflict means strengthening institutions
and building resilient societies, prioritizing national and
international policies and protecting and empowering
women and girls — one of the most important steps in
sustainable development.
As is well known, my country is in the process of
concluding what could be a peace agreement after more
than 50 years. I want to share three relevant points that
may be significant lessons learned.
The agreement is anchored in Chapter VI of the
San Francisco Charter, as has been mentioned, and is
the result of direct negotiations between the parties
to the conflict, with the backing of the international
community, the Security Council and, of course, the
special political mission, as well as the resolute support
of our regional body, the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States. The agreement addresses the
causes of the conflict, and its implementation will
enable us to generate economic development and
well-being in the rural areas of Colombia that perhaps
have not experienced development and Government
involvement for many years because of the conflict.
And, of course, as has been carefully considered in the
Security Council, the case of Colombia shows that the
help of international donors for the implementation of
the agreements in their development components goes
far beyond the resources of the special political mission
that is now in the country, verifying and monitoring the
ceasefire and disarmament.
Finally, the presence of women at the negotiation
table and their contribution to the peace agreement
and its future implementation as part of the women
and peace and security agenda in Colombia is a truly
unique experience in a peace process that specifically
includes a gender perspective. As Minister Wallström
said this morning, investing in prevention is not only
morally correct, it is also smart, economically safe
and sustainable.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
40/108

10/01/2017

Mr. Mminele (South Africa): My delegation
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and
the Kingdom of Sweden on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council, and we express our
appreciation to you for convening this important and
timely debate on conflict prevention and sustaining
peace. We once again welcome the new SecretaryGeneral, Mr. António Guterres, and thank him for his
informative briefing and vision on today’s topic.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, as well as the joint statement made by the
representative of Finland on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Mediation.
South Africa holds the view that, while we must,
undoubtedly, seek to strengthen the tools at our
disposal for addressing conflicts as they arise, we must
also emphasize the preventive approach to addressing
conflict and its root causes in order to prevent conflict
and prevent countries emerging from conflict from
relapsing into conflict. On his first day at the helm of
the Organization, the Secretary-General called on all
of us to resolve to put peace first. This debate, as the
first open thematic debate of the Security Council this
year, is therefore symbolic, as it places the emphasis on
prevention and sustaining peace before moving to the
task of resolving conflict once it occurs.
South Africa is convinced that global peace and
stability will remain elusive if we do not address the
nexus between security and development. The 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development recognizes that
vital link. The nature of contemporary conflicts reveals
that such conflicts are, to a large extent, precipitated
by
dispute-burdened
economic
development
issues, including access to mineral resources, the
disproportionate distribution of wealth and power,
bad governance, the lack of people’s participation in
democratic processes, and corruption.
Sustainable peace consolidation also requires the
strengthening of political approaches, such as efforts
aimed at preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention
and management, mediation and peacebuilding. In that
context, we must consider the report of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the 2015 review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture, which noted that
peacebuilding
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

“must be the principle that flows through all
the United Nations engagements, informing all
the Organization’s activities — before, during
and after violent conflicts — rather than being
marginalized.” (S/2015/490, p. 3)
We need to be aware that the under-resourcing of
conflict prevention interventions remains an obstacle.
South Africa believes that a commitment to sustaining
peace and conflict prevention requires adequate and
predictable resources in support of those priorities.
That will invariably lead to less spending on costly
interventions such as peacekeeping, humanitarian
responses and the protection of developmental gains.
South Africa further welcomes and reaffirms its
commitment to cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations in matters
relating to the maintenance of international peace and
security. That allows for consistency with Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations. As the United
Nations has already recognized, regional organizations
are well positioned to understand the causes of armed
conflicts, owing to their knowledge of the region, which
can strengthen their efforts to influence the prevention
or resolution of those conflicts. Furthermore, they have
a comparative advantage, owing to their increasing
political resolve to address the situation. It would
be beneficial for the United Nations to work closely
with regional and subregional organizations in their
mediation and peacemaking efforts.
In addition to traditional threats to international
peace and security, the nature of conflict is changing,
with a multiplicity of armed actors, many employing
asymmetric methods. Against that background, the
United Nations faces new challenges to its efforts
to ensure peace and security, promote sustainable
development, protect human rights and deliver
humanitarian aid.
In conclusion, South Africa continues to recognize
the importance of carrying out the recommendations
of the reviews on peacekeeping, peacebuilding and on
women and peace and security. In particular, we echo the
global study on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), which noted that the prevention of conflict must
be the priority, not the use of force, thereby stressing
the need for both short-term prevention measures and
longer-term measures to address the root causes and
structural drivers of conflict.

S/PV.7857

The Security Council should not act as the
proverbial man with the hammer. Instead, using all
aspects of the Charter at the disposal of the United
Nations system, including the good offices role of the
Secretary-General, we must commit ourselves to doing
everything we can to prevent conflict and sustain peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mr. Pedersen (Norway): I speak on behalf of
Colombia, Ethiopia, Ghana, Indonesia, Jordan, Mexico,
New Zealand and my own country, Norway. We are
eight countries that came together early in 2015 to form
a cross-regional group, the so-called UN70 Group,
with a view to developing reform ideas for the United
Nations. In November last year, we handed over a set of
recommendations to the Secretary-General. One of the
five key messages conveyed to Mr. Guterres was that he
should strive to place conflict prevention at the heart of
the United Nations peace and security agenda.
Last year, Member States agreed on the concept
of sustaining peace in the landmark resolutions on the
peacebuilding architecture (Security Council resolution
2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262).
Sustaining peace encompasses activities aimed at
preventing the outbreak, escalation, continuation
and recurrence of conflict, addressing root causes,
assisting parties to conflict to end hostilities, ensuring
national reconciliation and moving towards recovery,
reconstruction and development. That is quite an
agenda. We need concerted efforts that involve the
whole of the United Nations system and that include
collaboration with national Governments and other key
partners, such as international, regional and subregional
organizations, international financial institutions,
civil-society organizations, women’s groups, youth
organizations and the private sector.
The Security Council has a unique mandate and
position. The Council has various means of preventing
conflict at its disposal, as reflected in the concept note
(S/2017/6, annex) for today’s meeting. With opportunity
comes responsibility. The United Nations system is in
need of a renewal of its conflict prevention and conflict
resolution mechanisms. We, the cross-regional UN70
Group, strongly urge the Security Council to use all
the means at its disposal to prevent the emergence of
new crises like those in Syria or South Sudan. The
Security Council needs to work closely with our new
Secretary-General, give him space to work proactively

17-0061241/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

on preventive diplomacy and be willing to respond
when the Secretary-General recommends action by
the Council.
We are very pleased that the new SecretaryGeneral will put conflict prevention at the very top of
his agenda. We would like to see a greater proportion
of resources allocated to that area, as well as a more
coherent approach by the United Nations system
to identifying and addressing conflict risks. We
welcome the Secretariat’s initiative to convene monthly
situational awareness briefings for Council members,
and we underscore the importance of the SecretaryGeneral providing strong leadership to the Secretariat
and the wider United Nations system.
The Security Council has a crucial role to play in
conflict prevention. However, the Council cannot do it
alone. We, the States Members of the United Nations,
must come together and advance the sustaining peace
agenda. National ownership is fundamental in order
to achieve results. Preventing conflict and sustaining
peace, with the assistance of the international
community, does not undermine State sovereignty. On
the contrary, it strengthens State sovereignty. The shift
to prevention is not an opportunity, it is a necessity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me start by thanking
Sweden for organizing today’s open debate.
We endorse the Secretary-General’s call to make
2017 a year of peace. That is urgent, given that new and
complex conflicts are emerging, even as older, longerstanding and unresolved disputes continue to fester. We
are in fact witnessing unprecedented human suffering
caused by conflicts and violent upheaval. Entire regions
are being destabilized, and millions of lives destroyed,
by long drawn-out conflicts. Today’s debate is therefore
both timely and critical.
The United Nations responsibility for sustaining
peace flows from the Charter’s promise of the promotion
of economic and social development for all peoples in
larger freedom. That responsibility is in addition to the
obligation for the maintenance of international peace
and security. United Nations peacebuilding efforts must
respect the fundamental principles of the Charter of
theUnited Nations, including respect for the sovereignty
and sovereign equality of States. Such efforts should
42/108

10/01/2017

be undertaken under a clear mandate from the Security
Council and the General Assembly.
The United Nations capacity for sustaining peace
is still relatively nascent. It has evolved in response
to the growing number of conflicts across the world.
The United Nations endeavours in nation-building
have, however, had mixed results. Yet they have so far
been more productive and cost effective than unilateral
actions taken by some Powers.
Sustainable peace is a challenge and cannot be
achieved unless the underlying causes of conflicts are
addressed: poverty and, increasingly, environmental
degradation; political and economic injustice; ethnic,
tribal and religious tensions; and external interference
and intervention. It also means finding solutions to
longstanding political disputes. Political, security
and development actors need to support each other in
striving for sustainable peace. It is a comprehensive
activity requiring holistic, long-term thinking that
connects development, peace and security and human
rights into an integrated approach. All our discussions
from the past year have brought forth the understanding
that sustaining peace entails a political process. It
encompasses the prevention of the outbreak, escalation,
continuation and recurrence of conflict.
Its core message is prevention. We believe that
prevention should be taken as a task to be shared by
national Governments and national stakeholders.
Inclusive dialogue, mediation, accountable institutions,
good governance, access to justice, gender equality
and youth participation all feed into the processes of
conflict prevention and, ultimately, sustainable peace.
Inclusivity is the linchpin for sustaining peace.
When we look at sustainable peace through the lens
of conflict prevention, it is important to shift from a
culture of reaction to a culture of prevention. Effective
preventive strategies rely on, first, early reaction to
sign of trouble; secondly, efforts to alleviate the factors
that trigger violence; and, thirdly, the resolution of the
underlying root causes of violence. In all such processes,
national ownership is essential. We believe that conflict
prevention and mitigation are not generic. Moving
a country towards durable peace begins with a clear
understanding of the sources and nature of the local
conflicts. Ambitious conflict-prevention strategies
have to avoid the pitfalls of either a delayed reaction or
an incorrect reading of the signs of an impending crisis.
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

The United Nations already has several instruments
for conflict prevention. At present, the United Nations
and regional organizations maintain dozens of goodoffices missions in, or in proximity to, countries faced
with significant risks of conflict. Existing conflictprevention mechanisms, such as early-warning
systems, are mostly designed to detect only imminent
or recurring conflicts. The United Nations observer
and peacekeeping missions should serve to provide a
deeper understanding of potential conflicts and crises
and act as early warning systems.
Finally, the United Nations cannot fulfil the role
of sustaining peace and preventing conflict without
adequate financial resources, the political support
of Member States and efficient management and
coordination by the various United Nations organs
and entities concerned. Today’s debate can contribute
significantly to advancing such goals.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Sweden on joining
the Security Council for a two-year mandate. I also
congratulate the Swedish delegation on assuming the
presidency of the Council this month. I would like to
wish all States Members of the United Nations a year of
peace and security, one in which our populations leave
war and terrorism — terrorism that rages around the
world — behind.
I would also like to thank Sweden for convening
today’s open debate on an important subject, namely,
conflict prevention and sustaining peace. I would also
like to congratulate the other new members of the
Council — Bolivia, Ethiopia, Italy and Kazakhstan.
We wish them every success in the Council and in
upholding the values of peace and security. I would also
like to thank Spain for the excellent manner in which it
presided over the Council last month.
Terrorism is carried out by international terrorist
organizations such as Da’esh and the Al-Nusra Front. It
leads to instability and an absence of peace. It also leads
to armed conflicts around the world. Da’esh and other
terrorist groups having seized large areas of territory in
Iraq, Syria and Libya, and have taken terrorism to a new
level. They, along with other terrorist organizations,
are attaining ever-greater capacity. They have powerful
modern weapons and know the secrets of technology,
which they make use of to gain supporters and recruit

S/PV.7857

foreign terrorist fighters, as well as to propagate their
extremist and violent ideology.
No country is immune from those dangers. Iraq
remains in a state of war against all of those terrorist
groups, which have gravely threatened peace in our
country. Despite the process of reconstruction in our
country, basic services have been in decline. Economic
and social indicators, in particular on health care, are
in free fall. Poverty is increasing. There are also waves
of internal displacement. The number of casualties
is growing. Terrorism has increased the feeling of
insecurity and has led to upheaval. That, in turn, also
impedes socioeconomic growth in our country. All of
that has led to setbacks in the gains that have been made
by our country in terms of sustainable development.
A functioning society is essential for peace
and security. We must therefore leave behind all
forms of violence and terrorism, as well as conflicts,
traditional warfare and organized crime, in order to
meet the Sustainable Development Goals. Transparent
democracy, the rule of law and good governance are the
preconditions for a peaceful society. The only way to
achieve a peaceful way of living is to create a context
in which the various political currents can discuss how
to change society. We also need the public to be able
to participate in the decision-making process. The
public should have access to the essential information
that it needs. Indeed, the participation of the public
is one of the pillars of a peaceful society. We need to
end exclusion because that will allow us to combat
financial and administrative corruption and strengthen
development.
We can have sustainable peace only if there is
consensus within our societies. With that in mind,
my Government has adopted a range of legislative
enactments to strengthen national unity and reinforce
the trust of all of the Iraqi people. We are determined to
continue our national project and create an environment
that favours dialogue, which will allow us to strengthen
the feeling of national ownership in a political process
involving all of the national stakeholders, be they
religious or ethnic. In that way, we will be able to
maintain the security and stability of the country.
In conclusion, international efforts to help Iraq in
its fight against terrorism can be seen as part of our
collective responsibility to address terrorism at the
international level. Aware of the danger that local
terrorism can cross borders, our activities now reach

17-0061243/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

beyond the national to the continental level. That is how
we will contribute to maintaining international peace
and security.
More than ever, Iraq requires the support of the
international community to help to rebuild cities
that have been liberated, ensure stability and allow
internally displaced persons to return to their homes.
We also need to mitigate the effects of the war against
terrorism around the world. Furthermore, we encourage
all countries to respect the Security Council resolutions
on the fight against terrorism and to cut off the sources
of terrorist financing.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Hungary.
Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): I have learned from a
fantastic woman in Northern Ireland, Nobel Peace
Prize laureate Betty Williams, that peace is action,
not words. That is what she said, and that is how she
worked. Hungary supports the concept of the year of
peace and is ready to act for peace.
I wish to thank Sweden for convening this important
open debate, and I thank the Secretary-General for his
inspiring introductory remarks.
Hungary aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union (EU).
Speaking in my national capacity, I would now like to
add a few thoughts,
For a long time now, we have been arguing that
there is a need for a sharper focus on prevention across
all stages of conflict. In that connection, last year
Hungary offered a voluntary contribution to support
the work of the Department of Political Affairs in
preventive diplomacy and mediation. Given that
United Nations police can contribute across the entire
spectrum of peace and security, we decided to deploy
police experts to two African missions, and we seek
further opportunities to boost our police presence in
other United Nations peace operations.
We believe that women’s participation in United
Nations peace and security efforts, including postconflict governance and peacekeeping, is very
important. Hungary has intensified its efforts to
identify, nominate and deploy female military experts
and police officers to United Nations peacekeeping and
EU Common Security and Defence Policy missions.
In the coming months, female Hungarian officers
will be deployed to the African Union-United Nations
44/108

10/01/2017

Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, and they will serve as
good examples for their compatriots.
Hungary has shown firm and long-standing
dedication to contributing to the elaboration and
realization of the universal and ambitious road map
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Our
ultimate goal should be to ensure everyone peaceful and
secure living conditions in their homelands, but that can
be achieved only by tackling the root causes. As part of
our prevention efforts we must deal with transnational
risks such as violent extremism, climate change, water
scarcity and modern slavery. In that context, Hungary
just increased its voluntary contribution to the UNWomen project that focuses on violent extremism. We
recently hosted the Budapest Water Summit 2016 to give
momentum to the implementation of the water-related
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), and we will
continue to work towards achieving the various SDG
targets aimed at eradicating modern slavery, human
trafficking and forced and child labour. We encourage
the Secretary-General to strengthen the United Nations
response by adopting specific measures to improve
international coordination in that area.
As a new member of the Human Rights Council
for the term 2017-2019, one of our priorities will be
to work towards the prevention of atrocity crimes
and to promote already existing tools available to the
international community that can contribute to an
effective and timely response.
We believe that the prevention role of the United
Nations should be strengthened. We would like to invite
all Member States to join the code of conduct developed
by the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
Group and already signed by 112 Member States, and,
by doing so, to pledge to support timely and decisive
action by the Council aimed at preventing or ending the
commission of atrocity crimes.
Hungary will support the leadership efforts of the
Secretary-General aimed at creating a strong, efficient,
responsible and credible United Nations that is able
to tackle the challenges of the twenty-first century.
We are ready to contribute to the work of this noble
Organization with our best efforts.
The full version of my statement will be circulated.
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): The idea of preventive
diplomacy is rooted, as we all know, in the purposes
and principles of the United Nations, which are defined
in its Charter, in particular in Article 1, paragraph 1,
“[t]o maintain international peace and
security, and to that end: to take effective collective
measures for the prevention and removal of threats
to the peace”.
That has inspired successive Secretaries-General,
from Dag Hammarskjöld — your fellow citizen, Madam
President — to Boutros Boutros Ghali and our current
Secretary-General, to move the United Nations “from a
culture of reaction to a culture of prevention”, as is often
said. It has also been the central piece of many debates
in the Security Council, including the one organized by
Lebanon in September 2011 (see S/PV.6621), to which
my country, as President, submitted a concept paper
entitled “Strengthening and consolidating preventive
diplomacy” (S/2011/570, annex). That concept has
been reinvigorated in three global policy reviews and
many reports and resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly. Suffice it to mention here the preamble to
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its
Goal 16.
Yet at the beginning of 2017, our world continues
to face a multitude of challenges: from occupation and
protracted conflicts to large movements of refugees
and migrants to extreme violence, terrorism, violation
of human rights and crises in global governance.
Today’s debate on the topic “Conflict prevention and
sustaining peace” should be an opportunity to sharpen
the existing tools on prevention and to restore our faith
in multilateralism’s ability to push forward the agenda
for peace and its sustainability.
In an attempt to answer the questions raised in
Sweden’s concept note (S/2017/6, annex) framing the
debate, allow me to highlight the following points.
The United Nations currently has at its disposal
a significant array of assets in the field of conflict
prevention, including the Secretary-General’s good
offices, envoys, resident political missions, United
Nations country teams, situation briefings, the
Mediation Support Unit of the Department of Political
Affairs, regional offices, peacekeeping operations,
groups of friends and their diplomatic support, fact-

S/PV.7857

finding missions, inquiries and investigations. We look
to the Secretary-General for a reinvigorated approach to
strengthening those assets and streamlining their roles.
Close cooperation between the Council and an effective
and efficient Secretariat is pivotal in our preventive
endeavours. Moreover, partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations, youth, women, civil society
and academia will improve our early-warning systems’
ability to identify the source of tension, to address it and
to consolidate the national, regional and international
support needed to support peaceful and developmental
processes built on respect for human rights.
We, the Member States, should remain committed
to achieving the reform of the United Nations, which
will strengthen its ability to fulfil its mandate in our
increasingly interconnected world with its new threats
to peace and security. While wishing to respect the
mandates of the various organs, we can see that the
nature of those challenges requires an integrated
approach within the United Nations. It is imperative
to build upon the preventive initiatives taken by other
agencies, such as UNESCO in the field of education
and the United Nations Development Programme in
the area of good governance, democratic processes and
elections, just to name a few.
My region, the Middle East, is a clear example of
the importance of placing the need to address the root
causes of conflicts at the top of our agenda. Moreover, in
the context of conflict prevention, I remind the Council
of Lebanon’s initiative in 2016, namely, to seek, based
on the Charter of the United Nations and paragraph 10
of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), the good
offices of the Secretary-General in the demarcation of
the disputed maritime border of the exclusive economic
zones between Lebanon and Israel, emphasizing that
the non-resolution of that issue will remain a source
of conflict that threatens the peace and security of
our region.
Article 99 of the Charter of the United Nations,
which entrusts the Secretary-General with the authority
to
“bring to the attention of the Security Council
any matter which in his opinion may threaten the
maintenance of international peace and security”,
should always be considered in the context of shared
responsibility in the maintenance of peace and security.
Regular briefings, frank reviews of situations and open
debates, just like the one we are having today, will pave

17-0061245/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

the way towards the collective ownership of conflict
prevention and sustaining peace.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. João Vale
de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 28 member States of the European
Union (EU). The candidate countries, Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; the European Free Trade Association
country Iceland, member of the European Economic
Area; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement. The full
text of my statement is being distributed. I will try to
limit my statement to a few remarks.
The first one is to thank Sweden for its initiative
in organizing this open debate, the second one to thank
Secretary-General Guterres for a very convincing
outline of what needs to be done and for reminding us
of the clear imperative for all of us to work as hard as
we can, collectively, on finally getting prevention right,
because we know that we have often failed on many
fronts. As Mr. Guterres has said, “trillions of dollars are
spent destroying societies and economies”. The human
suffering that we are currently witnessing is immense
and, frankly, shameful. We therefore wholeheartedly
support the Secretary-General’s call to “put peace
first”, and welcome the strong emphasis that he places
on prevention.
Security and development are closely interlinked and
mutually reinforcing, and are key to preventing crises
and to achieving sustainable peace. The link permeates
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The
General Assembly and the Security Council have both
agreed that sustaining peace is the joint responsibility
of Governments and societies and is supported by
the international community. The high-level reviews
underlined the need to prioritize prevention in order to
break the cycle of responding too late.
Prevention is better than firefighting, and sustaining
efforts for peace reduces human and financial costs
immensely in the long run. We know that we must
develop a political culture of acting sooner in response
to the risk of violent conflict. And we must act together,
if we want to have any chance of success.
46/108

10/01/2017

The European Union’s new global strategy
entitled “Shared Vision, Common Action: A Stronger
Europe” emphasizes the importance of acting promptly
on prevention. It also emphasizes the importance of
an integrated and comprehensive approach to conflict,
and the EU’s commitment to working through the
multilateral system, with the United Nations at its
core. Building on the comprehensive approach and
working in an interconnected manner, the EU will use
the global strategy to step up its efforts and capacities
to strengthen the way we bring together institutions,
expertise and instruments and work with member
States on prevention, resolution and stabilization.
Making coherent use of all the policies at the EU’s
disposal is essential, much as the United Nations
tries to work coherently across all of its pillars. The
EU is working with the United Nations on earlywarning capacities. If we are to prevent the emergence,
re-emergence and escalation of violent conflict, early
warning is indispensable. But generating early action
is the key. Mediation is recognized as an effective tool
for preventing conflicts, as well as for resolving them.
Building and sustaining peace is inescapably
linked to inclusive development, resilience and human
rights. The best ways to prevent conflicts continue to
be democratic governance, the rule of law and respect
for human rights, teamed with inclusive economic
development. In that context, the proposed new
European consensus on development puts forward a
shared vision for development cooperation for the EU
and its member States, aligned with the 2030 Agenda
and designed to respond to current global challenges.
It also aims to help build resilience among individuals,
societies and States, and emphasizes our strong
engagement with the countries most in need. We work
in partnership with Governments in countries at risk
of conflict and fragility and with external partners
and civil society, as defined in the New Deal for
Engagement in Fragile States. Peaceful and inclusive
societies, good governance, the rule of law, independent
judiciaries, reliable police forces and public sectors free
of corruption are the best guarantees of sustainable
peace and sustainable development. Sustaining peace
requires that human rights and fundamental freedoms
be respected, protected and fulfilled.
The implementation of the Paris Climate Agreement
will be a crucial factor in reducing susceptibility to
crises throughout the world. Much of that work will
have to be tackled outside the Security Council. But
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

the Council has a particular responsibility to address
situations in danger of deteriorating, effectively and
in a timely manner. Given the role foreseen for the
Secretary-General by Article 99 of the Charter of the
United Nations in bringing issues to the attention of the
Security Council, it is essential that the Council and the
Secretariat cooperate smoothly and efficiently.
We must also develop more creative approaches
to diplomacy, including by continuing to promote the
role of women in peace efforts, for we need them to
be at the forefront in creating and sustaining peace. In
order to be prepared to respond in a timely and effective
manner, the Council could explore new and innovative
ways to work with other actors, including civil society.
Existing tools such as Arria Formula meetings are
very useful in that regard. Horizon-scanning briefings
could be reinvigorated, and the Human Rights Up
Front initiative, as an early warning tool, should be
maintained and strengthened. We urge members of
the Security Council not to vote against credible draft
resolutions on timely and decisive action aimed at
preventing or ending mass atrocities.
In conclusion, the Council should ensure that
longer-term peacebuilding is considered in mission
mandates, along with reflections on how to design
transitions and strengthen the advisory role of the
Peacebuilding Commission. What we need most is to
translate what we know into action, so that the United
Nations can deliver effectively on its core tasks in a
coherent manner. A strong, effective United Nations is
more essential than ever.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Sevilla Borja (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): We
are very pleased that the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Sweden, a country that throughout its rich modern
history has always striven to maintain peace in the
world through respect for international legal standards,
has been presiding over today’s important debate on
preventive diplomacy — that is, the prevention of
conflicts in the maintenance of sustainable peace,
a timely issue that the Government of Sweden has
fittingly presented for our consideration.
There is no greater or more important priority for
the international community than peace. According to
the Charter of the United Nations,

S/PV.7857

“the peoples of the United Nations determined
to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war”
decided to organize legally and to create the United
Nations as
“a centre for harmonizing the actions of nations in
the attainment of these common ends”,
which are basically three — to maintain international
peace and security, to develop friendly relations among
nations in order to strengthen universal peace, and to
achieve international cooperation on development,
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for
all. There can be no doubt that the Organization has
achieved remarkable success during its first 70 years
in helping the world to avoid a dreaded new global
conflagration — in other words, an aggravated reprise
of the two previous wars that “twice in our lifetime
ha[ve] brought untold sorrow to mankind”, as the
Preamble to the Charter has it.
However, those seven decades of the second half
of the twentieth century and the beginning of the
twenty-first have been cruelly marked by the outbreak
of many terrible, smaller wars that we have not been
able to prevent, avoid or suppress. Let us recall some
of them — though not all, because the list would be
very long — Korea; Viet Nam; the colonial wars,
especially in Africa, whose consequences continue
to this very day, as the Council’s agenda shows; the
Middle East and Palestine; the Balkans; Afghanistan;
Iraq; Libya; Syria, and so on and so forth. Those wars
are the result of a lack of respect for the Charter and
of the hegemonic decisions taken by the great Powers.
Those who led those wars have, unfortunately, gone
unpunished, thanks to the politics of power and to the
unjust and anti-democratic composition and hegemonic
prerogatives of a few countries on the Security Council.
Today humankind and civilization are facing
an unprecedented situation that is a serious threat to
peace — the onslaught of barbarism in the form of
criminal terrorist attacks by non-State actors. We
should not fail to point out that that phenomenon has its
causes and origins in the same deplorable hegemonic
practices and abuses of power of the few who in their
irresponsibility have created and supported such
criminal gangs. This new situation, which brings
bloodshed and humanitarian crises in its wake, is a
clear example of the importance of finding political
solutions to prevent conflicts before they explode.

17-0061247/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

Ecuador believes that, in order for the United
Nations at this new stage in its life — beginning with
a new Secretary-General and the adoption of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development — to be effective
in its fundamental task of maintaining international
peace and security, it should at the very least meet the
following six requirements.
First, every State, especially the great Powers,
should renew its political commitment to the purposes
and principles of the Charter, particularly the obligation
to refrain from the threat or use of force in settling
international disputes.
Secondly, the Security Council must be
democratized once and for all by making it appropriately
representative and geographically equitable, eliminating
the prerogatives of the few and strengthening the role of
the General Assembly.
Thirdly, the Security Council must be more
effective in using preventive diplomacy — that is,
preventing and avoiding conflicts before they occur. As
the concept note (S/2017/6, annex) prepared by Sweden
for today’s debate points out, we now have
“a Security Council that is seized primarily
with addressing the crises of the day rather than
preventing the conflicts of tomorrow.”
That is why we enthusiastically support the first
administrative and functional measures that SecretaryGeneral António Guterres took based on the view that
there is no conflict that cannot be solved politically
through the use of diplomacy and peaceful means for
settling disputes under international law.
Fourthly, peace and security are intrinsically
linked to sustainable development. There can be no
peace while hunger and poverty persist, or while there
is no decrease in inequality. Fair societies are peaceful
societies, and that is true both domestically and at
the international level. The most effective preventive
diplomacy would be the immediate implementation
of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals set out in
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, for
which political commitment is key in our efforts
to guarantee financing, technical cooperation and
technology transfer.
Fifthly, we fully support efforts in the field of
disarmament, an issue that seems recently to have
been overlooked.
48/108

10/01/2017

Sixthly, and finally, the following examples are
flash points for potential international conflicts:
continued colonial domination over territories while
the colonizers seek to take domestic legal steps to
maintain their dominion; territories subject to foreign
occupation; and the presence of military bases of one
country in the territory of another. The resolution of
those situations once and for all must be part of our
new commitment to conflict prevention, so that we can
deliver sustainable peace.
I echo the words pronounced by António Guterres
after he was sworn in as the ninth Secretary-General of
the United Nations. Prevention requires that we address
the root causes through the three pillars of the United
Nations: peace and security, sustainable development
and human rights. That must be our priority in
everything we do.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank the Swedish
delegation for having convened this open debate, and
also to congratulate it on assuming its mandate in the
Security Council.
Argentina is convinced that, in order to achieve
sustainable peace, prevention and peacebuilding
activities must be included not just in the post-conflict
phase but also before, during and immediately after
conflicts. For that reason, my country has for many years
supported the adoption of a comprehensive approach
that tackles the deep-rooted causes of conflict through
the strengthening of the rule of law, the promotion of
sustained and sustainable economic growth, poverty
eradication, social development, the promotion of
democracy and respect for human rights, including
ensuring that the needs of all sectors of the population
are always taken into consideration. Such an approach
covers activities aimed at preventing the outbreak,
exacerbation, continuation and recurrence of conflict.
It does so by addressing the deep-rooted causes and
by supporting parties to conflict so that they can put
an end to hostilities, enable national reconciliation and
move towards recovery, rebuilding and development.
The United Nations system is endowed with
a broad array of tools in the areas of preventive
diplomacy and mediation. Nevertheless, as was made
glaringly clear during the review of the peacebuilding
architecture, there is a need to strengthen those tools
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

and to achieve greater coherence in our prevention
strategies. Each of the organs of the United Nations
has a specific responsibility and function, mandated
by the Charter of the United Nations, with regard to
prevention and the broad concept of peacebuilding.
The General Assembly and the Security Council,
as well as the Economic and Social Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, deal with issues relating
to prevention. Regrettably, experience has shown us
that the preventive action carried out by each of those
bodies is often fragmented, and there is a lack of a
single overarching vision to shape the efforts made. If
we wish to enhance our prevention capacity, we need
to craft concrete strategies, not just so as to ensure that
there is early warning of conflict but also to encourage
early action. Emphasis must be placed on preventing
and not just mitigating or resolving conflict. We must
give priority to political — not military — solutions.
Coordinated work between the General Assembly,
the Security Council and the Secretary-General is vital
in order to boost the capacity of the United Nations in
thia area. The Secretary-General has a key role to play
in achieving greater coherence in conflict prevention.
It is for that reason that Argentina welcomes and
supports the proposals of the Secretary-General aimed
at strengthening the prevention agenda and at giving
fresh impetus to diplomacy for peace. We believe that
the proposal of the Secretary-General to strengthen the
mediation and good offices agenda of his Office is very
appropriate. We must not lose sight of the fact that, for
those efforts to be successful, all parties to a dispute or
conflict must cooperate fully with the Secretary-General
as he seeks to fulfil his mandate. That would allow us
to bolster the role of the United Nations as an honest
and mutual broker. It is crucial that we deliver greater
consistency in the actions taken by the Secretariat and
the United Nations system in terms of prevention and
peacebuilding. Putting an end to fragmentation and,
in many instances, to the duplication and overlapping
of efforts must be one of our priorities. And it is for
that reason that we commend the fact that one of the
roles of the new Special Adviser on Policy will be to
seek out and deliver greater systemic coherence and
consistency among the policies, tools and operations
linked to prevention.
A comprehensive preventive approach necessarily
includes full national involvement in the process of
peacebuilding. The participation of Governments and
the various political and social actors of Member States

S/PV.7857

involved in those processes is essential. Such national
involvement must be encouraged by the United Nations
and by other international actors, who can support and
facilitate that process, but not lead it.
There is also much to be done at the regional level. We
must continue pursuing actions that will deliver peace
in concert with regional and subregional organizations,
which are crucial allies in the development of strategies
conducive to conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
In the Americas, I think it worth pointing out the role
that could be played by the Organization of American
States and other subregional organizations, such as the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States,
the Union of South American Nations and the Southern
Common Market.
The allocation of greater resources to prevention
will contribute to avoiding the outbreak of new conflicts
and the recurrence of old ones. That is the only way
to save lives and to protect the progress that we have
made in terms of sustainable development and to avoid
having to devote untold resources in the future to
alleviating the aftermath of conflict. Argentina believes
that peacebuilding activities must be underpinned by
predictable and sustainable financing. For that reason,
we will continue to support the recommendation
that the Peacebuilding Fund should be allocated an
appropriate sum drawn from the contributions of
individual Member States, which should be established
by the budget of the Organization.
Finally, I would like to highlight that, as a country
committed to the purposes and principles of the
Charter, Argentina reiterates the resolute concern of
its foreign policy and its diplomatic action to support
conflict prevention, the sustaining of peace, the rule of
law and human rights.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): Conflict prevention and
sustaining peace go to the heart of the Charter of the
United Nations. They are core principles bringing
together all three pillars of the work of the United
Nations. We therefore welcome Sweden’s choice of
today’s topic for the first open debate under the tenure
of the new Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres.
Australia is deeply committed to that agenda.
We were pleased to co-facilitate the sustaining peace
resolutions, and strongly support the key messages

17-0061249/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

provided by the recent major reviews. We commend the
Secretariat on the progress made and look forward to
breaking new ground this year in advancing the use of
conflict prevention tools and policies.
We particularly welcome the Secretary-General’s
comments that, inspired by the sustaining peace
resolutions, he will take forward comprehensive
reform. Cultural, structural and process reforms based
on the sustaining peace resolutions are all crucial. The
Secretary-General has the prerogative to make such
necessary reforms of the Organization, as they fall
within his authority, and we encourage him to continue
to do so. We are greatly encouraged by the SecretaryGeneral’s early decisions to strengthen the Secretariat’s
performance. More must be done to improve coherence,
accountability and financing for sustaining peace.
First, coherence requires strong coordination.
Fragmentation is untenable and undermines the
effectiveness of the United Nations in this area and
others. We welcome the Secretary-General’s initial
decisions to address this. More must be done at all
levels to improve coordination between departments,
between agencies, between the field and Headquarters
and between policy and programmes. The quadrennial
comprehensive policy review included a welcome
emphasis on the importance of sustaining peace and
prevention as an intellectual and practical lens through
which to align Headquarters and country approaches.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
also has a vital role in implementing the sustaining peace
agenda. The United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) and DPKO should continue to adopt new
policies and practices for enhanced coherence and
joint programmes.
Secondly, with regard to accountability, it is
paramount to monitor progress and recognize success
and failure. Independent, frank advice to the Security
Council should be a key role for the Secretary-General
and of the Secretariat broadly. The little-used Article
99 should become a standard tool. We welcome
collaboration between the Department of Political
Affairs, the Peacebuilding Support Office and UNDP
to take forward pilot projects on sustaining peace in
Sri Lanka and Burkina Faso. The lessons learned from
those projects should shape new practices and policies
for a coherent United Nations.
Finally, new financing approaches are long overdue.
A fit-for-purpose United Nations must be financed
50/108

10/01/2017

in a way that stimulates the highest-quality advice,
personnel and action on the ground. That will ensure
a nimble, innovative United Nations that responds to
needs rather than corporate structures to achieve action
that lives up to our rhetoric.
The Secretary-General’s report to the seventysecond session of the General Assembly called for in the
resolutions on sustaining peace will be key, including
its critical financing element. Investing in the existing
peacebuilding architecture is also important to ensure
that crucial peacebuilding gaps are met. Australia’s
recent $10 million commitment to the Peacebuilding
Fund shows our confidence in this tool.
The sustaining peace agenda must be central to all
our efforts in 2017. Australia welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s leadership and urges the whole of the United
Nations to come together to advance this agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Ms. Boucher (Canada) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking Sweden for organizing this
open debate on conflict prevention and sustaining peace.
As we begin the year with a new Secretary-General,
today’s debate is extremely timely and goes directly to
the heart of the Organization’s fundamental purpose.
We are confronting a challenging global situation,
and we continue to face threats to international
peace and security that generate major pressures on
the Organization and on Member States. In numbers
unprecedented since the Second World War, people
around the globe remain displaced by conflict. The
duration of protracted refugee situations is also
lengthening, which puts sustained pressure on those
displaced, on host communities and on the global
capacity for humanitarian response. The indiscriminate
bombing and targeting of civilians and medical facilities
have become the hallmark of too many conflicts.
The senseless attacks recently suffered by civilians
in Aleppo represent perhaps the lowest point in our
collective response in protecting populations at risk.
Clearly, we must do more and do it sooner to prevent
conflicts from escalating. We must do more to secure
sustainable peace in fragile situations. Over the past
year, Canada has sought to reinforce the capacity of
the United Nations to support conflict prevention and
peacebuilding. As Prime Minister Trudeau signalled to
the General Assembly (see A/71/PV.8), pluralism and
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

inclusion represent crucial values in building peaceful
societies and sustainable development.
(spoke in English)
Various high-level reviews conducted over the past
two years — by the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations and by the Advisory Group of Experts
on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture, and
the global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) — highlighted the importance of
prevention. Many of those recommendations were
endorsed by Member States in the landmark Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions (resolution
2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262)
on sustaining peace. Not only must that work continue,
but we encourage the Secretary-General to articulate
an ambitious plan of action to advance those objectives.
Let me highlight a few areas where Canada would like
to see greater emphasis.
We know that political solutions lie at the heart
of conflict prevention and peacebuilding. However,
preventing conflict and sustaining peace must become
overarching goals of all United Nations activities before,
during and after conflict, including for the human rights
and development pillars. We also think it is important to
strengthen the Secretariat’s capacity for joint analysis
and joint planning, as well as for conveying timely earlywarning information and analysis to Member States.
Overall, we believe a better balance must be struck
between the considerable resources spent on peace
operations and those supporting conflict prevention
and sustaining peace, particularly in the field.
As for the Security Council, we encourage it to
make greater and fuller use of its prevention toolbox,
including Chapter VI measures, as well as the use of
special political missions. We also think the SecretaryGeneral has a central role to play in galvanizing
international action for peace.
Finally, we really do need a stronger link between
sustaining peace and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. As highlighted in the Stockholm
declaration of 2016, peacebuilding and State-building
are integral to sustainable development, not separate
from it. While that link is recognized in the 2030
Agenda, we believe that it needs to be strengthened
with greater urgency. The sustaining peace and
sustainable development agendas intersect in multiple
ways, but perhaps the most important priorities are
gender equality, women’s empowerment and the

S/PV.7857

participation of women and youth in peacebuilding
and governance. We urge the Secretary-General and
the Council to continue to strengthen the work of the
United Nations on gender and youth, particularly in
countries experiencing fragility.
We look forward to working closely with our new
Secretary-General. We offer our full support to him
and to his team, as well as to Council members, as we
advance this important agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Ms. Pham (Viet Nam): I would like to join previous
speakers in congratulating the President on Sweden’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month and in thanking the President for convening
this very important meeting on conflict prevention and
sustaining peace. My sincere congratulations and warm
welcome also go to the new non-permanent members of
the Security Council and the new Secretary-General.
I would like to wish them tremendous successes
throughout their terms.
Our world today is facing a multitude of complex
emerging and recurring security challenges, both
traditional and non-traditional. Prolonged disputes
not only hinder the development efforts; they are also
potential causes of conflict. The Asia-Pacific region is
no exception and is wracked with intractable conflicts
over natural resources and territorial disputes,
including in the East Sea — also known as the South
China Sea — that could undermine international peace
and security.
Therefore, it is high time for the United Nations
to renew its commitment to taking effective collective
measures for the prevention and removal of threats to
peace. The United Nations should continue its leading
role in promoting a collective security architecture.
For such an architecture to work, we must strengthen
multilateralism, advance the establishment of rules
and norms and ensure respect for and compliance with
international law, without any threat or use of force.
We treasure the values outlined in the vision of the
new Secretary-General for fulfilling the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
with regard to the maintenance of international peace
and security.
As indicated in relevant resolutions and reports
during the past reviews on the United Nations peace

17-0061251/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

and security architecture, there is an urgent need to put
conflict prevention and dispute settlement at the core of
the Organization’s work, as provided for in Article 33 of
the Charter. In order to achieve such goals, the Security
Council should continue to promote robust leadership
and actively assume its primary responsibility to
maintain international peace and security. Such
endeavours also need the shared responsibility of all
Member States, with strong political will and the active
participation of the relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations.
Furthermore, we should strengthen close
coordination and cooperation within the United Nations
system, particularly among the Secretary-General, the
Security Council and the General Assembly, in order
to develop a long-term and comprehensive strategy for
conflict prevention and sustainable development, with
due respect for national independence, sovereignty
and integrity.
We also believe that additional internationally
binding legal instruments are much needed and should
be strengthened to effectively control the proliferation
of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass
destruction to non-State actors, to combat transnational
human and drug trafficking and to prevent the
propagation of violent extremist ideology and terrorism.
More attention should be given to assisting Member
States in addressing the root causes of conflicts,
promoting national reconciliation, reconstruction and
development and enhancing good governance and
institutional capabilities, which are key factors that
lead to sustaining peace.
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), of which Viet Nam is a very proud member,
is a community striving for peace, harmony and
shared responsibility, and has been playing the central
role in building our region’s security architecture,
thereby contributing to the maintenance of peace and
security in South-East Asia. ASEAN has also worked,
with much success, to seek solutions to disputes and
prevent conflicts, including in the East Sea. ASEAN
has always been committed to upholding the primacy
of international law, including the 1982 United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, and diplomatic
and legal processes, to ensuring the full and effective
implementation of the Declaration on the Conduct
of Parties in the South China Sea and to striving for
an early conclusion of a code of conduct in the South
China Sea. We call on all States to join ASEAN in
52/108

10/01/2017

that effort, with the common vision for a South-East
Asian region of peace, stability and prosperity. In order
to move the United Nations conflict prevention and
sustaining peace agenda forward, we need bold and
tireless endeavours from both the United Nations and
Member States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Sweden for convening this debate. We value this
first opportunity for interaction with Secretary-General
António Guterres, to whom we reiterate Chile’s support
as he carries out his duties and whose proposals to
improve performance in terms of peace and security,
including through the establishment of an internal
review group, we are following with interest.
In addition to the traditional threats to international
peace and security, there are new threats that are
not always of a State or military nature. Indeed, an
important part of the Security Council’s agenda relates
to conflicts that have arisen internally. For that reason,
one of the axes for action to prevent internal conflicts
that can threaten international peace and security is
the promotion of stable societies, where radicalization,
violence and extremism have no place. Prevention
should be promoted through a multidimensional and
integrated approach that addresses the underlying
causes of such threats, including socioeconomic, gender,
ethnic, tribal, religious or ideological tensions. Such an
approach should serve to reinforce the coherence of
political, security and development concerns, human
rights and the promotion of the rule of law.
When Chile presided over the Council two years
ago, it did so with a focus on conflict prevention, with
an emphasis on preventing countries in post-conflict
situations from relapsing into violence. During the
open debate chaired by President Michelle Bachelet on
19 January 2015 (see S/PV.7361), the point that security
and development are closely interrelated and mutually
reinforcing and that their presence is fundamental to
sustainable peace was underscored. The importance
of inclusive development for the maintenance of
international peace and security was emphasized.
Many speakers have discussed ways to promote such
an approach. In that regard, in addition to reiterating
the importance of improving the Council’s working
methods and the synergies and flows of information
between the Council and the rest of the system, we
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

would like to highlight five measures that we believe
could contribute to improving the functioning of the
Council’s peace and security system.
First, we must empower women and increase their
participation in politics, including in peace processes,
and we must continue to examine gender issues in
conflict prevention and peacekeeping. That entails
working for the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and related resolutions, to which the Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security,
known as Group 2242, can contribute.
Secondly, we must strengthen the Peacebuilding
Commission, while recognizing its important role
in the peacebuilding architecture as a whole. The
Council should strengthen its interaction with the
Commission, in particular by making greater use
of the Commission’s advisory role. For its part, the
Commission should redouble its efforts to promote
greater coherence with national strategies and priorities
in the field of peacebuilding, and should highlight the
importance of its own coordination with regional and
subregional institutions.
Thirdly, we must address and prevent the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, which contributes
to igniting conflicts. The United Nations can help
concerned States, as appropriate and at their request
and with full respect for their sovereignty over their
natural resources, to prevent illegal access to those
natural resources and to help concerned States lay the
framework for the legal exploitation of natural resources
in a way that contributes to their development.
Fourthly, attention must be focused on the protection
of critical infrastructure and the prevention of attacks
on that infrastructure, including hospitals and schools.
That is essential for ensuring the well-being of citizens
and consolidating peace. In that regard, we reiterate our
support for the Oslo Safe Schools Declaration.
Fifthly, and finally, we must implement resolution
2250 (2015), on youth, peace and security, which is the
first resolution to recognize young people as actors in
peace processes and urges Governments to increase
the participation of youth and the representation of
youth in peacekeeping initiatives, bearing in mind that
600 million young people currently live in conflict
zones or fragile States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.

S/PV.7857

Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank Sweden for convening this important debate.
The multiple crises that we were faced with in 2016
show how acutely necessary this debate is and how
important it is to draw lessons from the situation and
improve conflict prevention. Switzerland is pleased
that this debate is taking place in the presence of the
Secretary-General, and we support his call for the
strengthening of prevention. We would like in that
connection to make three remarks.
First, we need to invest more in United Nations
instruments aimed at preventing conflict and
maintaining peace. Those tools include the United
Nations
Development
Programme-Department
of Political Affairs Joint Programme on Building
National Capacities for Conflict Prevention and the
Peacebuilding Fund, which have produced excellent
results. The Department of Political Affairs entities in
charge of mediation and good offices, as well as special
political missions, play an important role. Nevertheless,
Switzerland regrets that those instruments are
chronically underfunded, and we remain firmly
committed to providing our political and financial
support to those key instruments.
Secondly, prevention is a responsibility to be
shared by all United Nations entities. That means
that all parts of the United Nations, including its
intergovernmental forums, need to conduct their work
within the framework of their respective mandates
with a preventive mindset, in line with the new notion
of peacekeeping endorsed by the Security Council
and the General Assembly. That calls for adopting a
proactive, inclusive, comprehensive and coordinated
approach to conflict, as well as for national ownership
of peacekeeping.
We need to work on our institutional measures in
order better to understand the links between peace and
security and between development and human rights.
The nexus between peace and security and human
rights has, in our view, particular potential with regard
to conflict prevention. Human rights violations can be
precursors that lead to conflicts. They can also indicate
potential instability or an escalation of conflict. We
must therefore step our efforts aimed at taking greater
advantage of that capacity. For that reason, Switzerland
launched the appeal of 13 June 2016 in the Human Rights
Council. The appeal is aimed at putting human rights at
the core of conflict prevention and is now supported

17-0061253/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

by 70 States. In that same regard, we firmly support
the Human Rights Up Front initiative and commend the
fact that the new Secretary-General will follow up with
efforts to that end.
That brings me to my third point, which is the role
of the Security Council. In resolution 2171 (2014), the
Council conveyed its determination to take effective
and rapid measures to prevent armed conflicts. We
stand ready to support the Council in its work aimed at
strengthening its capacities in the area of prevention.
In accordance with the appeal of 13 June, cooperation
between the Security Council and the Human Rights
Council is a central component. For example, the
members of the Security Council can request periodic
informational meetings with the High Commissioner
for Human Rights. They can use the reports of the
Human Rights Council and its various mechanisms
as a source of information and enhance cooperation
between the Security Council’s subsidiary bodies and
the relevant mechanisms of the Human Rights Council.
More generally, we encourage the Security Council to
further reflect on the nature of the existing interlinkage
between its own mandate and activities and those of the
other parts of the United Nations system.
In order to strengthen prevention, partnerships,
for example, between local, national, regional and
international actors, or between States, organizations
and civil society, are crucial. Accordingly, Switzerland
will continue to work with entities committed to such
goals and stands ready to give its full support to the
Secretary-General in the context of a renewed effort to
prevent conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me to begin by congratulating you, Sir, and your
delegation on the beginning of your mandate and the
assumption of your presidency of the Security Council.
I also warmly welcome the new Secretary-General
to this debate and thank him for sharing his visions
and thoughts.
I also associate my delegation with the statement
delivered by the representative of Venezuela on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Despite its limited success in decreasing the
number of wars among nations, the United Nations
is yet to have any success in harnessing the violence
54/108

10/01/2017

and extremism perpetrated by non-State actors within
nations and across international borders, especially
those that resort to the most barbaric forms of violence
and shamelessly glorify it. A cursory look at the list of
issues that the Council has dealt with in the past few
years shows that it is increasingly overwhelmed with
internal conflicts and the criminal acts of terrorist
and extremist non-State actors, including cross-border
terrorist activities, the recruitment of foreign terrorists
fighters planning terrorist acts in various countries and
transnational organized crime, among others.
What we need to do now is to focus increasingly
on preventing and suppressing this new scourge that
the United Nations was not originally established and
designed to deal with. A deeper analysis of the political
environment reveals that aggression is still one of the
major causes that lie at the root of the violent extremism
that we are currently facing. The occupation of
Palestinian territory by the Israeli regime, which is the
result of Israeli aggression, lies at the core of the ongoing
tension and anger in the Middle East. The United States
aggression against Iraq in 2003 is one of the major
causes that radicalized groups and individuals across
and beyond the region. The same applies to Syria and
Yemen, where foreign intervention and aggression have
damaged the prospects for international cooperation
aimed at fighting terrorist and extremist groups, while
putting an end to the prospects for peace. Although we
have acquired some historical distance from the age of
nations fighting among themselves, the United Nations
should remain adamant in preventing aggression,
which is one of the root causes of the new emerging
threats. That mission is enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations. There is still an obvious linkage
between aggression in the classic sense of the word and
the eruption of violence and other threats on the part of
non-State actors.
Apart from aggression, extremist, takfiri and
xenophobic ideologies, which are simultaneously on
the rise in the East and West, constitute another root
cause of the violence that is currently engulfing some
parts of the world. The ideologues and preachers
who spread hatred towards others are at the heart of
all of the resulting atrocities. It is imperative that the
United Nations encourage all Member States to cut
off access to groups and those who preach hate from
public platforms, and take a proactive role in ensuring
that civilization and intercultural and interfaith
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

dialogue and understanding are encouraged, promoted
and protected.
Undoubtedly, there are a number of other important
factors that create fertile ground for the spread of
violence — factors that we have to deal with seriously
if we wish to prevent more conflicts and make peace
sustainable. They include, but are by no means limited
to, injustice, discrimination, poverty, underdevelopment
and corruption, as well as economic factors,
environmental degradation, water- and land-related
issues and cultural deprivation and marginalization.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): Estonia aligns itself with
the statement made on behalf of the European Union.
Let me start by thanking Sweden for convening this
important and timely debate, and the new SecretaryGeneral António Guterres for outlining his vision for
a renewed focus on conflict prevention. Allow me also
to congratulate Mr. Guterres on his appointment as the
ninth Secretary-General of the United Nations.
We cannot agree more with the SecretaryGeneral that it is time to put peace first. The ongoing
deep-rooted conflicts, displacements and massive
movements of refugees and migrants around the
world serve as a clear sign that the Security Council
and the broader international community have been
ineffective in giving priority to prevention. The recent
three reviews of United Nations peace-related activities
concluded with the same message — there is an urgent
need to put prevention at the core of the United Nations
work. There is a strong convergence on the need for a
collective recommitment to prevention. Our normative
developments need to lead to a real shift in how the
United Nations addresses peace and security challenges.
I would like to point out several areas of importance for
ensuring more effective prevention.
First, we must develop a political culture of acting
sooner in response to the risk of violent conflict. We
must invest in prevention rather than continue to spend
money on reacting to conflicts. In that context, we call
upon the members of the Security Council not to vote
against draft resolutions on timely and decisive action
to prevent or end mass atrocities.
Secondly, in order to ensure more effective
prevention, it is essential to integrate the peace and
security and the human rights and development

S/PV.7857

approaches. None of the United Nations three mandates
can be achieved without the other. The promotion
of peaceful and inclusive societies, the provision of
access to justice for all and the building of effective,
accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels are
essential for achieving sustainable peace and stability.
In that context, I would like to emphasize the
importance of the Sustainable Development Goals. In
order to achieve them in conflict-affected countries, we
need to devote more attention and resources that target
the drivers of conflict. The comprehensive approach
of addressing the interdependence between peace,
security and development should clearly take into
account the protection of human rights, with particular
attention given to women’s rights, including through
their participation in peace processes. We must watch
for the first warning signs of conflicts, and human
rights violations are such warnings. Therefore, we urge
all fellow United Nations Members present here today
to be active in supporting and strengthening human
rights initiatives, in particular with a view to ensuring
United Nations-wide efforts to prevent grave human
rights violations and thus future conflicts.
Thirdly, while the primary responsibility for
conflict prevention falls on Member States, international
institutions have to do their part. The United Nations
system needs to work in a more integrated fashion and
develop synergies between the Security Council, the
Secretariat and other United Nations entities, at both
Headquarters and the country level, to implement
the “sustaining peace” agenda. We welcome the
increasing cooperation of the United Nations with
regional organizations aimed at helping them solve
regional problems and to include in solutions the States
concerned. At the same time, regional organizations
should continue contributing to United Nations peace
and security efforts.
Lastly, the Security Council has increased its
focus on peacebuilding to reduce the risk of relapses
into violence. The Council should continue to address
peacebuilding through horizon-scanning briefings,
ensuring that longer-term peacebuilding is considered
in mission mandates and strengthening the advisory
role of the Peacebuilding Commission. We encourage
the Security Council to address peacebuilding as early
as possible.
Let me also highlight the fact that Estonia has
supported the Peacebuilding Fund since 2013, as we

17-0061255/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

believe that the Fund is an effective peacebuilding
instrument for providing catalytic, fast and flexible
assistance. This year Estonia is a member of the
Peacebuilding Commission. As a member of the
European Union (EU), Estonia fully supports the EU’s
new global strategy, which emphasizes the importance
of acting promptly on prevention and the commitment
of the EU to working through the multilateral system,
with the United Nations at its core.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Indonesia thanks the
Swedish presidency for having convened this open
debate on a highly important topic and wishes to
congratulate the new non-permanent members of
the Council.
We associate ourselves with the statements
made by the representative of Thailand on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the
representative of Norway on behalf of UN70, as well as
by the representative of Finland on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Mediation. We also welcome many of the
points to which the Secretary-General alluded at the
beginning of this open debate.
Today there are more peacekeepers on the ground
than ever before, and they increasingly operate in
contexts where the United Nations is being asked
to manage conflict rather than restore or keep the
peace. We must ask ourselves why. One of the reasons
is that “we the peoples of the United Nations” have
not invested enough in addressing the root causes of
conflict or in prevention.
Allow me to share some key points on how to
put forward the agenda on conflict prevention and
sustaining peace within the work of the United Nations.
The first aspect is partnership. The United Nations
cannot single-handedly solve the challenges. A stronger
global-regional peace and security partnership,
particularly in the area of conflict prevention, is
essential. In that light, conflict prevention needs to
be undertaken by the Security Council by engaging
earlier; this should be done in partnership with regional
and subregional organizations, in line with Chapter VI,
as well as with civil-society groups.
The second aspect is institutionalization. Indonesia
supports the recommendation of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations requiring the
56/108

10/01/2017

Secretary-General to develop options for restructuring
the Secretariat’s peace and security architecture so
as to strengthen leadership and management and to
put an end to the silo mindset in the United Nations.
Synergy between the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the main committees, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Economic and Social Council and the
Secretariat should be a prerequisite. We should develop
a system-wide approach to conflict prevention and
sustaining peace.
We are also happy to note that the new SecretaryGeneral will have conflict prevention as one of his top
priorities and will take a leading role in promoting this
agenda. His unique insights into the workings of the
United Nations, his credibility and the use of his good
offices can bring parties together to enable peace, and
thus the Security Council should heed his early analysis
and advice.
The third aspect is adequate resources. Prevention
and mediation should be reinforced through a significant
increase and more reliable resourcing through the
regular budget and a single peace and operations
account for the concept of sustaining peace. We need
to also endorse a single peace operations account to
finance all peace operations, including special political
missions and related backstopping activities. We should
also explore how peacekeeping operations can more
explicitly integrate conflict prevention and sustaining
peace into the implementation of the mandates.
The fourth aspect is a nationally driven process.
We believe that United Nations entities should support
in particular those Member States lacking the capacity
to integrate prevention into national governance and
development functions. There should be a comprehensive
approach in which socioeconomic development and
the security challenges facing ordinary people are
addressed by their national authorities effectively.
A nationally driven process should also encourage
women and youth to play a greater role in fostering
reconciliation and building the basis of a collective
national vision of peace and prosperity.
The fifth and last aspect is trust. Trust and
confidence amiong all parties is an important element
in ensuring implementation with respect to the nexus of
conflict prevention and sustaining peace.
In conclusion, in the light of today’s discussion, my
delegation, which is also a member of the Peacebuilding
Commission, is of the view that the annual session
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

of the Commission should be reinvigorated as an
international forum that enables cross-sectoral
stakeholders to create synergies and develop concrete
initiatives on sustaining peace. Such a forum will help
move everyone from rhetoric to practice, and help
countries prioritize political and financial resources for
conflict prevention proactively.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mrs. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Strict adherence to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations is a duty by which all
States committed to international peace and security
are bound. War and armed conflicts have brought
humankind nothing by terrible suffering and setbacks
in their economic and social development, which is why
conflict prevention has always been a common goal
of the international community. And that is why the
Charter of the United Nations, in its Preamble, calls on
us to save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war, practice tolerance and live together in peace; the
primary goal is the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Many of the conflicts that have taken place over
the 70-plus years since the founding of the United
Nations could have been prevented if the causes that
triggered them had not been on myriad occasions
linked to interests related to domination. Sustainable
peace implies the elimination of threats that conspire
against its full realization as well as the prevention
of any breaches of the Charter, including interference
in the internal affairs of States, acts of aggression or
wars based on the quest to control natural resources,
including unconventional wars, which in recent years
have become one of the most serious threats to the
exercise of the self-determination of peoples.
Stable and lasting peace that will prevent the
outbreak of conflict presupposes, first and foremost,
the acknowledgement of and unwavering respect
for the sovereign equality of States; the peaceful
settlement of international disputes; respect for political
independence and the political, economic, social and
cultural systems that nations have freely decided to
implement for themselves; and the rejection of the
threat or use of force against another State.
There can be no sustainable, comprehensive, stable
or lasting peace as long as some countries impose
unilateral coercive measures on others; as long as there

S/PV.7857

exists an unjust and exclusive international economic
order; and as long as inequality and selfishness, the
result of neoliberal globalization, prevail, increasing
discrimination and xenophobia and raising levels of
aggressive posturing in military alliance doctrines.
While it is true that sustainable development
cannot be achieved without peace and stability, it is
equally true that there will be no peace and stability
without development. There can be no peace as long
as millions of people remain condemned to hunger,
poverty, discrimination, exclusion and despair.
We acknowledge that the Security Council has a
key role to play in the maintenance of international
peace and security given the responsibilities conferred
upon it by the Charter, for which reason the members
of this body must also be the first to promote peaceful
solutions to conflict and to show strong, effective and
clear resistance to recourse to war and to violations of
the principles and purposes enshrined in the Charter.
Manipulation and double standards on issues such
as terrorism and human rights, aimed at singling out
developing countries and discredit their legitimate
Governments, do not contribute to the ideal of peace.
We note with concern the increase in such
phenomena as the use or threat of use of force, the
promotion of hidden agendas for regime change in
developing countries, the production of new and
more sophisticated weapons, the persistence of large
nuclear arsenals, the violation by some States of the
principles of international law, intolerance and ethnic
and religious-discrimination. Those phenomena all
undermine the real possibilities for advancing peace
and preventing conflicts.
Improving the ability of the United Nations
to prevent and resolve conflicts is more effective
than dealing with the costly economic and social
consequences and the incalculable human suffering
that war brings. In recognizing the relationship
between socioeconomic development and international
peace and security, we believe that it is important to
ensure that any effort to transform the United Nations
into a more effective instrument for conflict prevention
and the maintenance of peace must take into account
the need for a balanced, consistent and comprehensive
approach — one that is in keeping with the Charter of
the United Nations and international law.

17-0061257/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the
Swedish presidency for organizing this open debate,
which enables the United Nations membership to renew
its collective commitment to conflict prevention and
sustaining peace. We are reassured by the SecretaryGeneral’s statement that his overriding priority is the
pursuit of peace in a holistic, cross-sectoral manner. His
words of wisdom remind us of the hard work involved
and the importance of conflict prevention as a value, in
itself, without undue external political pressure. From
our national perspective, we wish, in that connection,
to underline five points.
First of all, we consider conflict prevention to be,
first and foremost, a national responsibility supported by
responsive and functioning institutions, the promotion
of human rights and the rule of law and, most important,
sustainable development. The active participation of all
segments of society, including women and youth, is
fundamental to efforts to mitigate the potential drivers
of conflict, as well as elements with a propensity to act
as spoilers.
Secondly, the United Nations has a critical role to
play in facilitating and monitoring the implementation
of internationally agreed commitments to support
Member States in achieving those conditions in response
to their needs and at their request. The United Nations
analytical capacity should help identify any structural
or systemic drivers of conflict, including the growing
challenges posed by violent extremism, climate change,
irregular migration and organized crime, among others.
Thirdly, the ability to objectively decipher the early
warning signs of conflict — usually manifest in hatred
or intolerance, socioeconomic exclusion, systematic
discrimination and persecution on ethnic or religious
grounds — should give the United Nations an edge
in devising context-specific engagement strategies.
The range of tools available at its disposal for the
pacific settlement of disputes needs to be deployed
with sensitivity to the realities on the ground and in
consultation with the relevant national, civil society
and humanitarian actors.
Fourthly, as highlighted by the 2015 review of the
United Nations peace and security architecture, the
Organization’s conflict-response strategies need to
be situated within the broader framework of political
solutions to conflicts. As a contributor to increasingly
58/108

10/01/2017

complex United Nations peacekeeping operations,
Bangladesh recognizes the need on all sides to manage
expectations through a comprehensive, nationally
owned and internationally backed approach to
sustaining peace.
Fifthly, the current fragmentation in the United
Nations response strategies needs to be remedied
through incremental work in clarifying the various
conceptual and mandate-related issues, the fostering of
regular consultations across the principal organs and
the mobilization of enhanced and adequate resources,
thereby avoiding unnecessary competition and
duplication. Meaningful cooperation with the relevant
regional and subregional organizations must be pursued
jointly and strategically.
It is worth remembering that the most effective
bulwark against conflict, hostility, war and the
illegitimate use of force is one constructed within the
minds of men and women through the promotion of an
enduring culture of peace. In this year for peace and
beyond, Bangladesh will continue to work towards
realizing our Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina’s vision for
regional and international peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to commend the Swedish presidency for delving
into the promising concept of sustainable peace through
this debate devoted to one of its essential components,
namely, conflict prevention. We have taken careful note
of the important initiatives of the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, on that topic, which Peru
appreciates and values, as well as the proposals and
ideas presented earlier today by delegations.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to point out three fundamental factors that contribute
to more efficient prevention: the optimization and flow
of high-quality information on emerging conflicts,
an integrated, cross-cutting approach to addressing
the structural causes of conflicts, and the search for
renewed political commitment.
With regard to the topic of information, Peru
welcomes the recent measures adopted by the SecretaryGeneral after assuming his post. Of particular
importance is the strengthening and enhancement of
the United Nations Operations and Crisis Centre. Peru
understands that that unit is to be used to improve the
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

processing and analysis of information from reliable
sources. In order to do so, we must strengthen review
and evaluation units, both on the ground and at
Headquarters, by providing them with adequate human
capital and the necessary logistical resources and by
increasing our use of information technology.
My delegation also believes that any analysis of
a chain of events and the choice of response to those
events always require a multidisciplinary approach,
in which political, economic, sociological, cultural
and other elements are considered and assessed in a
comprehensive manner. Only then will we be able to
more efficiently address the complexities and specifics
of each scenario and conflict, and find timely and
adequate responses to them.
As for the need for conflict prevention through a
more multidimensional and integrated approach, the
Council should take note of and support the efforts of
the international community to implement the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. As the Agenda
recognizes, there can be no sustainable development
without peace and security, and peace and security are
precarious without sustainable development. The 2030
Agenda also notes, inter alia, the need to build peaceful,
just and inclusive societies. To that end, it holds us to
our commitment to achieve Goal 16 — to which Peru
attached particular importance during the preparatory
negotiations. Specifically, that Goal seeks to address the
factors that generate violence, insecurity and injustice,
such as inequality, corruption, bad governance, violent
extremism and illegal flows of financial resources
and weapons.
In that connection, we should recall that, in
December, in its latest resolution regarding the policy
review of operational activities for development
of the United Nations system (General Assembly
resolution 71/243), the General Assembly recognized
that sustainable development can play a positive role
in mitigating the causes of conflict, disaster risk,
humanitarian crises and complex emergencies. In that
regard, an integrated systemic response requires greater
coordination and complementarity among the needs
for development, disaster risk reduction, humanitarian
action and the maintenance of peace. That is essential
if we seek to respond to the needs of all as effectively
and efficiently as possible and to reach the Sustainable
Development Goals.

S/PV.7857

Finally, I note that we must strengthen political
will so as to enhance conflict-prevention efforts as
they relate to the primacy of the principles of national
ownership and a people-centred approach, both of
which appear in the 2030 Agenda and in the identical
resolutions on sustaining peace that were adopted in
April by the Security Council and the General Assembly
(resolutions 2282 (2016) and 70/262, respectively). The
United Nations system, with the legitimacy granted to
it by its universal membership and the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, is called upon to play a
crucial role in conflict prevention — by providing the
assistance, political support and the necessary funding
to lay the foundation for lasting peace. It is a new role — in
which the pillars of peace and security, development
and human rights come together for the first time under
the banner of sustainable peace — an approach that
Peru believes is the most fitting and promising.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Mr. Donoghue (Ireland): I thank Sweden for
convening today’s debate. I also thank Secretary-General
Guterres for making clear his strong commitment to
conflict prevention and sustaining peace.
We need to see the adoption in April last year of the
two resolutions on sustaining peace (resolution 2282
(2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262) as a
turning point for the United Nations. Collectively, we
are now charged with the responsibility of bringing the
United Nations back more closely to the reason of its
creation in the first place, that is, to prevent war, rather
than to react once war has been waged, and to solve
conflict, not merely to manage it.
I associate myself fully with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union. I now
offer four additional points in my national capacity.
First, conflict rarely comes as a surprise. Human
rights violations, hate speech and inter-communal
violence are early warning signs of conflict, which is
often in clear sight. The challenge is how to respond
effectively to such signs with timely action. However,
we are making progress. The Security Council has
increasingly used the various tools at its disposal,
including field visits, emergency any-other-business
meetings and statements, to place stronger emphasis on
conflict prevention. In addition, the Human Rights up
Front initiative has allowed quick decisions to be made,
including in the case of South Sudan.

17-0061259/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

However, more can be done to advance the
recommendations made by the three reviews of 2015
and the subsequent sustaining peace resolutions. We
would like to see a stronger voice given to those best
equipped to flag early warning signs of conflict and
make recommendations for action by the Security
Council. In addition, we must enhance the flexibility and
predictability of the funding needed for interventions
that can prevent conflict. If funding is decided on a
year-to-year basis or is rigidly earmarked, our capacity
to intervene early and quickly to stop conflict from
breaking out is significantly diminished.
My second point is that the root causes of conflict can
be many and far-reaching. Tackling such root causes is
the smart thing to do and is key to sustaining peace. The
interlinkages among issues such as poverty eradication,
creating sustainable peace, building human security
and combating inequalities are critical underpinnings
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. They
should not be addressed in isolation.
While the implementation of the 2030 Agenda is
not primarily the responsibility of the Council, it is
clear that the successful achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals will over time remove, or lessen,
many of the factors that give rise to conflict and other
threats to international peace and stability. Debates and
briefings in the Council Chamber increasingly recognize
that reality and factor in issues of institution-building,
governance, economic growth, migration and even
climate change.
We applaud the Secretary-General for the emphasis
he has placed on the need to address the root causes of
conflict. He has stressed that the work of sustaining
peace cannot take place in a vacuum. We look forward
to the leadership of the Secretary-General and of the
Council as we all work together to implement the
sustaining peace resolutions in complementarity with
the sustainable development and human rights agendas.
My third point is that conflict affects more than
the warring parties. To address conflict, we must
include everyone, especially civilians. When States and
societies are fractured, we need to listen to civil society
organizations and to ensure their participation in the
achievement of lasting peace. Women must be involved
at all stages along the peace continuum — from
prevention to peace negotiations and post-conflict
governance. Furthermore, the youth, peace and
security agenda should be utilized to support initiatives
60/108

10/01/2017

on conflict prevention. Sustaining peace is an objective
for all generations.
Finally, the role of regional partners cannot be
overstated. Our efforts towards sustaining peace
will fall short if we fail to draw on the expertise and
experience of regional and subregional bodies.
The United Nations is operating in a constantly
changing world. It is unlikely that those who drafted
the Charter of the United Nations considered phrases
such as “international terrorism”, “non-State actors”
or “national reconciliation processes”. Nevertheless,
although the times have changed and the terminology is
different, the principles of the Charter remain pristine
and absolute. To ensure that we are all part of a United
Nations that is fit for purpose, our deliberations on
sustaining peace must be conducted in a transparent and
inclusive manner. We must all keep our eyes firmly on
the prize of peace and reach an enhanced understanding
of how lasting solutions to conflict can be achieved.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Federated States of Micronesia.
Mrs. Chigiyal (Federated States of Micronesia): I
have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of
the Pacific small island developing States (SIDS).
At the outset, we would like to thank Sweden
for convening today’s important debate on conflict
prevention and sustaining peace. Similarly, we would
like to commend the President of the General Assembly
for the upcoming high-level dialogue entitled “Building
Sustainable Peace for All: Synergies between the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and Sustaining
Peace”, scheduled for 24 January.
We would also like to recognize Secretary-General
António Guterres and to thank him for his proactive
leadership on this very important issue. In many of
his recent statements, including an excellent article in
Newsweek yesterday, he highlighted the interlinkages
between conflict and many of its root causes: poverty,
inequality, human rights violations and environmental
destruction. In his Newsweek article, he stated that,
“climate change, population growth, rapid
urbanization, food insecurity and water scarcity
are adding to the tensions and instability”.
The Pacific States fully agree. We must reinvigorate
our political and diplomatic engagement in responding
to conflict, and a significant portion of that energy
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

must be directed towards improving the material
circumstances of people. Happy, safe and secure
people rarely see the need to reach for a weapon. And
the single-largest threat to the safety and security of
present and future generations is climate change.
In resolution 63/281, the General Assembly agreed
that climate change could have security implications
and invited all relevant organs of the United Nations to
intensify their efforts to address the matter. That was
followed by a landmark report (A/64/350) by former
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon entitled “Climate
change and its possible security implications”, in
which he labelled climate change as a threat multiplier
and identified food and water insecurity, natural
resources scarcity, exposure to extreme events and
human migration as some of the numerous channels
through which climate change has the potential to
destabilize societies.
In a 2011 presidential statement (S/PRST/2011/15),
the Security Council agreed, recognizing that climate
change could aggravate existing threats to international
peace and security. Since 2011, the threat of climate
change has only increased. Impacts are happening faster
and are more severe than most scientists had previously
projected. The Paris Agreement notwithstanding,
current emission trends are still far from adequate. The
climate-change threat is unprecedented, and therefore
we need new tools to respond. For that reason, the
Pacific States are renewing their call for the SecretaryGeneral to appoint a Special Representative on climate
and security.
The Special Representative would serve the
Secretary-General, with the responsibilities that would
include reporting regularly to the General Assembly
and the Security Council on emerging climate-related
security threats; facilitating regional cooperation and
the resolution of border issues that might be affected by
climate change; helping vulnerable countries evaluate
their security-related national circumstances and develop
action plans to increase their resilience; identifying and
monitoring potentially dangerous tipping points at the
climate change/security nexus; engaging in creative
preventive diplomacy, as appropriate, and supporting
post-conflict situations when climate change is a risk
factor that could undermine stability.
The initial outputs of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in the first two years of
work should include, first, an update of the Secretary-

S/PV.7857

General’s 2009 report (A/64/350), including the
status of implementation of resolution 63/281 and an
assessment of United Nations capacity to respond to
the security implications of climate change; secondly,
working with relevant scientific bodies and research
organizations, a new report that identifies and analyses
potentially dangerous tipping points at the climate/
security nexus, along with recommendations for
improving our ability to monitor and respond; and,
thirdly, preliminary climate-security risk assessments
for interested vulnerable countries.
To be completely clear, the appointment of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General should
in no way alter the mandates of the Security Council.
The mandates of existing bodies and institutions, most
notably the General Assembly, must be respected.
The climate-change risk is real. It is dangerous
and it is growing. It will touch the lives of billions
over the coming century, threatening their well-being
and, in some cases, their lives. It has the potential to
undermine global peace and stability in ways we are
only beginning to understand. Moreover, the nexus
between climate change, peace and security and the
Sustainable Development Goals cannot be ignored.
For those reasons, the Pacific SIDS urge all countries
to support our call for a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on climate and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate Sweden on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month. I thank you, Mr. President, and wish you every
success in your new role. Likewise, I would like to
thank the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, for
his strong and important statement this morning, and to
wish him every success in his new role and assure him
of the full support of Jordan as he works to discharge
his agenda.
We are committed to security and peace. They
are objectives that we want to meet first and foremost.
We align ourselves with the statement many by the
representative of Norway on behalf of UN70.
The world is today seeing very complex and
prolonged conflicts, and their scale and impact is
growing, sometimes beyond the capacity of the United
Nations to respond. It is not just a question of conflicts

17-0061261/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

in specific geographical regions. Far from it: there are
some regions, such as the Middle East, which are of
major significance, given the waves of instability that
they face and of which they are victims, but we see
many more conflicts and threats.
Our region is facing major political and ideological
challenges. The populations in the region are facing a
number of different problems, whether we are talking
about the occupied Palestinian territories or Syria or
Yemen. But all of this means that we need to make
sustainable peace and security within our region a
priority and find fair and holistic solutions to conflicts
and the causes of conflict, in order to respond to
the aspirations of our peoples to a life that is secure
and dignified.
As I have said, we face major challenges, such
as genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity, as well as extremism and terrorism.
Those challenges have become a threat around the world
as well as a threat to international humanitarian law and
human rights law. The responsibility for the prevention
of conflicts and for maintaining peace should be a real
commitment that goes beyond international reports and
declarations. We have to work seriously on the ground
if we indeed want to save future generations from the
horrors of those conflicts.
The primary responsibility for prevention falls to
States. From previous experience in prevention, and
to carry out these efforts with success, efforts must
be national in nature. Given the deterioration of peace
and security around the world, the role of the United
Nations has become more urgent than ever. There is no
alternative to the prevention of conflicts. This should
be an objective in all of the different bodies and all of
the different organizations within the United Nations
and should indeed be their ultimate objective, as the
Secretary-General said this morning. The United
Nations should adopt an effective approach to uprooting
evil and do so in cooperation with all partners from
international organizations, regional organizations,
civil society and international financial institutions.
With that in mind, Jordan supports the SecretaryGeneral’s agenda for peace and for the reform of the
Secretariat, while also supporting the tools at our
disposal, by which I mean the role of the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General and the
political and regional offices as well as the special
62/108

10/01/2017

political missions. All of this will allow us to
prevent conflict.
We reiterate the importance of very quickly
implementing a strategy to make sure that peace is
sustained and to modernize the monitoring mechanisms
that we have for peace, in order to take into account the
context of each country. This includes the fundamental
elements that need to be offered to respond in a timely
fashion and to manage the unconventional challenges
that we may face today.
Jordan is ready to participate in peacekeeping
operations, given its moral commitment to the United
Nations strategy for preventing conflict and to
providing a response. We support the development of
peacekeeping mandates so that they are complementary
to national policies and so that they are able to meet the
scale of the challenge. With this in mind, the Security
Council, given its mandate and the different tools at its
disposal, has a specific role to play, a role of mediating
in conflict. We also must take into account the Articles
of the Charter. The Security Council should work in
close cooperation with the Secretary-General so that
he can make use of mediation and good offices, among
other tools. All of those factors should play a part,
based on the long experience of the United Nations. I
would also like to commend the important role played
by regional organizations in mediation and diplomacy,
indeed in preventive diplomacy. This allows for
peace negotiations to take place and for expertise and
assistance in capacity-building to be offered.
To sustain peace, we need to include the whole of
society without any kind of discrimination, in particular
of women and young people. These two groups should
have an opportunity to participate in an effective way.
Jordan has done everything it can to increase awareness
of development and the inclusion of young people,
in particular respect for, and the implementation,
of resolution 2250 (2015), as adopted by consensus,
on youth, peace and security. This really is a way of
making our processes more inclusive. It allows us to
move forward.
The role of women is very important, as it supports
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and helps to uphold peace and security
in the face of challenges. It also helps to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) in Jordan. We are aware of the
conflicts in the region and of the large migratory flows
into our country. Health services and education are
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7857

offered to those migrants. We therefore need continued
international coordination, with Jordan’s involvement,
so that we are able to discharge our duties.

theme “Building Sustainable Peace for All: Synergies
between the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and Sustaining Peace”.

In conclusion, Jordan reaffirms its responsibility
for, and its commitment to, upholding the values of
peace, security, tolerance and reconciliation. In that
way, we can respond to people’s specific aspirations
of moving beyond violence and extremism, as well as
carry out our international cooperation activities, in
particular with the United Nations.

Sustaining peace as a core agenda of the United
Nations must be fully and meaningfully supported
by Security Council members and all other Member
States in the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations.
Parochial politics, which has been a nemesis of global
peace and security, unfortunately has been a hallmark
in the Council in recent years. That has cost countless
innocent lives and livelihoods. It cannot be allowed to
continue and needs to change, and change now.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Papua New Guinea;
Mr. Rai (Papua New Guinea): On behalf of my
country, Papua New Guinea, I convey our sincere
congratulations to your country, Sweden, Mr. President,
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January. We also congratulate
the new members of the Security Council, namely,
Bolivia, Ethiopia, Italy, Kazakhstan and the Netherlands.
We look forward to working with the members of the
Security Council to achieve the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.
Let me also take this opportunity to congratulate
and welcome our new Secretary-General, Mr. António
Guterres, on his assumption of office, and to express
our confidence and best wishes that his strategic
leadership will further strengthen the work of the
United Nations for the mutual benefit of we the peoples
of the United Nations.
My delegation also commends Sweden for the timely
convening of this open debate on conflict prevention
and sustaining peace. The theme is highly relevant given
the unacceptable level of the increasing and continuing
violence, the destruction and humanitarian catastrophe,
at the hands of both State and non-State actors, which
regrettably have been experienced in many parts of
the world today. We are directly impacted by those
persons who have fled their homelands to either save
themselves or seek new opportunities to survive, as
highlighted by the asylum seekers processing centre in
my own country, Papua New Guinea.
Papua New Guinea welcomes the bold
pronouncement by the new Secretary-General to foster
and sustain global peace, including conflict prevention,
as a strategic priority during his tenure. We also
applaud the initiative of the President of the General
Assembly to convene the high-level dialogue on the

My delegation is of the view that the solid
foundations for sustaining peace, including conflict
prevention, have been laid under the Charter of the
United Nations and relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions. They include, most
recently on 27 April 2016, the simultaneous adoption
of resolution 2282 (2016) and of General Assembly
resolution 70/262, on the review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture.
What is required now is the fundamental issue
of ensuring the political will and commitment for
a paradigm shift that recognizes the importance of
an integrated and comprehensive approach to peace,
including conflict prevention. Those must include
reforms of the outdated and inadequate existing
structures, practices and policies; improved coherence
and synergies among peace, human rights and
sustainable development work in the United Nations
system, such as in the Peacebuilding Commission; the
mobilization of resources at a sustained and predictable
level; and strengthening the partnership among all the
relevant stakeholders. Moreover, country ownership
and leadership in addressing the root causes of conflicts
is pivotal.
My country learned from our decade-long internal
bitter civil conflict in Bougainville, 29 years ago — a
conflict that claimed many lives and livelihoods and
whose impact is still felt today — that sustaining
peace and enjoying its dividends entails the following:
First, the imperative of investing political will and
commitment in conflict prevention actions before,
during, and after conflict; scondly, adequately
addressing the underlying root causes of tensions and
conflict; thirdly, the importance of peaceful dialogue
to resolve conflicts; and, fourthly, the relevance

17-0061263/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

and importance of proactively engaging women in
peace processes.
Sustaining peace has intrinsic links to sustainable
development. Indeed, the preamble of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development recognizes that,
“[t]here can be no sustainable development
without peace and no peace without sustainable
development”. (General Assembly resolution 70/1,
preamble)
The challenges that climate change poses to our
sustainable development and their implications for
international peace and security are particularly
pertinent to Papua New Guinea and to the other
Pacific island States. Just as armed conflict has led
to mass movements of people, which has global peace
and security implications, climate change is having a
similar adverse effect. The loss of territory, food and
water insecurity and the involuntary displacement
of people from their homes and their quest to seek
refuge elsewhere from the catastrophic effects of
natural disasters and rising sea levels will inevitably
lead to outbreaks in conflict over scarce resources if
left unaddressed.
My delegation fully agrees with the Pacific island
States Chair’s remarks on climate change, which
I will not repeat here, except to note with regret the
insignificant concrete or coordinated action at the
international level to address the security implications
of climate change.
As the primary organ under the Charter of the
United Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security the Security Council needs to
carefully consider and act decisively with regard to the
growing concerns on the nexus between climate change
and its security implications, before it is too late.
Finally, not least, I align my statement with the
statement recently delivered by the Chair of the Pacific
island small States. The full statement will be provided
to the Secretariat.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
as well as your country, Sweden, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council at the
beginning of your membership. We also congratulate
64/108

10/01/2017

the newly elected members of the Council, namely,
Bolivia, Ethiopia, Italy and Kazakhstan. We also
congratulate the new Secretary-General as he begins
his wide-ranging duties.
I am fully confident, Sir, that as President of
the Security Council you have not overlooked any
contribution by any country that has participated in this
important discussion on conflict prevention. Allow us
to summarize our vision of that important topic in its
eight aspects.
First, with regard to the comprehensive concept
of conflict prevention, if we look at different conflicts
around the world, especially internal conflicts, we see
that efforts are not only limited to their prevention alone.
We see that conflict prevention is now a reality that
includes the following preventing the aggravation of
conflict, preventing an ongoing conflict and preventing
the exploitation of conflict.
That broader concept of prevention gives the
Secretary-General, who enjoys ultimate neutrality,
additional major burdens to ensure that a conflict does
not become a battleground to advance the interests
of other countries, just as in the past conflicts used
to be battlegrounds to advance the ideologies of
other countries.
With regard to the direct link between conflict
prevention and economic and social development,
development is the antidote to conflict. Internal
conflicts spread and expand in proportion to economic
weakness and a lack of development opportunities.
I would like to point out that imposing unilateral
coercive economic sanctions is as reprehensible as is
resorting to the use of force to settle disputes. Under
the Charter of the United Nations, only the Security
Council is entrusted with the use of force in resolving
conflict, and it is therefore the Security Council alone
that is entrusted with the use of economic sanctions, as
was stated in Security Council presidential statement
S/PRST/1995/9, in which the Council agreed that the
object of economic sanctions is not to punish but to
modify the behaviour of the country concerned.
My next point is on the need to acknowledge the
underlying causes of conflict. In the case of Africa, the
root causes of conflict are economic deterioration and
climate change, which have led to the erosion of green
areas, especially on the west coast of Africa as far as the
coast of the Sudan. That has resulted, unfortunately, in
the outbreak of the conflict in Darfur, which erupted as
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

a direct result of climate change. Despite references in
a report of the United Nations Environment Programme
to the role of climate change in the emergence of the
crisis in Darfur, the position of the United Nations on
the issue continues to be limited to what amounts to an
implicit denial of that role. I would like to echo what
some members have said today regarding the need to
appoint a special representative for climate change
and security.
My next point is the need to refrain from using
violence to attain political objectives, which is a
principle of international law. When, at the outset of
a crisis, armed rebel movements violate international
law, the country concerned must turn to the United
Nations and Member States for any possible assistance
in preventing and ending such violations.
Next, on sustaining peace, the possibility of
sustaining peace is undermined when a country suffers
from continued conflict. When the overall situation in a
country dealing with an internal armed conflict shows
a reduction in military clashes — thanks, of course,
to a negotiated peace agreement — we then move to a
second phase, in which we can begin to ensure sustained
peace. That opportunity has not been available in
certain situations, the province of Darfur in the Sudan
being one of them. Some members of the Security
Council have chosen — through their influence or their
role as penholders in the Security Council — to impose
the adoption of resolutions that have ensured that those
conflicts remain unresolved, and they have thereby
created diplomatic confrontations. Council members
know that they are supposed to work not on behalf of
their own countries and interests but on behalf of the
international community. That is a difficult mission, but
it is not an impossible one. We must help one another.

S/PV.7857

temporal interests, we do a disservice to our
specific, local and immediate interests.”
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): In the interests of saving
time, I will deliver a shortened version of my statement,
the full text of which will be circulated.
My delegation would like to thank the Swedish
presidency for organizing today’s open debate on the
important and pressing topic of conflict prevention and
sustaining peace. We are also grateful to the SecretaryGeneral for his insightful remarks. Azerbaijan greatly
appreciates and fully supports the appeal for peace
that he made on 1 January. My country will be an
active and strong partner in contributing genuinely to
the Organization’s joint efforts to make 2017 a year
for peace.
The principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes
is one of the cornerstones of the Charter of the United
Nations and the international legal order. Its primary
objective is to ensure that States are committed to
respecting one another’s sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence, and refraining
from the threat or use of force in their international
relations. International law requires not just that we
work to produce a successful outcome by preventing
or resolving conflicts, but that those outcomes be
achieved through a process that is consistent with
specific norms. Without that, no solution can provide
the necessary foundations for sustainable peace and
long-term stability.

I would like to conclude by quoting the words
of Mr. Václav Havel, the late first President of the
Czech Republic:

As a matter of priority, special attention should be
given to the implementation of resolutions adopted by
the principal organs of the United Nations, particularly
the resolutions relating to the peaceful settlement of
disputes and to conflict prevention and resolution. It
is also important to stress the role of the rule of law
in establishing a stable and durable peace. Nor can we
ignore the critical imperative of shedding light on real
facts and of combating impunity. Such efforts must be
free of selectivity and politically motivated approaches,
however difficult or even unrealistic that may seem.

“We must recognize that we are related to
more than the present moment and the present
place, that we are related to the world as a whole
and to eternity. We must recognize that, by failing
to reflect universal, supra-individual and supra-

Armenia’s continuing aggression against my
country has led to its seizure of a significant part of
Azerbaijan’s territory, including the Nagorno Karabakh
region and seven adjacent districts and some exclaves.
It has claimed the lives of tens of thousands of people,

On the role of the General Assembly and the United
Nations Secretariat, we are pleased that SecretaryGeneral Guterres spoke about the importance of
conflict prevention and considers it a priority.

17-0061265/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

ruined cities and livelihoods, and resulted in the
forcible expulsion of more than a million Azerbaijanis
from their homes and properties. Serious violations
of international humanitarian law, amounting to war
crimes, crimes against humanity and acts of genocide,
have been committed in the course of the conflict.
Next month will mark the twenty-fifth anniversary
of an atrocious crime committed by Armenian armed
forces and their affiliates against the civilians and
defenders of the town of Khojaly in the Nagorno
Karabakh region of Azerbaijan. What happened in
Khojaly in February 1992 was the largest massacre of
the conflict. The following year, the Security Council
adopted four resolutions — resolutions 822 (1993), 853
(1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993) — condemning the
use of force against Azerbaijan, the occupation of its
territories, the attacks on civilians and the bombardment
of inhabited areas. In its resolutions the Council
supported the principle of respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Azerbaijan, affirmed that
the Nagorno Karabakh region is an integral part of
Azerbaijan and demanded the immediate, full and
unconditional withdrawal of the Armenian forces
from all of the occupied territories of Azerbaijan. At
a time when there was a real possibility of halting the
bloodshed, saving the lives of thousands of people and
investing in development and prosperity, Armenia
continued with its annexationist policy.
Very little, if anything, has changed since then. The
Security Council’s principled demands have still not
been implemented, and the mediation efforts conducted
for almost 25 years within the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe have yet to yield results.
Armenia persistently refuses to start meaningful peace
negotiations, obstructs the conflict settlement process,
regularly resorts to various provocations aimed at
escalating the situation in the conflict zone and tries
to consolidate the current status quo. The only way to
achieve a durable and lasting solution is to ensure the
immediate, complete and unconditional withdrawal
of the Armenian armed forces from the Nagorno
Karabakh region and the other occupied territories
of Azerbaijan. That is what international law and the
Security Council demand.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
66/108

10/01/2017

Mr. Begeç (Turkey): I join others in congratulating
Sweden on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council.
The Under-Secretary of State of Finland delivered
a joint statement on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Mediation and its co-Chairs, namely, Finland and
Turkey. Turkey has also aligned itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union. The
following remarks are made in my national capacity.
Turkey highly values and genuinely contributes
to efforts aimed at the peaceful settlement of disputes
at the regional and international levels. In that regard,
our renewed efforts in cooperation with our partners
to address the crisis in Syria, including the suffering
of the people, demonstrate both the need for effective
political engagement as well as the cost paid in their
absence. Defusing tensions before they escalate into
violent conflict should be the first course of action
in preserving peace and stability, and Member States
should commit themselves to that objective.
In any quest for sustaining peace, the root causes
of problems should be addressed, long-term grievances
must be brought to an end and prospects for security,
development and justice should be made available to all.
Turkey has supported the key recommendations of
the United Nations reviews, in particular with regard
to the primacy of politics and the need for conflict
prevention and mediation. Accordingly, we see great
merit in conflict prevention, especially through
effective mediation. Yet there are Member States that
consider that preventive actions without the consent of
the parties may lead to premature interventions, and
such interventions may eventually damage the prospects
of a peaceful solution. We should all recognize those
concerns and explore the ways to address them, in
particular when we pursue new initiatives.
The
complex
political,
ideological
and
socioeconomic challenges, as well as asymmetric threats
and terrorism, have rendered conflict prevention and
resolution more difficult than ever. The humanitarian
dimension of conflicts and refugee problems do not
make the present situation easier. Those factors dictate
a delicate handling of each and every conflict situation
where adherence to the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and international law are no less
important than proper conflict analysis and inclusive
process design. In the meanwhile, the responsible organs
of the United Nations, together with the Secretariat, can
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

develop more effective ways to enhance the capacity of
preventive diplomacy for our Organization. The good
offices of the Secretary-General and United Nations
regional offices are certainly important assets at our
disposal, and they must be supported with political
vision and financial resources. More transparency and
consultation with Member States will help improve
coherence and build mutual trust throughout the system.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Bosah (Nigeria): I wish to express my
appreciation to the delegation of Sweden for convening
this open debate on conflict prevention and sustaining
peace as a centrepiece of the United Nations. Nigeria
considers it a subject of critical importance to all
humankind. Our appreciation goes to the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. António Guterres, for his remarks and
for outlining his vision to prioritize prevention in
collaboration with the Security Council.
At the outset, we wish to congratulate the
delegations of Bolivia, Ethiopia, Italy, Kazakhstan
and Sweden on assuming membership of the Security
Council for the period 2017-2018.
In July 2010, when Nigeria convened an open
debate (see S/PV.6360) of the Council on preventive
diplomacy, we were motivated by a profound concern
that the nature of conflict was outpacing our collective
ability to respond effectively to it. We noted that, for too
long, the international community had accorded little
attention to mediation and the prevention of conflicts.
We have placed far too much emphasis on, and devoted
enormous resources to, the military dimensions of
peace and security, without addressing the root causes
of conflicts.
Although the United Nations works to maintain
international peace and security, contemporary world
security threats have become more complex. We live
in a world in which violent conflict is all too common
a feature of the daily lives of many across the globe.
Fragile constitutional frameworks, limited natural
resources and economic disparities can together render
a State vulnerable to conflict. The costs of such an
outcome are high in terms of both human suffering and
economic loss. Moreover, the socioeconomic advances
achieved through development efforts are also often
lost. Add to that the price of warfare and peacekeeping
operations, and the resulting figures are staggering.

S/PV.7857

It is against that backdrop that we must centre our
discussion today.
The immediate challenge before us must be how to
address those key questions. Africa has, over the years,
placed a great deal of political weight on the application
of preventive diplomacy strategies by putting in
place early-warning and mediation mechanisms. The
African Union took bold steps to develop a framework
for preventive diplomacy through the efforts of the
African Union Peace and Security Council. At the
subregional level, the Economic Community of West
African States has also made great strides in this area,
primarily through the steady implementation of its
conflict prevention framework, which encompasses
diplomacy, fact-finding and early-warning systems. It is
imperative, therefore, that those efforts at the regional
and subregional levels be supported both financially
and technically by the international community and the
United Nations system.
Today a number of effective contact points have
been developed within the United Nations system for
these collaborative arrangements, especially through
the Special Envoys of the Secretary-General, the
Department of Political Affairs, the United Nations
regional offices and the Peacebuilding Commission.
It is imperative for the United Nations to continue
to work with relevant partners in creating enabling
environments to ease tensions, build capacities for
skilled interventions and foster dialogue. Nigeria
has invested resources to support the campaign for
preventing conflicts, especially within our subregion.
We have adopted the use of preventive diplomacy
in addressing complex questions arising from
armed conflicts.
We cormnend the establishment of a steering
committee to consider measures for enhancing
cooperation across the network of preventive
diplomacy actors. In real terms, preventive diplomacy
is often most effective when conducted behind the
scenes, certainly well before tensions rise to boiling
point level. We believe we can foster the growth of
conflict prevention at both normative and practical
levels. We can standardize our approach to political
and peacekeeping missions to reflect the strategic
importance of preventive diplomacy.
If indeed our primary responsibility in the Security
Council is to maintain international peace and security,
the work of the Council in managing international

17-0061267/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

peace and security should be viewed through the
lens of preventive diplomacy. If we are able to assist
nations and communities in restoring their social and
institutional fabric, and if we can also apply ourselves
to the ongoing task of providing opportunities for
people and their livelihoods, we can go a long way in
reducing opportunities for conflict. We can directly
and indirectly prevent conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): Belgium thanks the presidency of Sweden for
having provided us with this opportunity to together
undertake strategic reflection on an issue that is of
primordial importance and at the very heart of our
Organization. I also warmly thank the SecretaryGeneral for his committed words. We are very pleased
that he has chosen to accord significant importance
to this topic during his mandate. We support his
efforts fully, as well as the integrated approach that he
presented to us this morning.
Belgium fully subscribes to the statement of the
European Union, as well as that of Finland, delivered on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Mediation, to which
we belong. I wish to make additional remarks, and will
read out an abbreviated version of my statement.
Even in the absence of conflict, we should focus on
peacebuilding by working on human rights, sustainable
development and the rule of law. Conflicts do not
happen by chance. In that regard, we consider it useful
to continue to consider the establishment of an earlywarning mechanism at the United Nations, like those
in other international organizations. The prerogative
of the Secretary-General to draw the attention of the
Council to a situation posing a risk to peace and security
is fundamental. Regular contacts between the Security
Council and the Secretariat seem to be another way of
proceeding. Existing practices, such as the forwardlooking overview, need to be revitalized.
Investing in sustainable development, education,
human rights and the rule of law is crucial. Particular
attention to fragile and conflict-affected countries is all
the more necessary in order to ensure their inclusive
development through sustained peace. For example,
Belgium has decided to allocate 50 per cent of its
official development assistance to fragile and lessdeveloped countries. Belgium implores other donors to
do the same.
68/108

10/01/2017

During a conflict, transitional measures can be taken
to invest in future peace. It is important, for example, to
launch an educational and reconciliation process for the
victims of conflict in order to avoid the perpetuation
of violence by a generation that has lost its standards.
In that regard, the rehabilitation and reintegration of
children affected by armed conflict through appropriate
programmes is crucial to efforts to ensure lasting peace
and security. Specific action in that area helps break the
vicious cycle of violence and can serve as a tremendous
instrument for conflict prevention.
The Security Council is regularly called upon
to review the mandates of peace operations, modify
them or decide to put an end to them. The transitional
phases resulting from those developments can lead to
periods of fragility for the State in question. Belgium
therefore pleads for better articulation of the activities
of peacekeeping operations with the rest of the
United Nations system, particularly during times of
transition. Belgium also advocates that transition and
exit strategies should be adequately articulated around
political processes, which should include the processes
of demobilization, disarmament, reintegration,
security-sector reform, transitional justice and
institution-building, as well as capacity-building.
The Security Council can contribute in several
ways to the goal of peacebuilding. It begins with the
inclusion in the text of its statements and resolutions
of concepts emphasizing the inclusiveness of such a
global approach. Whether it is women, children or
minorities, a specific mention can make a difference.
Moreover, its positions, whether to support a mediation
process or a peace agreement, or to condemn the lack of
progress, have an impact. The example of the Security
Council’s support for the Arusha Peace Accords is a
positive illustration of that.
Finally, the use of mediation as an instrument for
the prevention and resolution of conflicts must become
more systematic. Belgium fully supports the SecretaryGeneral’s work on mediation and advocates increasing
the capacity of regional organizations in that field.
Belgium also calls for women to play an active role
in the mediation and conflict-resolution processes in
their countries. I would like to take this opportunity to
point out that Belgium will organize, on 14 February in
Brussels, a high-level international conference on the
subject of mediation.
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): I would like to join previous
speakers in welcoming the Swedish presidency and in
thanking Foreign Minister Wallström for setting a very
ambitious agenda from the start and for this particular
debate, which promotes reflection on the vision of the
Secretary-General.
My country would like to align itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union, and in my national capacity, I would like to
make the following statement.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s first priority,
namely, to promote a surge in diplomacy for peace in
order to resolve ongoing conflicts and prevent others
from erupting. A holistic vision and strategic decisions
on the part of the new leadership are critical in order
to counter the static stance that the United Nations has
taken on early action, along with its frequent failures
to prevent or resolve conflicts, as we saw in Syria,
Ukraine, Georgia and other places.
Georgia welcomes the effort to build a new political
consensus in support of maintaining peace and security
worldwide by preventing conflicts before they occur,
which is in line with the concept of sustaining peace
and which underlines the imperative of addressing
all stages of the conflict cycle. Georgia shares the
view of many on the importance of early action and
proactive work on the part of United Nations entities,
both at Headquarters and in the field, across the main
pillars of the United Nations system, to identify early
warning signs and address the risks confronting peace.
Let me recall the pledges and commitments undertaken
by Member States at the World Humanitarian Summit
in May 2016 with a view of preventing conflicts and
stress, where we agreed that sustaining peace can only
be achieved through joint determination and adherence
to the principles of international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations.
We view peace prospects as directly linked
to advancing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and to the international community’s
continuous focus on strengthening human rights. As a
strong supporter of greater involvemen by women in
preventing conflicts, we also place particular emphasis
on the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.

S/PV.7857

Noting that the Security Council has a unique
responsibility in the area of peace and security and
conflict prevention, Georgia has had its own sad
experience, from which we should all learn valuable
lessons about what happens when a permanent
member of the Security Council, a party to the
conflict, singlehandedly vetoes the presence of an
United Nations observer mission as an international
monitoring mechanism. That can take place right
after a full-scale war, at a time when the international
security presence should be increased, as was the case
with the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
in 2009. Since then, both Georgia and the regions of
Abkhazia and South Ossetia, which are under illegal
military occupation by the Russian Federation,
continue to be completely closed off from international
monitoring mechanisms. Following several waves of
ethnic cleansing, hundreds of thousands of people have
been displaced, and, in the absence of international
monitoring mechanisms, the humanitarian situation
in the occupied regions remains critical. People are
deprived of their basic human rights and freedoms,
including, but not limited to, the freedom of movement.
Given that experience, Georgia believes that the veto
right should be restricted so as to prevent its misuse.
When a permanent member is involved in a conflict
under consideration by the Security Council, it cannot
exercise its veto right impartially. That is the only way
that we can prevent mass violations of human rights and
further escalation of conflict. In the same vein, Georgia
has also endorsed the joint French-Mexican proposal
regarding the use of the veto in the Security Council,
as well as the initiative introduced by Liechtenstein on
a code of conduct regarding Security Council action
against genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes. Those concepts have been presented to the
Council, and now it would be expedient, in our view,
to develop the relevant procedural rules to accomplish
those goals.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Panama.
Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
First, we wish to congratulate the newly elected
non-permanent members of the Security Council and
wish them success.
Today we are witnessing various firsts. This is the
first open debate of the Security Council in this first
month of 2017, with Sweden, a small State with the

17-0061269/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

first declared feminist Government, presiding. Our
thanks go to Minister Wallström for her introductory
words and for convening this meeting. This is also the
first meeting with Secretary-General Guterres, who
has been insisting on the importance of preventive
diplomacy. It is high time to hear fresh and innovative
arguments about what is already a long-standing topic
of debate.
When I have the opportunity to show the United
Nations to my guests, an obligatory stop is the
disarmament section of the displays on the third floor
behind the General Assembly, where a bubble chart is
displayed, which makes a graphic comparison between
the global budget for militarization, the regular budget
of the United Nations, the size of official development
aid and the budget for disarmament. There is nothing
more discouraging for the peace agenda than comparing
the sizes of the bubbles, which show that we have our
priorities inverted.
The efforts of the international community for
peacekeeping operations are mostly directed through
military agreements. Instead, resources should be
directed largely to actions for conflict prevention. As
Secretary-General Guterres said, development is the
best antidote to conflict. An increase in preventive
diplomacy would ensure linkages between the three
pillars of the United Nations and would focus on where
they intersect. There is no issue that has a more negative
impact on the United Nations reputation vis-à-vis the
public than its inability to prevent atrocities. How can
we therefore move from an eminently reactive Security
Council agenda to a proactive agenda? How can we
move from reacting to crises to preventing conflicts?
The Charter of the United Nations promises to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war. Fortunately, wars among States are becoming
increasingly fewer, but we are seeing a critical situation
around the world owing to the rise of complex and
violent conflicts, which extend beyond borders and
trigger massive displacements of people and have led
to large-scale human rights violations, with women,
children and girls as the main victims.
That situation, which is significantly different from
what the Organization faced 70 years ago, requires
effective preventive action by the Security Council as
the guarantor of peace. Article 33 of the Charter refers
to instruments designed to settle conflicts through
peaceful means, which, as the Security Council itself
70/108

10/01/2017

acknowledged in resolution 2171 (2014), are not used
sufficiently. Among those instruments is the recognition
of the role that women play in peacekeeping. That role
should be substantially increased.
Similarly, we are at the threshold of new leadership
in the person of the Secretary-General. Now is the time,
therefore, to lay the groundwork for effective interaction
with the Security Council that prioritizes analysis
and early warnings, which could lead to preventive
political missions. To do that, we must strengthen
our relationship with the Human Rights Council and
make that tie constant and close. That body, through
its reports and resolutions, can facilitate the work of
the Security Council by providing early warnings of
human rights violations.
For complex problems, there are no linear
solutions, but rather multisectoral ones. There is no
horizontal or vertical approach, but a matrix-oriented
approach. Panama has been insisting on the need for a
change in the paradigm so that ethics can provide the
main criterion that the Organization uses in order to
humanize its agendas, promote solidarity and make
the action of all United Nations bodies transparent, in
particular the Security Council.
In order to effectively prevent conflicts and move
towards lasting peace, the Security Council needs to
have a stronger analytical capacity and be proactive
with regard to preventing potential risks. The Council
should involve the parties to conflicts or parties
potentially at risk in the elaboration of comprehensive
implementation, monitoring and resource-allotment
strategies. Involving parties bolsters trust and ultimately
provides stronger guarantees of peace. The Security
Council should have a more balanced power structure,
so that narrow interests do not prevail, which only
makes it more difficult to have an independent analysis
in the search for solutions. The Security Council should
also work hand in hand with other bodies of the United
Nations system.
Today we have an opportunity to establish new
standards and to create a vision in which the United
Nations maintains leadership in comprehensive
strategies to assist the parties to conflict or parties who
are potentially at risk, thereby ensuring international
peace and security, an essential ingredient for the
fulfilment of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, with which we are striving to transform
the world.
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7857

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.

and to understand how it can be done. As the saying
goes, you cannot shake hands with a clenched fist.

Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I begin by congratulating
you, Mr. President, and the other new members who
joined the Security Council earlier this month. I
also thank the Secretary-General for passionately
outlining his vision and ideas for furthering conflict
prevention and sustaining peace in his maiden address
to the Council.

Thirdly, we need to remember that, while the
mandate provided in the Charter of the United Nations is
vast, the United Nations cannot do it all by itself. There
can be, and are, actors at the local, national, subregional
and regional levels that may be in a better position to
deal with a situation and can manage the issues better.
The United Nations needs to recognize and act after
taking into account the diversity of situations and the
availability of instruments. Fourthly, talk of promoting
sustainable peace and preventing conflicts will cut little
ice if there are no resources to back it. The sustaining
peace resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and
the Security Council in April last year (resolution 2282
(2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262) did not
lead to agreement, even on the allocation of 1 per cent
of the annual peacekeeping budget to those activities.
Are we now ready to change that mindset?

Today’s agenda relates to one of the primary
purposes in the Charter of the United Nations, one that
is listed in the first Article. We are therefore grateful
to the delegation of Sweden for proactively initiating
this debate and for preparing the useful concept note
(S/2017/6, annex).
The wisdom of the age-old adage, prevention is
better than cure, is self-evident. At the United Nations,
your compatriot, Mr. President, former SecretaryGeneral Dag Hammarskjöld, is said to have been the
first to introduce the term “preventive diplomacy” more
than 50 years ago into our lexicon. The Agenda for
Peace of former Secretary-General Boutros BoutrosGhali, unveiled in the 1990s, comes to mind as another
milestone in that saga. Yet efforts at prevention have
failed to lay down firm institutional roots. That raises
the question therefore — why have we not got it right?
Is it because we do not have the right tools or is it that
we are using the right tools in the wrong way? It is from
that perspective that we offer a few of our views.
First, India believes that, for the United Nations
to develop a culture of conflict prevention, it needs to
recognize that the primary responsibility for sustaining
peace lies with Member States. The United Nations
can supplement what are essentially home-grown
processes. The emphasis on analytical instruments and
tools, such as fact-finding, agenda-setting, diplomatic
initiatives and peace operations, is valuable, but
represents too narrow an approach. Such efforts can, at
best, supplement the roles and situations of the Member
States concerned. Yet we provide too few resources to
strengthen the institutional inadequacies of Member
States, and instead we focus on strengthening the
institutional arrangements of the United Nations.
Secondly, prevention efforts can be effective only
if they are undertaken with the consent and cooperation
of the Member States concerned and are not seen as an
imposition. After all, such efforts are aimed at helping
the Member States concerned to do what can be done

Fifthly, the established international order is being
upended through economic, political and technological
shifts. Even long-established States are unable to fully
respond to the new factors and forces that are being
unleashed. History teaches us that ungoverned swathes
often become grounds for competition, or become
storehouses for the germination of new threats. Ye,
we have no global governance architecture in frontier
areas, such as cyberspace, outer space and the oceans.
We ignore them at our peril.
Sixthly, while the world is changing, the institutional
architecture primarily responsible for the areas of peace
and security remains frozen. The Security Council,
which takes decisions on behalf of “we the peoples”,
represents an increasingly small minority of the world’s
population. If it is to make rules for “the peoples”, it
needs to adequately reflect new realities. Addressing
the new issues, threats and challenges of the twentyfirst century requires an updated, not an outdated
instrument. A Security Council that has lost its
legitimacy cannot be an effective tool for addressing the
challenges of conflict prevention and sustaining peace.
Putting the sustaining peace agenda on a firm
footing requires a coherent and comprehensive strategy.
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate as
a contribution to that noble objective.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.

17-0061271/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. AlJarallah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
during the first month of your membership. Despite the
tremendous responsibility on your shoulders, we are
confident that you will have a successful presidency.
We also thank you, Sir, for preparing the concept note
(S/2017/6, annex) on the subject of conflict prevention
and sustaining peace.
We would also like to congratulate the other
new members, namely, Bolivia, Ethiopia, Italy and
Kazakhstan. We wish them luck. We would also like
to thank His Excellency Secretary-General Guterres
for his valuable briefing, which outlined his vision for
conflict prevention. We hope that, during his mandate as
Secretary-General, we will be able to achieve tangible
progress in activating preventive diplomacy. Kuwait
stands ready to work with the Secretary-General to
achieve his vision on peace and security in the Middle
East and around the world.
Our world today faces profound humanitarian
tragedies and suffering that have worsened alarmingly
over the past several years. The number of civil wars
has increased from four in 2008 to 11 in 2015, which
has resulted in more than 128 million persons who
have been affected by conflicts, displacement and
natural catastrophes, and more than 60 million persons
have been displaced or become refugees as a result of
wars and conflict. The humanitarian appeal for 2017
launched by the United Nations to raise $22 billion — a
record amount — illustrates the dangerous crisis that
we are facing. Today’s topic could not therefore be
more timely. With the beginning of the new year and
the mandate of the new Secretary-General, we have an
opportunity to work together towards achieving that
goal and make 2017 a year of peace.
Over the past several years, the Security Council
and the international community have faced numerous
challenges and conflicts. We need to deal with those
conflicts in a creative way. We need to work in
accordance with the principle of preventive diplomacy
to address the root causes of those conflicts, especially
economic causes, such as poverty and unemployment,
and social causes, such as the absence of justice and
the existence of human rights violations. We must
also draw constructive lessons from past experience.
We must focus on preventing conflict instead of
addressing its political, humanitarian, economic and
social implications. I am speaking specifically about
72/108

10/01/2017

the work of the Security Council, which must shoulder
its responsibility to maintain international peace and
security in dealing with conflicts after they break
out. That exacts a large cost from the international
community. I must point out that, over the past several
years, the Security Council has been unable to deal
with many of the issues before it, chief among them
being the Palestinian question, which has been an
agenda item for more than 70 years, and the Syrian
crisis, which has entered its sixth year and has claimed
the lives of more than 400,000 people. That shows the
inability of the Council to address the consequences of
many conflicts and to ensure that they are contained
and do not worsen.
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations
addresses the peaceful settlement of conflicts and the
benefits that we can derive from peaceful negotiations
and mediation aimed at reaching peaceful settlements.
Article 99 of the Charter ensures that the SecretaryGeneral has the right to alert the Council to any matter
that he believes might endanger international peace and
security. We believe that it is important to remove all
obstacles to that function and to enhance the resources
available to the Secretary-General and the Secretariat
so that they can warn us of any potential conflict.
We must strengthen partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations, which play a pivotal role in
bolstering international peace and security.
The road towards the achievement of permanent
peace is full of dangers. We cannot walk down that road
if we do not walk together and if we lack a common
vision. The United Nations, and the Security Council
in particular, has a historical and moral responsibility
to meet the needs of the millions of people affected
by conflicts throughout the world. We agree with the
Secretary-General that we must improve our efforts to
prevent conflicts before they emerge, and not merely
address those conflicts by trying to contain them,
because we know that such an approach has a high
financial, political and human cost.
It seems appropriate to me, during the Swedish
presidency of the Security Council, to conclude my
statement with a quotation from the late SecretaryGeneral Dag Hammarskjöld on how the quest for peace
must be an ongoing process:
“The pursuit of peace and progress cannot end in
a few years in either victory or defeat. The pursuit
of peace and progress, with its trials and its errors,
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

its successes and its setbacks, can never be relaxed
and never abandoned.”
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, on behalf of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, we congratulate
your country, Sir, on its assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council, as well as the new non-permanent
members of the Council. Likewise, we appreciate the
convening of this very important open debate and the
concept note (S/2017/6, annex), which was diligently
circulated. We thank the Secretary-General for his
participation in this meeting and for the important
remarks that he contributed, and we reiterate the
support and full cooperation of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela for his stewardship of the Organization.
In recent years, the evolution of the situation on
the ground throughout the world has transformed the
nature of conflicts and threats to international peace
and security, which today include not only bellicose
confrontations but also encompass economic, financial
and technological dimensions that negatively impact
the stability of countries, owing to new challenges
that violate the sovereignty of those countries and run
contrary to the principle of non-interference in countries’
internal affairs. The seriousness and complexity of
the challenges posed require a determined approach
by the United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, so as to enable Member States to agree on
new multilateral approaches and adequate responses,
within the framework of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, to situations that
may arise from those new threats to the sovereignty and
political independence of countries.
Threats to international peace and security
resulting from terrorism, the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, prolonged conflicts and
unresolved colonial situations, as well as the cases of
violence and destabilization that have recently arisen
in the Middle East and North Africa, require strong
political will and willingness on the part of Member
States to conduct their international relations in the
framework of equality and respect for sovereignty
and territorial integrity, without interference in
their internal affairs, and with a commitment to the
peaceful settlement of conflicts. It is no secret that the
Organization, in particular the Security Council, reacts

S/PV.7857

reflexively when faced by conflicts, favouring the use
of short-term military and sanctions measures instead
of political actions that could address the root causes
of the problems. Moreover, most often, permanent
members of the Council are implicated and participate
directly in conflicts, providing military and financial
support to one of the sides involved, thereby rendering
it enormously difficult for the Council to take action.
Therefore, the peaceful settlement of conflicts,
particularly longstanding ones, such as the Palestinian
question and outstanding colonial situations in various
areas of the world, such as the question of Western
Sahara, the last colony in Africa, must remain an
essential aspect of the work of the Organization, in
particular the Security Council, whose responsibility
to maintain international peace and security gives
rise to its ineluctable obligation to deal with conflicts.
Often the consideration of such conflicts has been
deferred with regard to their solution but has often
been suppressed in the Council by the inaction of some
permanent members that put their national interests
before collective action that would promote the interests
of multilateralism.
A reflection of that reality has been the prolonged
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, resulting from Israel’s
illegal occupation of the territory of the State of
Palestine. Seventy years have passed without the
realization of the legitimate and just aspirations for selfdetermination of the Palestinian people, whose rights,
which should be expressed in the form of a sovereign,
free and independent State, have been violated by the
occupying Power with the support of members of the
Security Council. We also see a similar situation in the
Western Sahara, which has been occupied by Morocco
for 25 years since the referendum that was promoted by
resolution 690 (1991).
Moreover, the settlement of conflicts and the goal
of sustainable peace include a whole range of political
and institutional activities and long-term development,
which seek to address the profound causes of conflicts
and prevent those root causes from surfacing or
resurfacing, as well as bring about lasting peace. Last
year, the peacebuilding architecture was the subject of
reflection on how the United Nations should be dealing
with this issue. My country, during its presidency of the
Security Council, took that opportunity to contribute
to the discussion through the convening of an open
debate on peacebuilding held on 23 February 2016 (see
S/PV.7629).

17-0061273/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

Achieving sustainable peace will be possible only
to the extent that we address the root causes of conflicts.
In this regard, we must place greater emphasis on
relaunching sustainable economic development in
countries that have just emerged from or might fall
back into conflict situations. We cannot claim to be
sustaining peace when we ignore the need of peoples
to overcome their most basic socioeconomic problems,
obtain the means to earn a living and lay the foundations
for inclusive development and social justice.
Despite the fact that the majority of countries in
post-conflict situations take some 20 years to recover
their capacities, international financing drops off after
the first four to eight years. This is due to the fact that
many bilateral or multilateral assistance packages
set conditions with regard to quality of governance
and institutional capacity, which very few countries
in these terrible circumstances cannot satisfy fully.
Capacity cannot be generated overnight, and solutions
are not quite as simple as some seem to think, given
the institutional weakness of countries emerging from
conflict. To grasp the particular circumstances of
such countries is especially important. International
financial institutions and donor countries must keep
this in mind and offer assistance and aid in a more
flexible and sustained manner. Countries emerging
from conflict can take a long time to recover, and that
process can be a stop-and-start one. But international
assistance must be sustained and continue over the long
term. That is the only way in which root causes can be
dealt with and the vicious circle of conflict broken.
We cannot but warn that any intervention that
promotes the dismantling of State institutions, as,
unfortunately, happened in Iraq, Libya and Syria, is
counterproductive in terms of achieving a sustainable
long-term peace, as it promotes the expansion of
extremist and terrorist groups on a country’s territory.
The creation of resources at the national level is
therefore vital to sustainable peace.
Finally, all of these steps are key to giving
countries emerging from conflict the capacities
necessary to prevent any replapse into conflict and
build a sustainable peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mrs. Arrieta Munguia (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We wish to thank Sweden for having convened
this very timely debate and express to all members
74/108

10/01/2017

of the Security Council our hope that 2017 will be a
year of peace, as called for by the Secretary-General.
Mexico hopes that under the leadership of SecretaryGeneral Guterres, the Organization will effectively and
in a timely way address the current challenges on the
international peace and security agenda. We fully agree
with his vision of linking the pillars of international
security and development as a meaningful path
towards prevention.
That is why, given the current evolution of armed
conflicts, it is essential to make urgent and innovative
changes to the tools that the Organization has at its
disposal to prevent them, through a focus on the
underlying causes of such conflicts.
Unfortunately, the Security Council has sought to
resolve and manage conflicts and has not really focused
on preventing them. This has resulted in very high
monetary costs and a significant loss of life. However,
conflict prevention is also the responsibility of the
Organization as a whole. We must create a paradigm
shift so that people experiencing and suffering from
situations of conflict or post-conflict can be the
protagonists of public policies that strive to achieve the
well-being of societies in the long term.
The involvement of the Secretary-General directly
or through his envoys or special representatives is
vital to early warning of conflicts and could be key
in prevention efforts. Enabling the Secretary-General
to request advisory opinions from the International
Court of Justice could be a valuable instrument of
preventive diplomacy that would strengthen the work
of the Secretariat within the framework of the purposes
of the Charter.
The adoption of historic resolutions — General
Assembly resolution 70/262 and Security Council
resolution 2282 (2016) — has demonstrated that both
the Assembly and the Council are committed to guiding
the Organization’s work on the basis of sustainable
peace, and the concept has also been incorporated in
the programme of work of the Secretary-General.
Mexico has supported the Group of Friends of
Sustaining Peace, and in this context we look forward
to working with the Secretary-General and members of
the Security Council in the coming years to gain a better
understanding of the potential of this conceptual and
systemic challenge, especially given the fragmentation
of the work of the Organization. This, of course,
requires the active and meaningful participation of the
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

principal organs of the United Nations as well as of the
Secretariat, agencies, funds, programmes, specialized
agencies and United Nations field operations.
This paradigm shift should lead to the achievement
of international peace and security not only as ends in
themselves, but rather as a way to prevent social and
humanitarian disasters caused by wars. This would
mean moving from a culture of non-interference to
one of non-indifference, particularly when it comes to
human suffering.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Kickert (Austria): Let us make 2017 a year for
peace. The Secretary-General’s appeal is crisp and clear.
The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of peace and security. If it takes
this responsibility seriously, it must shift its focus to
prevention rather than on the management of conflicts,
because when conflicts erupt, human suffering has
already begun.
Conflict prevention is as necessary as it is
notoriously difficult. It is also thankless, as, when
successful, it mostly goes unnoticed by the public
eye. Since the 2015 reports on peace operations,
peacebuilding, and women, peace and security, the
concept of conflict prevention as an essential element
of achieving sustained peace has gained more traction
than ever before. The question we are all grappling with
is how to put it into practice.
Allow me to focus on five areas in which the
United Nations could become more effective in
preventing conflict.
In order to remain credible, the Security Council
has a legal and moral obligation to prevent mass
atrocities. We therefore encourage all its members to
support the code of conduct regarding Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity
or war crimes, as elaborated by the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency Group and already signed
by 112 Member States.
Secondly, the Secretary-General has a mandate to
play a proactive role in warning the Security-Council
when international peace and security are threatened.
We encourage him, as many speakers before me have
done, to do so proactively whenever necessary. In this
regard, we are heartened by the organizational changes

S/PV.7857

introduced by the Secretary-General to place more
emphasis in his Office on conflict prevention.
Thirdly, regional organizations, under Chapter VIII
of the Charter, play an increasing role in prevention
and in sustaining peace. In 2017, Austria will make its
contribution by chairing the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). As a regional
organization created in the midst of the Cold War
as a first platform for cooperation on a then-divided
continent, it continues to play a vital role in preventing
and addressing conflicts in the region.
In 2017, the OSCE region faces many challenges
that are exacerbated by a lack of trust and growing
radicalization and violent extremism. The Austrian
chairmanship will focus its energy on using established
formats as well as informal and alternative channels of
communication to advance negotiated solutions to the
conflicts in the region. Foreign Minister Kurz will be
in New York in February to present the priorities and
work plan of the Austrian chairmanship-in-office to the
Security Council.
Fourthly, effective prevention work needs to start
at the regional and country levels. Nothing is more
helpful than being in the field and knowing the actors.
To that end, it is necessary to decentralize in order to
further strengthen regional offices and United Nations
Resident Coordinators and their teams. The root causes
for conflict are often multidimensional; they may be
economic, political or related to persistent violations
of minority or women’s rights. The United Nations and
its partners must be able to address those root causes
as part of a broader conflict prevention effort. In that
context, the Human Rights Up Front initiative is crucial,
as human rights abuses are the early warning signs of
upcoming conflicts.
Fifthly, where United Nations peace missions are
deployed we need more proactive procedures to adapt
them to changing local needs in order to prevent a
recurrence of conflict after withdrawal. Partnerships
between host Governments and international partners
need to be strengthened when missions are phased
out, in order to ensure the sustainability of peace. The
current peacebuilding architecture must become much
more flexible in support of such efforts.
Let me conclude by thanking you, Mr. President,
for making prevention and sustaining peace a priority
of your presidency and of Sweden’s membership of the
Security Council. Let me assure you of Austria’s support.

17-0061275/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Moldova.
Mr. Lupan (Republic of Moldova): I shall read out
an abridged version of my statement in order to save
time, as you have requested, Mr. President. The full
version has been distributed.
As has been mentioned in Security Council and in
the Secretary-General’s 2015 report (S/2015/682), these
are difficult times to talk about conflict prevention,
with conflicts and lawlessness persisting in various
parts of the world, including Eastern Europe.
My country is observing those trends with distress
because, on 2 March, we will commemorate 25 years
since the beginning of the armed conflict in the eastern
regions of the Republic of Moldova. There were no
early warning mechanisms in the Republic of Moldova
in 1992. The support of the international community
might have proved crucial at that time. Hence, in line
with resolution 2171 (2014), we believe that sound
early-warning mechanisms might need to receive
greater consideration in the future as actual first steps
of conflict prevention. Moreover, the role of the media
in this context merits a separate discussion in the
Security Council.
For 25 years, the Republic of Moldova, with the
support of its external partners, has been promoting
a resolution to the Transnistrian conflict, being
determined to reach a peaceful and sustainable result.
Moldovan authorities continue to strive to prevent any
escalation of the conflict. However, in 2016 we saw
for the first time military exercises conducted by the
separatists, together with the military forces of a United
Nations State Member. Such an experience proves
that external interference is often not a stabilizing
factor. Foreign military forces cannot enter Moldovan
territory unless mandated by the United Nations or its
organizations under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.
The Republic of Moldova’s efforts should focus
instead on building bridges between communities
and establishing a favourable environment for a
peaceful solution, on the basis of the United Nations
principles of respect for sovereignty and territorial
integrity. The same applies to other conflicts as
well. Therefore, our firm belief is that the existing
peacekeeping mechanism in our case should be
adjusted to the current realities and transformed into
a compact, multinational civilian mission. Such a step
76/108

10/01/2017

would support two important conflict prevention and
resolution activities from a United Nations perspective:
an increased role for both regional organizations and
for confidence-building measures. In the case of the
Republic of Moldova therefore, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) could
provide the international legitimacy, impartiality and
a tailor-made mandate that, in addition to monitoring
and verification, could include activities related to
confidence-building and public order.
In that connection, and with the support of the
2016 German OSCE chairmanship, a substantive
meeting took place in Bavaria allowing for progress
in confidence-building measures that focus on the
development side of conflict resolution and are
implemented with the support of the United Nations.
We therefore take this opportunity to suggest that the
application of such confidence-building measures at the
grass-roots level has great potential in future conflict
prevention activities of the United Nations, particularly
with a focus on development.
While recalling resolution 2171 (2014), the Republic
of Moldova supports the idea that conflicts could be
prevented through the inclusion of the Sustainable
Development Goals philosophy in such processes.
What we would like to see is not only the right wording
of such resolutions, but also their implementation. We
support the new Secretary-General in his determination
to act accordingly.
Finally, the small States of the United Nations
follow the Security Council’s successes and failures
with regard to international law, and many past and
current conflicts are a clear signal of the need for
Security Council reform and for respect for United
Nations principles of international law to which we all
have subscribed. That is an element that can improve
conflict prevention governance at the United Nations
and can strengthen the mediation, peacebuilding and
resolution components of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mr. Al Musharakh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to express my
thanks to Sweden for convening this open debate. The
United Arab Emirates emphasizes the importance of
today’s discussions.
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

We condemn the terrorist attack on the Kandahar
Governor’s guest house, which injured the United
Arab Emirates Ambassador to the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan and a number of Emirati diplomats who
were accompanying him on a humanitarian mission
under the United Arab Emirates programme to support
the brotherly Afghan people to end conflicts and
sustain peace.
Today’s meeting is a critical first step towards
building an important relationship between the new
Secretary-General and the Security Council. Having
such dynamic, strong linkages between the SecretaryGeneral and this organ is integral to utilizing and
maximizing the United Nations tools for prevention. We
would like to thank the Secretary-General for sharing
his vision earlier today and for revitalizing conflict
prevention across the United Nations. We endorse his
call for a diplomacy of peace and stand ready to support
all his efforts in that regard.
Nowhere is there a need for conflict prevention
greater than in the Middle East, our region. It is
urgently needed. We sense the grave impact of
violence and instability. The persistent conflicts in
Syria, Yemen, Iraq, Libya and Palestine, among other
protracted conflicts in the region, have implications for
the security of countries near and far, as they fuel a
state of global instability and undermine international
security. It is high time to find political solutions to
those conflicts, with the aim of building sustainable
and resilient societies in our region.
We believe that there is a very clear connection
between extremist ideologies and terrorist acts. Those
acts must be addressed simultaneously, through a
comprehensive, long-term approach. The narrative
of extremists is in stark contrast to the United Arab
Emirates model as a modern, progressive Arab society.
It is also in contrast to the Middle East as we envision
it — a vibrant tapestry of cultures and backgrounds
coexisting in peace.
For too many years, the international community
has managed humanitarian political crises only by
minimizing their impacts, instead of truly finding
solutions to them and preventing them from occurring.
We would encourage taking strong measures to prevent
such crises. The list of conflicts is too long, their nature
is too complex, the actors involved are unconventional,
the magnitude of lives lost and humanitarian need is

S/PV.7857

too staggering for us to continue to avoid confronting
crises head on.
The United Arab Emirates adopts a comprehensive
approach that has human beings as a pillar. We try to
address all aspects, not only economic factors. We
invest in our people by encouraging women and youth
to be active members in protecting our communities
by empowering them and providing them with the
necessary tools and opportunities. We also try to prevent
the recurrence of conflict by rebuilding institutions and
infrastructure and by underscoring the rule of law.
At this critical juncture, we hope that there is
scope for renewed multilateral, regional and bilateral
cooperation. In that connection, the United Arab
Emirates is pleased to offer recommendations to the
Security Council with the aim of ensuring progress
and results in preventing conflicts and maintaining
international peace and security.
First, the Security Council must better consult
with regional organizations and countries concerned.
Regional organizations are often closer to conflicts and
have a special understanding of their dynamics.
Secondly, crisis prevention must start with
addressing the roots causes that lead to violence and
instability. The United Arab Emirates is dedicating its
efforts to countering violent extremism and terrorism.
We firmly believe that we must combat extremism
before it becomes violent.
Thirdly, we call upon the members of the Security
Council to work together to achieve the best outcomes
that would benefit the world at large. All States
Members of the United Nations must fully benefit from
all the tools available to prevent conflicts, as outlined
in Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations.
In conclusion, I would like to congratulate Sweden
on its election to the Security Council. We wish it
all success in stewarding the Council for the rest of
the month.
The President: I wish to express to the representative
of the United Arab Emirates my sympathies with regard
to the injuries sustained today by his colleagues in the
course of the horrendous attacks in Afghanistan.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Sri Lanka.
Mr. Sabarullah Khan (Sri Lanka): Let me take this
opportunity to congratulate Sweden on its assumption

17-0061277/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

of the presidency of the Security Council, as well as to
join other speakers in commending the Foreign Minister
of Sweden and her delegation for convening today’s
timely debate. We acknowledge with appreciation the
remarks of the Secretary-General earlier today on this
important topic, and we take this opportunity to wish
the Council a blessed and peaceful new year.
As we embark upon a new year, we do so mindful
of the fact that both as an international community and
as a multilateral organization, in terms of resources,
we have been served with a multitude of challenges.
However, those challenges are not insurmountable.
Together as one body, with one voice, with unwavering
resolve and, most important, with political will, we can
face the future and steer our world towards peace and
prosperity for all.
We welcome the incoming Secretary-General’s
identification of a surge in diplomacy for peace as
one of his priorities.We appreciate his efforts to
further improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the
Secretariat in that area by establishing an executive
committee to support decision-making at the senior
level, while taking steps to enhance performance in the
peace and security pillar and to reconfigure the Office
of the Secretary-General so as to place more emphasis
on strategic integration across pillars.
On 21 September last year, Sri Lanka, together
with several other countries, co-hosted a successful
pledging conference to refinance the SecretaryGeneral’s Peacebuilding Fund to support United Nations
peacebuilding efforts across the globe. Sri Lanka has
been working closely with the Peacebuilding Support
Office since January 2015, when the Government
prioritized reconciliation and development as twin
agendas to be pursued in guiding our nation towards
durable peace.
The challenges faced by the international community
arising from terrorism, violent conflict, human rights
abuse, poverty, disease and the destruction of cultures
must be faced by all the principal organs of the United
Nations working actively to set up a collective security
firewall, in accordance with their respective functions
under the Charter of the United Nations. In order to
face such phenomena, it is imperative that we work as
one United Nations.
The Security Council, including its permanent
members, has in its tool kit powerful instruments to
address matters of international peace and security, and
78/108

10/01/2017

it must use those tools with circumspection and only
in the cause of humankind. At this time, when selfabsorption and self-importance have reared their heads,
the United Nations must fiercely promote its values of
commonality, humanity and the good of all.
To address the new threats, our peacekeeping
operations must also adapt and acquire specialized
capabilities. When possible, the countries receiving
peacekeepers should take ownership of the process.
We must focus on building national institutions,
strengthening national security structures and
addressing issues of restorative justice and
reconciliation, if peace is to be sustained. Establishing
the rule of law is fundamental to achieving durable
peace in the aftermath of conflict. It is also vital
that women be included at all levels of peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. It is well known that women and
men experience conflict differently and, as a result,
understand peace differently.
Sri Lanka is a country that successfully eradicated
terrorism after suffering under its yoke for nearly
30 years. Today we have embarked on a journey of
reconciliation, restorative justice and inclusive and
lasting peace. Let our nation serve as a beacon of hope
to the world as we, the international community, face
the many challenges ahead.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): I would like to
congratulate all of the new members of the Security
Council, and Sweden in particular as President of the
Council in the very first month of its mandate and for
organizing today’s timely open debate on such an everpressing and current issue.
My statement is fully aligned with that delivered
earlier today by the observer of the European Union.
Today we heard Mr. António Guterres address
the Council for the first time as Secretary-General.
Portugal shares his aspiration for a surge in diplomacy
for peace and supports his vision and priorities. As
the Secretary-General has often emphasized, global
problems require global solutions, and the United
Nations is at the centre of a tremendous multilateral
effort needed to effectively address global terrorism,
climate change, dire humanitarian crises and parallel
movements of migrants and refugees.
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

The primacy of politics, mediation and prevention
across all stages of conflicts, stronger partnerships,
nationally driven conflict prevention and resolution,
improved United Nations missions on the ground and
enhanced effectiveness, efficiency and accountability
throughout the United Nations system are all goals to
which we remain bound. We all know that human rights
violations are often a warning sign. Human rights and
the protection of civilians, and women and children in
armed conflict, must remind us of our endeavours in
sustaining peace. Sharpening the focus on prevention
also means a sharper focus on inclusiveness, involving
all the relevant actors, communities and stakeholders,
including women, youth, religious leaders and
minority groups.
Preventing the lapse and relapse into conflict must
include both the political and economic empowerment
of women. Peacebuilding and sustaining peace can
emerge only from within societies, which means
national ownership. That often requires assistance in
building national capacities, strengthening domestic
institutions and supporting good governance. The
response to multidimensional and cross-border demands
also requires complementary partnerships of all kinds.
The absence of development puts peace and security
at risk, and the opposite is also true. That is why the
primacy of politics and sustainable development must
be continually mutually reinforcing. In that regard, the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development must be an integral and essential
dimension of sustaining peace. Incorporating a culture
of prevention and sustaining peace system-wide
requires the efforts of all United Nations bodies and
entities across the three pillars and demands close and
proactive institutional cooperation. The United Nations
family will be able to act in a transversal manner in
addressing conflict prevention only if it maximizes
the best synergies among its organs, including in the
framework of Article 99 of the Charter.
Portugal also looks forward to deepened and more
effective cooperation with regional organizations and
with the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), which
can help to bring a peacebuilding perspective to the
deliberations of the principal organs of the United
Nations. The PBC is also well positioned to offer the
Security Council additional advice and insight.
Strengthening coherence across the United Nations
system and moving from silos to synergies is crucial

S/PV.7857

to placing prevention at the very heart of the United
Nations. Accordingly, we greatly welcome the decisions
quickly taken by the Secretary-General to increase the
Organization’s efficiency and effectiveness. We are
living in a time marred by the largest number of crises
that have both security and humanitarian dimensions,
unprecedented levels of displacement and human
suffering, and it seems natural to demand that the
United Nations do more and better, even if with less.
How can the Security Council support conflict
prevention more effectively? In our view, the Council
already has at its disposal a set of instruments that could
be better used for the purpose, including discussions
with the Secretary-General, horizon-scanning, early
warning informal briefings by the Department of
Political Affairs, Arria Formula meetings involving a
diverse range of actors and stakeholders, interactive
dialogues with regional partners and other United
Nations organs, and regular discussions with troopand police-contributing countries. Timely and clear
statements, open debates, country field trips and
démarches by the Council are other tools that could
and should continue to be fully used in support of
preventive diplomacy.
Continued reform of the Council’s working
methods, including greater transparency and burdensharing among all members, will, in our opinion, also
contribute to enhancing the Council’s ability to focus
on conflict and crisis prevention. Effective institutional
cooperation, broad consultation and inclusiveness
could also further contribute to improving the
design of mission mandates. In addition, sustaining
peace will require a more coherent, comprehensive,
flexible and tailor-made approach to peacebuilding
and peacekeeping.
The Security Council has the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. However, such responsibility is not exclusive
to the Council; all States must commit to and engage
equally in that responsibility. Clearly, well-designed
mandates, long-term commitments, robust and betterequipped field operations, more professional and
well-trained peacekeepers and United Nations staff,
greater accountability and transparency must all be
pursued, but they will remain elusive if Member States
collectively do not wholeheartedly embrace a culture of
prevention and engage with the United Nations for an
effectively delivery on the ground.

17-0061279/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to welcome you,
Mr. President, as you preside over this important
meeting. I would also like to express my congratulations
to you, Sir, on your country’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
also take this opportunity to congratulate you and the
permanent delegations of Ethiopia, Italy, Kazakhstan
and Bolivia for assuming their responsibilities as
non-permanent members of the Security Council.
My delegation is interested in discussing the role of
the Security Council in maintaining international peace
and security, on the basis of the principles, objectives
and purposes of the Charter of the United nations, free
from the practices of double standards, politicization
of issues and the exacerbation of the phenomenon of
investing in terrorism as a political weapon. That
practice has been adopted by Governments of States
inside the Security Council, in an attempt to achieve
agendas that contradict the purposes of the Charter,
to justify interference in the internal affairs of other
States and violate their sovereignty and undermine
their independence and territorial integrity. Over the
past decade, that represented the gravest threat to
international peace and security, creating hotspots for
armed conflicts, extremism and terrorism. Examples
are vivid in in all of our minds.
A review of the archives of United Nations
resolutions in general, and Security Council resolutions
in particular, proves that we do not lack resolutions
or mechanisms or necessary mandates to maintain
international peace and security. Instead, we lack the
political will by the Governments of some States that
continue, along with their allies, to consider themselves
as tutors of the international Organization and
authorities superior to international law. They refuse to
abide by the provisions of the Charter and refrain from
implementing resolutions of international legitimacy.
Despite the hundreds of resolutions of the General
Assembly and the other Security Council resolutions,
the Israeli occupation of Arab territories has continued
for nearly half a century. Despite many resolutions
on counter-terrorism unanimously adopted by the
Security Council in accordance with Chapter VII of
the Charter, which have provided broad mandates,
flexible prerogatives and deterrent procedures that
80/108

10/01/2017

were supposed to ensure the eradication of terrorism,
the scourge of terrorism is still spreading in numerous
parts of the world.
My country, Syria, is still suffering from the terrorist
war imposed upon it as the result of the failure of some
States to abide by resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014),
2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015). Foreign terrorist fighters
are still flowing in across borders. The Governments
of some States are still providing declared financial,
military and political support to terrorist groups. Those
Governments are still sponsoring the extremist terrorist
ideology by issuing fatwas for killing and destruction,
providing platforms for preachers of mutiny and callers
for hate while the wold is watching. Those Governments
are still establishing camps to train those terrorists on
their own territories, under the supervision of military
and security experts from Governments of States,
some of which are permanent members of the Security
Council, and which were mandated by the Charter to
maintain international peace and security.
I must stress that the misleading statements that
the delegations of some States made in today’s meeting
about the reality of the terrorism faced by my country
are no longer heard by the international community, and
international public opinion has realized the truth about
the involvement of the Governments of those countries
in supporting armed terrorist groups and the emergence
of the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters
What we need today is to develop and activate the
work of the United Nations to ensure that it carries out
its role with integrity and seriousness as an international
body that is mandated to shoulder the responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security,
while addressing the root causes of armed conflicts,
committing to dialogue and political solutions and
avoiding the threat of the use of force in international
relations, in such a way to provide our peoples with
safe, prosperous and peaceful lives. We also need to
abide by the provisions and purposes and principles of
the Charter. We should not ignore it or manipulate its
provisions or derive from it new terms and concepts
that run counter to its provisions and are still a source
of deep controversy and disagreement among Member
States.
That is due to the hidden purposes of the
Governments of certain Member States in the use of
terms such as “violent extremism”, which have been
put forward even before reaching an international
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

consensus on a crystal-clear legal definition of
terrorism. That is also the case for the “responsibility
to protect”, which the Governments of some States are
trying to exploit to interfere in the internal affairs of
other States and violate their sovereignty. Obviously,
the term “moderate armed opposition” will not be the
last such dangerous and abnormal phrase used by their
authors to try to to deviate the United Nations from its
purposes and principles.
In conclusion, my country, Syria, is still calling on
the international community and the United Nations
to take a clear and firm position that respects the
Charter and its purposes, with regard to the use by
the Governments of some states, notably the United
States and the European Union, of unilateral economic
coercive measures as a tool to bring political pressure
to bear on certain developing countries, including
my country, thereby targeting citizens in all aspects
of their lives and whole segments of society, thereby
undermining the ability of our community to bring
about socioeconomic development. Putting an end to
such coercive measures, which are illegitimate and
coercive in nature, would in the end maintain the
effectiveness and credibility of the Organization.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Drobič (Slovenia): Let me first thank the
Swedish presidency for convening this open debate on
confict prevention and sustaining peace.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union and
with the statement delivered on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Mediation. In addition, I would like to make
a few remarks from my national point of view.
The global security environment has changed
significantly in recent years. Multidimensional issues,
such as terrorism, violent extremism and irregular
migration, still represent challenges to the international
community and its universal values and principles.
To be able to tackle those and future challenges the
emphasis must be on doing more collectively, effectively
and in a timely manner. We need to overcome political
divisions and show that the Security Council is able
to respond when dire, protracted human suffering,
injustice and breaches of international humanitarian
law are happening.

S/PV.7857

People-centred
and
development-oriented
approaches are important. All Governments have
the responsibility to protect their own people and to
sustain peace. All other entities of the international
community — the United Nations, but also regional
organizations, non-governmental organizations and
civil society actors — could, however, do more to
support the most vulnerable and fragile countries, in
particular by enhancing their societal resilience and
security architecture.
One of the imperatives for the success of conflict
prevention and for the maintenance of peace and security
in and among States is full respect for international
law and the rule of law. Their promotion at all levels
is crucial for the realization of sustained economic
growth, the eradication of poverty and hunger and the
protection of human rights. Justice and reconciliation
must be among the main focuses for all preventive and
post-conflict activities. Attaining them by peaceful
means, as stipulated in Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations, including through international courts
and tribunals, must be our common endeavour.
We welcome the engagement in conflict prevention
issues at the United Nations and commend the efforts
in different parts of the United Nations system to
significantly strengthen the Organization’s capacities.
We are glad to hear that the surge in diplomacy for
peace will be one of the key priorities of the SecretaryGeneral’s mandate, and we appreciate today’s
presentation of his vision on how to achieve that goal.
In the future we need to be careful not to depart
from multilateralism. We need to foster it, especially
in preventive action. Cooperation and credible
information-sharing on early warning and situational
assessments among international actors must be stepped
up, in particular with a comprehensive approach that
encompasses humanitarian and development assistance,
human rights and rule-of-law promotion, peacebuilding
and other areas.
Slovenia is a traditional advocate of preventive
diplomacy and preventive post-conflict mediation. In
past years, we dedicated most of our efforts in this field
to enhancing mediation in the Mediterranean region,
especially by highlighting the priorities of actively
engaging women and young people and respect for
international law and the rule of law. We intend to
continue pursuing those in the future.

17-0061281/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Castañeda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala thanks the delegation of Sweden,
which currently holds the presidency of the Security
Council, for organizing this open debate and for
presenting the concept note (S/2017/6, annex) on which
it is based. We welcome Secretary-General António
Guterres and thank him for his first statement as
Secretary-General to the Council.
We align ourselves with the statement made earlier
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
We share the notion set out in the concept note by
the Council presidency that, despite the fact that the
Organization’s mandate is to prevent the outbreak
of conflicts and engage at an early stage to prevent
the escalation of violence, the reality is different.
We also agree with the idea that the Council has
disproportionately been occupied with addressing
current crises rather than preventing the conflicts
of tomorrow. Its approach has therefore been more
reactive than preventive.
The Organization and its States Members have tools
available to them that have a common denominator in
the emphasis on the primacy of politics, indicating
that sustainable peace is achieved through political
solutions and not only through military and technical
commitments. In that regard, Guatemala would like
to emphasize the importance of working in a holistic
manner over the long term to maintain peace in all the
United Nations commitments before, during and after
a conflict. We also stress that the United Nations must
move from a linear approach to addressing conflicts to
a focus on prevention that is continuous, cross-cutting
and intersectoral.
Moreover, in the context of achieving sustainable
peace, it should be noted that this new term shares
common points with the 2030 Sustainable Development
Agenda, as noted in the concept note. The message is
clear: we cannot talk about peace without development,
and we cannot talk about development without talking
about peace.
For Guatemala, sustainable peace has a direct
relationship with investing in strengthening institutions,
security sector reform and good governance. An
example of that lies in the fact in our own country an
agreement was reached with sectors of organized civil
82/108

10/01/2017

society that resulted in the creation of the International
Commission against Impunity in Guatemala (CICIG),
whose sole objective is to support the strengthening of
national institutions in the judicial sector, in particular
the Public Ministry.
With the support of CICIG, Guatemala is
strengthening its institutions, the rule of law is working
better and the citizenry is participating more actively,
demanding accountability and supporting the fight
against corruption and impunity. We emphasize that
CICIG is a cooperation tool devised and designed by
Guatemalans, which has been explicitly supported by
five Government Administrations and by society in
general in an explicit manner. For Guatemala, that is
an example of working to implement sustainable peace
together with our international partners.
Breaking down the silos within the Organization
and among Member States is a clear challenge. But it
is important to work with the idea of ​​implementing the
three fundamental pillars of the Charter of the United
Nations together, in the sense that both peace and
security, development and human rights should all be
addressed in a cross-cutting manner as a whole. At the
same time, the Council should not always wait for cases
of conflict to be included in the agenda. We need to
invest in prevention in order not to wait until conflicts
erupt to take the necessary and pertinente measures.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the accession
of the Kingdom of Sweden to the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of January, and I thank
you for organizing this open debate and for choosing
its theme. Issues pertaining to conflict prevention
and sustaining peace are currently enjoying a very
positive momentum, and we should, all together, take
advantage of that in order to give concrete follow-up to
your call for political and financial re-engagement on
those priorities.
I also congratulate the Secretary-General on his
briefing, which confirms his firm commitment to
conflict prevention and sustaining peace. I would like
to say to the Secretary-General and to the members
of the Security Council that Morocco continues to be
committed to the universal values of peaceful conflict
resolution and sustaining peace.
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

The multiplication of conflicts, their complexity
and their disastrous consequences make it necessary to
review the way in which the Organization deals with
them. This debate also provides us today an opportunity
to present new approaches and answers to the questions
that remain for the implementation of the vision initiated
two years ago by the processes to review the peace and
security architecture, which resulted in the emergence
of the new paradigm, namely, sustaining peace.
The resolution on the review of the peacebuilding
architecture (resolution 2282 (2016)) led to a redefinition
of sustainable peace through a more integrated, strategic
and coherent approach, in which security, development
and human rights are closely interrelated and mutually
reinforcing. A comprehensive approach recognizes that
sustaining peace is based, first, on conflict prevention
and the elimination of its root causes by promoting
sustained economic growth, lasting social development,
strengthened social cohesion, the culture of democracy
and human rights. Conflict prevention then becomes
one of the strongest links in this new mechanism,
namely, sustaining peace.
Often, the instruments available to the SecretaryGeneral and to the Security Council set out in Chapter
VI in the Charter of the United Nations, such as
negotiation, mediation or arbitration, are not enough
to avoid conflicts. As a result, traditional policies for
preventing armed conflicts that seek only to reduce the
intensity, duration and geographical extent of violence
and, ultimately, to end it, have become inadequate.
The fact is that the underlying causes of conflicts
often go neglected in the face of the urgency of ensuring
a security and humanitarian response. But when strong
institutions, the rule of law, and sufficient State capacity
for minimum public services are lacking, conflicts, or
relapses into conflict, are more likely to emerge. That
is where we need a holistic vision and where the new
concept of sustaining peace takes on its full meaning.
According to this innovative approach, the strategy that
enables a coherent, effective and legitimate culture of
prevention to establish itself is one that tackles every
aspect of the root causes of conflicts.
There are many stakeholders with an important
role in addressing the root causes of conflict, including
bilateral and multilateral partners and non-governmental
organizations, as well as representatives of civil
society, young people and women. Within the United
Nations system, the various funds and programmes

S/PV.7857

play a leading part in strengthening States’ institutional
capacities, as do regional and financial organizations.
Beyond that, several elements are required to
implement the concept of sustaining peace, among
them a change in the culture within the United
Nations. We commend the Secretary-General on
the steps he has already taken to reorganize various
departments, and we believe firmly that they will
help to revitalize prevention activities and improve
the flow of information. This situation makes the
role of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) crucial
in functioning as a bridge between all the various
actors. In accordance with the latest resolutions of
the Security Council (resolution 2282 (2016)) and the
General Assembly (resolution 70/262)) on the review of
the peacebuilding architecture, the time has come to
strengthen the PBC so that it can play its role to the full.
In conclusion, I would like to share two
recommendations. First, some Member States see
prevention activities as an attack on their countries’
sovereignty or as interference in their States’ internal
affairs. To remedy that, we should clarify the principles
of early warning and preventive action. A few years ago,
the same misunderstanding afflicted the concept of the
protection of civilians, and yet today it has become a
sacred principle. Secondly, in order to ensure the success
of sustaining peace, we should pay special attention to
an operation’s transition from peacekeeping to country
team. Based on current experiences in Liberia, as well
as in Mali and the Central African Republic, we could
consider including support for country teams in the
compulsory contribution funds while the missions are
still deployed, in order to prepare for the transition as
soon as that deployment begins.
Lastly, I would like to congratulate the new members
of the Council — your country, Mr. President, as well
as Bolivia, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan and Italy — on their
election, and to assure them of our full cooperation.
Similarly, I offer my congratulations on the end of
the Council term of the last remaining dictatorship in
Latin America, Venezuela. That country has perverted
the Council’s mandate with a political and ideological
agenda and an utter lack of interest in just causes,
particularly in Africa and the Middle East. It is a selfproclaimed teacher of lessons about human rights
when its own people live under oppression, torture,
forced disappearances and imprisonment. Venezuela’s
representative talks of referendums when his own
Government has refused its own people a referendum

17-0061283/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

and prevents them from expressing their views
democratically. The presence of such a representative,
of such a country, in the Security Council tarnishes its
image and weakens the Organization. Happily, it is gone.
I am sorry for having digressed from my statement, but
I had to respond to attacks on my country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Roet (Israel): I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and Sweden on joining the Security
Council and presiding over its activity this month.
I would also like to welcome the other new Council
members and to wish them success in fulfilling their
important role.
In 2016 the international community experienced
an increasing threat of global terrorism, which
indiscriminately claims innocent lives from Brussels
to Baghdad and from Paris to Istanbul. In Israel,
Palestinian terrorists have been responsible for
numerous attacks. Men and women on their way to
work, as well as children and the elderly waiting for
their buses home, have all fallen victim to shootings,
stabbings and other horrendous acts of terror. Just a
few days ago, a terrorist drove his truck into a group
of cadets gathered on a Jerusalem promenade, taking
the lives of Yael Yekutiel, who was 20 years old,
Shir Hajaj, 22, Shira Tzur, 20, and Erez Orbach, 20.
Blessed be their memory. We thank the SecretaryGeneral, the Council and the many countries that have
expressed their condolences. Despite the evils of hate
and terrorism that we face, Israel is, and will always
remain, committed to the way of peace.
Our history has taught us that courage, impartiality
and seeing reality for what it is are important elements
in preventing conflict. More important, they are
essential to establishing the ground for a durable
peace. We believe that they are also vital to the work
of the Security Council in its pursuit of global peace
and security.
While it is clear that courage is needed in the
conflicts that take place on the battlefield, courage
is even more important in preventing them. For the
Security Council, courage should mean not turning
a blind eye to actions that pave the way for future
conflict. For the Council, courage should mean its
equal application of moral values and standards to
all, without allowing politics and special interests to
interfere in its work.
84/108

10/01/2017

Sadly, that is not the case when the Council
examines the actions of those who systematically try
to harm the State of Israel. As a matter of fact, since
the adoption of resolution 1701 (2006), Hizbullah,
which is internationally acknowledged to be a terrorist
organization, has multiplied its missile stockpile
tenfold and has amassed more than 150,000 rockets and
missiles. We continue to see increases in the number
of Hizbullah operatives, described in reports relating
to resolution 1701 (2006) as “civilians”, in possession
of unauthorized weapons. The situation serves only to
heighten tension in an already volatile environment.
It seems that political considerations undermine
the Council’s ability to receive accurate reports on the
real situation on the ground. If conflict between Israel
and Hizbullah is to be prevented, the Security Council
must acknowledge Hizbullah’s dangerous buildup in
southern Lebanon and demand that the Governments of
Lebanon and Iran fully comply with the provisions of
resolution 1701 (2006).
Time and again we have warned the Security
Council that, where the Middle East is concerned,
we can be sure that wherever and whenever there is
terrorism, there is Iran. We urge this new Council to
put an end to Iran’s destabilizing actions in our region
and around the world.
For centuries, justice has been depicted as a
woman wearing a blindfold, which represents the
basic legal element in maintaining peace and order:
impartiality. Unfortunately, on too many occasions
this institution has lifted the blindfold where the State
of Israel is concerned. Biases, hypocrisy and double
standards — the same double standards that SecretaryGeneral Guterres spoke of earlier today — have
unfortunately become honorary members of the long
debates and meetings condemning Israel. The Council’s
latest initiative, resolution 2334 (2016), epitomizes its
failure to address all sides of a conflict equally. Its
condemnation of Israeli actions and attempt to portray
them as the one major obstacle to a two-State solution
portrays the type of bias that hinders real diplomatic
progress. It is clear that these biases are paralysing the
Council and holding it back from playing a constructive
role in conflict prevention.
Courageous and impartial actions to achieve
sustainable peace must be based on facts, not on mere
perceptions. Like the prisoners in Plato’s famous
allegory of the cave, some members of this institution
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7857

refuse to see the facts, while indulging themselves in
the comfort of the lies presented to them. One dire
consequence of that dangerous behaviour is the failure
to effectively identify the real aggressor. Almost
every time the Council has condemned terror attacks
against Israelis, it has avoided answering the most basic
questions: who is the terrorist, and who is the victim?
If we cannot make that simple differentiation, how can
we even begin to solve the problem?

As has been illustrated very clearly in today’s
debate, prevention and sustaining peace require much
deeper and wider coordination of United Nations
peace efforts. Denmark welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s strong emphasis on enhancing coherence
within the United Nations system. Denmark is a longstanding supporter of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture and donor to the Peacebuilding Fund,
which is a key tool in that regard.

A new year offers us an opportunity to have a fresh
start and to stand together for the true values of the
Organization. It provides us with an opportunity to have
the courage to face the facts, to call the aggressor by its
name, to be impartial and to apply equally standards to
all aspects of every conflict we face.

The imperative must be to protect people and
ensure respect for international humanitarian law and
human rights by States and non-State actors. Denmark
has been among the core supporters of the Human
Rights Up Front initiative and will remain committed
to ensuring its further development as a critical
instrument of the United Nations. Member States carry
the primary responsibility for protecting populations
from atrocity crimes, but the international community
has a responsibility to act where States fail to do so.
The Security Council must live up to its responsibility
in the maintenance of international peace and security
and strengthen its leading role in prevention. Syria
remains the most striking and heartbreaking recent
example of the consequences when the Council fails to
stop bloodshed and conflict.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.
Mr. Nielsen (Denmark): Denmark aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier today by the observer of
the European Union, as well as with the statement made
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Mediation.
Denmark warmly thanks Sweden for convening this
debate on a topic of extreme importance to the United
Nations. In its broadest sense, prevention constitutes
the bedrock of our cooperation. It is a shared strategic
agenda that should guide and mobilize all parts of the
United Nations system and Member States. Against
that background, Denmark strongly supports the vision
outlined today by the Secretary-General. We look
forward to working with Mr. Guterres and his team to
turn that new agenda into concrete actions and reforms
that will make United Nations efforts for prevention
and sustaining peace more effective.
Denmark firmly shares the view that the work of
the Organization on conflict prevention, supporting
political solutions and providing good offices and
mediation must be further strengthened. The United
Nations system must work on the basis of a common
and integrated operational strategy for prevention and
sustaining peace. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
ambition to improve coherence of the country-level work
being undertaken by the Secretariat across departments.
More predictable resources for prevention, including
special political missions, will also be crucial. Denmark
is a major donor to the Department of Political Affairs,
and we will remain a close partner in the future.

The most effective prevention strategy is to address
the causes and core drivers of conflict. Member States
must ensure representative, legitimate and inclusive
political and economic institutions, and respect for
human rights and the rule of law. Without effective
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, we will not succeed.
Furthermore, the United Nations must make youth
a strategic priority and give the leaders of tomorrow a
much stronger role in prevention and sustaining peace.
Through its development cooperation, Denmark is
strongly engaged in the global youth agenda and stands
ready to support the Secretary-General in creating
opportunities for future generations and making
sure that youth are included in decision-making. The
strengths and capacities of young people must be met
with optimism and opportunities. If not, we risk further
marginalization, radicalization and frustration, fuelling
violence and destabilization. Denmark looks forward to
working with all partners to implement resolution 2250
(2015).
As we put behind us a year marked by conflict,
violence, terrorism and human suffering around the

17-0061285/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

world, the expectations for the Organization and its
Secretary-General to deliver on the promise of the
United Nations are high. We have a shared responsibility
to make 2017 a year for multilateralism, common
solutions and a strong United Nations prevention role.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Treppel.
Ms. Treppel (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Secretary General of the Organization of American
States (OAS), Mr. Luis Almagro, allow me to express
our gratitude for the invitation to participate in this
necessary and timely debate. On behalf of the General
Secretariat of the OAS, I would like to congratulate the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. António
Guterres, on his appointment and to wish him every
success in promoting peace, the rule of law, sustainable
development, human rights and dignity for the millions
of people around the world who demand it. The OAS
can be counted on to shoulder that shared responsibility.
The OAS has the clear conviction that sustainable
peace cannot be the exclusive result of military or other
measures that exclude the communities in which they
take place. We believe that sustainable peace is possible
only as part of a multidimensional vision, with marked
political sense and commitment, and inclusion and
social cohesion.
We have worked hard in our region to free ourselves
from this scourge. We are celebrating the recent signing
of a peace agreement between the Government of
Colombia, led by its President and Nobel Peace Prize
laureate Juan Manuel Santos, and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC), which ended
the longest internal armed conflict in the history of the
Western Hemisphere. Dialogue, mutual understanding
and the good offices of different actors, including the
OAS, made that possible.
Regional bodies act as facilitators for the realization
of consensual solutions and as promoters of measures
based on international cooperation and multilateralism.
In that regard, we echo the need to strengthen and
improve dialogue between regional organizations and
United Nations bodies. We at the OAS have promoted
dialogue based on stakeholder consensus, with a high
degree of national ownership and leadership. The
Americas have many cases of success, thanks to the
implementation of mechanisms to resolve disputes
in a peaceful manner and to prevent the escalation of
violence. The Peace Fund, the consultative meetings of
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs, and the forums on
86/108

10/01/2017

confidence- and security-building measures are part
of the framework of the organization. The deployment
of civilian missions with specific mandates has also
yielded satisfactory results. Such missions include the
mission to support the peace process in Colombia, the
mission to support the fight against corruption and
impunity in Honduras and the special mission in Haiti.
We know that the deep inequalities and poverty
that afflict several countries in the region, as well as the
marginalization and the forced migration of hundreds
of thousands of people as the only option in the face
of violence, serve as a haven for crime. We are aware
that Governments and societies face many challenges
in their efforts to achieve sustainable peace, but they
are not insurmountable. We can achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals, including sustainable peace, only
by working together, by putting aside rhetoric and
by taking concrete action using a multidimensional
approach to governance and security that includes the
resolve to include women and to ensure more rights for
more people.
I reiterate the support and commitment of the
OAS to build a world endowed with the security and
development that millions of people today lack. I
conclude by citing Rigoberta Menchú, an indigenous
Guatemalan woman, a social advocate and a Nobel
Peace Prize winner, who said that peace is not only
the absence of war; as long as there is poverty, racism,
segregation and exclusion, we can hardly achieve a
world of peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mrs. Natividad (Philippines): I wish to congratulate
the new members of the Security Council and to thank
Sweden for organizing during its presidency this open
debate on conflict prevention and sustaining peace. I
also wish to thank the Secretary-General for sharing
his views on this topic this morning and for reminding
us that conflict prevention and sustaining peace must
be a priority for each one of us.
The promise of the Charter of the United Nations
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war continues to challenge us after 71 years. The tools
and mechanisms at the disposal of Member States
and the Security Council, particularly those outlined
in Chapters VI and VII of the Charter, could better
deliver on that promise, if they were fully utilized at an
earlier stage, if they were used to encourage inclusivity,
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

participation and ownership among all stakeholders in
a conflict and if they were coupled with economic and
social development, which would help to sustain peace.
For the Phillipines, a country that has witnessed
armed conflicts that have spanned many generations,
the work to attain a just and lasting peace continues. In
2014, after 40 years of conflict, the Phillipines signed
a peace agreement with the Moro Islamic Liberation
Front. The implementation of that agreement is now
the focus of our work in order to ensure that the peace
we have is durable. At the same time, peace talks have
resumed with the Communist Party of the Phillipines,
and peace negotiators are preparing for the third round
of talks later in January. The Phillipines’ decades-long
quest for peace, especially in Mindanao, has taught
us many valuable lessons on conflict prevention and
sustaining peace.
Today the Government of the Phillipines is
embarking upon a new template for peace, with the
support and assistance of our international partners. It
is one where the dividends of peace are being planted
while a peace agreement is still being negotiated.
There is greater incentive to pursue and maintain peace
when parties to a conflict see the need to safeguard
the seeds of economic and social opportunities that
are growing in their communities. It is a template that
is anchored in greater inclusivity and ownership by
all stakeholders — not only among warring factions,
but also among all those affected by the conflict, who
have an equal stake and interest in its resolution. Allow
me to share some important elements of this new
peace template.
First, our peace negotiators no longer need to
wait for formal peace agreements to be signed before
embarking upon projects for stakeholders so that they
can experience and enjoy the dividends of peace.
Development projects can be implemented alongside
peace negotiations. The envisioned Mindanao
trust fund, which the United Nations Development
Programme has been invited to support, is anchored in
that belief.
Secondly, aside from formal peace tables, we have
instituted the Peoples’ Peace Tables, which are open to
all stakeholders who are directly involved in conflict, as
well as those who are on the sidelines but are affected
just the same — women, indigenous peoples, youth,
local Government, civil society, traditional and folk
leaders, religious leaders, as well as representatives of

S/PV.7857

business and other sectors. The Peoples’ Peace Tables
allow for broader participation by people, the building
of relationships, the strengthening of institutions, and
healing and reconciliation.
Thirdly, economic empowerment remains key to
conflict prevention. Fragile communities must benefit
from socioeconomic development programmes, which
can reduce their vulnerabilities and increase their
capacity to address conflict.
The national experience of the Phillipines in
building and sustaining peace is anchored in three
complementary strategic pillars, some of which have
been pointed out by previous speakers. The first pillar
has to do with policy reform and governance, which
addresses issues of injustice relative to land security,
natural resources, identity and human rights. The second
pillar has to do with capacity-building that strengthens
Government institutions and empowers communities.
The third pillar has to do with peace-promoting
socioeconomic interventions.
In conclusion, those pillars can easily be applied
to the work of the United Nations in addressing peace
and security challenges. Our peacebuilding and
peacekeeping initiatives should promote economic
development at all stages of the peace process, uphold
inclusivity through dialogue, and strengthen policies and
governance, all while working with local Governments
and institutions in the spirit of cooperation. Peace
can be achieved and sustained if it is founded on the
aspirations and labour of the people who seek it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mali.
Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Mali congratulates Sweden on the
organization of this debate on a topic of great relevance,
namely, conflict prevention and sustainable peace. I also
congratulate the Secretary-General for his outstanding
presentation of his vision this morning on this issue.
I would like to make some comments in my
national capacity.
For too long, conflict prevention has remained
unattractive to the international community, including
our Organization, which does not find it urgent. Alarm
bells are heard only when conflicts erupt and become
more complex. The various theatres of conflict in
the world, including my own country, are edifying
examples of that.

17-0061287/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

We need to reinvigorate preventive diplomacy. That
requires greater cooperation among regional, national
and international mechanisms for prevention and
peacebuilding. It also requires good neighbourliness,
peaceful coexistence, the non-use of force, mutual
understanding and respect, enhanced international
cooperation, and a culture of peace and dialogue among
religions, regions and civilizations.
Poverty is one of the main causes of conflict in the
world. The most vulnerable groups in our societies,
particularly women, youth, children and the elderly, are
the primary victims. Extreme poverty, climate change
and despair expose young people in our countries to
terrorism, violent extremism and migration, which
has been a source of the humanitarian crisis in the
Mediterranean. And yet solutions exist.
At the national level, our States must improve
governance and create conditions and equal opportunities
for all citizens. At the international level, we need
to implement the decisions and recommendations of
the major international conferences on financing for
development, so as to reduce the effects of poverty.
Conflict prevention is needed above all, and we
must refrain from creating crises and limit military
interventions, which often go against the advice of the
countries of the region, especially when “after-sales
service” is not provided. Indeed, it has been established
by now that the military action in Libya in 2011 has
had collateral effects on Mali and all the countries of
the Sahel. Preventing conflict also means working to
strengthen the capacity of the specific mechanisms set
up by regional organizations, particularly the African
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States, which make use of early warning tools.

10/01/2017

vision on how to take the work of the United Nations on
prevention forward.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union and its
member States.
The concept paper presented by the Swedish
presidency (S/2017/6, annex) for today’s debate offers
us a valuable opportunity to consider many aspects of
prevention, including the role that it can play in ending
human suffering and reducing humanitarian needs.
The message for bringing prevention back to the fore
emerged from the United Nations reviews on peace and
security, which offered a wealth of recommendations
for the way forward, including by addressing the root
causes of armed conflicts at a much earlier stage. In that
regard, Bulgaria welcomes the important new concept
of sustaining peace, which encompasses activities
aimed at addressing the root causes, preventing the
outbreak and recurrence of armed conflicts and
moving towards recovery and development in conflictaffected countries.
Focusing greater energy on prevention also means
that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
should be part of our strategies for sustaining peace.
With that understanding, Bulgaria contributed to the
development and subsequent operationalization of the
United Nations Guidance for Effective Mediation, which
calls for a comprehensive and integrated approach that
flows through all three pillars of the United Nations:
peace and security, development and human rights.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bulgaria.

The human costs of armed conflicts can be seen
in all too many places. My country therefore feels
obliged to take upon itself a greater commitment to
implementing the new concept of sustaining peace as a
cost-effective way to find sustainable political solutions
to armed conflicts, which currently drive 80 per cent
of the global humanitarian needs. In that regard, at the
World Humanitarian Summit, Bulgaria made a set of
commitments that particularly relates to prevention
by addressing the root causes of armed conflicts,
reducing fragility in post-conflict situations and
bringing humanitarian, development and peacebuilding
efforts together.

Mr. Panayotov (Bulgaria): Bulgaria thanks
Sweden for convening this debate on a subject that is
very relevant and timely. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing outlining his

Furthermore, Bulgaria has consistently supported
the mediation capacities of the United Nations system,
including through an annual voluntary financial
contribution to the United Nations Mediation Trust

In conclusion, I would like to highlight the need for
an inclusive and global approach that takes into account
women and youth in the analysis and implementation
of conflict prevention and peacebuilding strategies.
Nobody should be left out if we want lasting peace in
the world.

88/108

17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Fund. Bearing in mind the increasing relevance of
the prevention of conflicts and sustaining peace, let
me assure the Council of my country’s readiness to
continue backing the activities of the United Nations in
maintaining international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Djibouti
Mr. Aden Moussa (Djibouti): At the outset,
Djibouti aligns itself with the statement made on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Djibouti wishes to extend a warm welcome to
Ms. Margot Wallström, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Sweden, and to express its gratitude to the Head
of Delegation for taking the lead in organizing this
important debate of the Security Council on the theme
“Conflict prevention and sustaining peace” under
the agenda item “Maintenance of international peace
and security”.
We have keenly followed the preparatory process
for today’s important open debate through the Swedishstyle digital diplomacy, which the delegation has used
as a tool for creating a conducive environment for what
we hope will be a focused, rich and action-oriented
discussion. We are also grateful for the quality of the
insights provided by previous speakers.
(spoke in French)
Albert Camus, the French thinker, described the
twentieth century as the century of fear, referring to
the terrible wars of the previous century, which led
to the birth of the United Nations. In Camus, there
was also the hope that the next century would be a
century of peace and harmony among peoples and of
development. Although much has been done to silence
the weapons, we have continued to experience a great
number of conflicts and the emergence of new threats
in the current century. The African continent in
particular continues to face complex challenges, which
are manifold. Among the most worrying are the threats
of terrorism, intra-State conflicts, unconstitutional
changes of Government, transnational organized crime
and maritime piracy. While we can easily diagnose the
problems, can we say that the solutions adopted have
been clearly identified and have produced the expected
results? The answer must be qualified.
We welcome the African Union’s efforts aimed
at developing promising instruments in partnership
with the United Nations. We particularly welcome

S/PV.7857

the effort to develop a continental framework for the
structural prevention of conflicts as a tool to facilitate
a coordinated approach to structural prevention at
the level of the African Union Commission. We also
welcome the instruments on the structural assessment
of countries, whose objective is to facilitate the early
identification of a country’s structural vulnerability to
conflict and the formulation of strategies for reducing
structural vulnerability. Thanks to those instruments,
we are confident of the continent’s ability, in partnership
with the United Nations, to significantly improve its
security situation.
While the devastating impact of conflicts on human
lives and the untold suffering that they engender is well
known, the long-term cost to regional infrastructure and
the economy is much less well known, as shown in the
recent report of the Institute for Economics and Peace.
That report, which is entirely devoted to the economic
impact of violence and conflict on the global economy,
provides an astounding estimate of the cost of conflict
and violence. For 2015 alone, the figure is $13.6 trillion,
or 13.3 per cent of the global gross domestic product. In
order to put that in perspective, one can compare that
figure with the 0.7 per cent commitment of funds for
development assistance, which is one twentieth of that
amount. That observation alone dictates the need for
us to mobilize our efforts so as to better use the tools
of preventive diplomacy at our disposal and set out in
Articles 33, 34, 35 and 99 of the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as the recommendations of the 2015
report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (see S/2015/446). The message of the new
Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, echoes those
recommendations and should give a decisive impetus to
our collective action.
Djibouti is convinced that we must invest in peace.
That is why we joined the Group of Friends of Sustaining
Peace. The policies implemented by His Excellency
Mr. Ismaël Omar Guelleh, President of the Republic of
Djibouti and Head of Government, are entirely guided
by the need to promote peace. Prevention is an ongoing
undertaking that requires constant vigilance. We
understand in Djibouti the importance of prevention
and of an appropriate response in the face of the violent
extremism, which threatens to undermine our societies.
That is the goal of the Horn and Eastern African Counter
Violent Extremism Centre of Excellence and CounterMessaging Hub, which has its headquarters in Djibouti.

17-0061289/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

In conclusion, if the past century was one of fear,
we must do all we can to ensure that this century does
not lead to the proliferation of a civilization of fear and
terror, which is the goal of terrorists. In the absence
of continued peace, we should mobilize our efforts and
invest in lasting peace throughout the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Sumah (Sierra Leone): I heartily congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of January 2017.
Let me use this momentous occasion to wish you, Sir,
a very happy new year. My delegation is thankful to
you for convening this open debate. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his valuable briefing.
Let me express the heartfelt apologies of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of the
Republic of Sierra Leone, who, owing to unavoidable
circumstances, could not be with us here today.
My delegation subscribes to the view stated in
the concept note (S/2017/6, annex) that the SecretaryGeneral is taking office at a time when our Organization
faces myriad complicated challenges to peace and
security, which makes it critical to deliver on the
commitment of the Charter of the United Nations to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war. In that
regard, the United Nations should pool its strength so as
to strengthen the analysis brought to the Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission. Adequate and predictable
financing is also a prerequisite for good governance,
mediation, country teams and the Peacebuilding Fund.
As the former Secretary-General of the United Nations,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, aptly stated,
“[t]he human costs of our failures can be seen
in all too many places ... we have the tools with
which to do better. Let us use them.” (S/2015/
PV.7561, p. 3-4)
To that end, on behalf of the Government and the
people of Sierra Leone, let me express our profound
appreciation for the continued support and interest of
the Peacebuilding Commission, the wider membership
of the United Nations and our international partners
in strengthening peace and security in Sierra Leone.
Today we have initiated a profound move in the United
Nations core mandate from peacebuilding to peace
consolidation and development. That manifests the
Organization’s strong commitment to our political and
90/108

10/01/2017

economic ambitions. On that note, I would like to use
this opportunity to extend our gratitude to the members
of the Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission through the Chair, Ambassador MarcAndré Blanchard of Canada, for the tireless commitment
and profound support that the configuration continues
to display for our efforts to sustain peace, security
and stability.
In our commitment to conflict-prevention and
sustaining peace, we have made progress in addressing
key priority areas that could trigger conflict,
particularly in the areas of youth unemployment and
empowerment, improving the justice system and the
security sector, and the effective management of our
natural resources. Mechanisms have been put in place
for strong private-sector-led growth, which could
translate into more concrete peace dividends. Sierra
Leone has over the years been commended for its
work towards the consolidation of peace and security.
The holding of three successive violence-free, fair,
transparent and credible elections signals our readiness
to evolve towards a more developed phase of conflict
prevention and peace consolidation. There is no
gainsaying that our democratic process is progressively
taking strong root.
Sierra Leone, a country that once received
peacekeepers, now contributes peacekeepers to other
countries. Our country, which was once a byword for
humanitarian crisis, was one of the fastest economies
before the outbreak of the Ebola epidemic. A country
that was rocked by armed and civil divisions has healed
itself. We are grateful to the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission of Sierra Leone and the Special Court
for Sierra Leone, and we very much appreciate the
commitment of our international friends. I am pleased
to inform the Council that remarkable progress is being
made in setting up the required structures to address the
risk areas of youth unemployment and empowerment,
good governance, the rule of law, drug trafficking and
organized crime. However, sustained international
support is still crucial if we are to fully address the
challenges that we continue to face at both the national
and the regional levels. The progress that we have
collectively made in improving peace, security and
stability provides us with a platform for rolling out the
agenda for prosperity, which is our national development
programme. It aims to build a sustainable future for all
Sierra Leoneans and primarily focuses on moving the
country beyond the phase of peace consolidation to one
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

in which it is a more secure, peaceful and responsible
member of the community of nations.
The Government of Sierra Leone is committed to
promoting national reconciliation, political dialogue
and an inclusive governance system, as well as gender
equality. The constitutional review process is in its
final stages and addresses major political and social
issues. We have taken a collective decision to move
towards becoming a middle-income nation by 2030.
Almost 15 years ago, the conflict in Sierra Leone was
officially declared over. Since the end of the war, with
the support of the United Nations, the country has made
tremendous progress in charting the path for conflict
prevention and the sustainability of peace. We have
considerably improved our national risk profile as a
post-conflict country and enjoy increased confidence
as a destination for quality investment. In March 2014,
we witnessed a significant transition in our actions
towards a democratic, peaceful, stable, developed and
prosperous country. With the closure of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone, Sierra Leone has left fragility behind.
In preventing conflict and sustaining peace, it is
important to underscore the critical need for the existence
of impartial and transparent institutions, which must
be consolidated and strengthened with strong national
ownership and inclusiveness. That will prevent relapse
into conflict and further ensure peace consolidation.
As rightly stated in the report (see S/2015/490) of the
Advisory Group of Experts on the 2015 Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture, coordination between the
Security Council and peacebuilding agencies such as
the Peacebuilding Commission is vital. There is a need
for a mutual working relationship with a much more
focused approach that seeks to utilize comparative
strengths. Equally significant is building partnerships
with regional and subregional organizations to address
transnational crime.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm Sierra Leone’s
commitment to promoting durable peace and security
within its borders, as well as addressing subregional
peace and security issues. We will continue to build
on the remarkable progress achieved in terms of the
political stability that is critical to our development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Mayong Onon (Malaysia): My delegation
joins others in commending Sweden for convening this

S/PV.7857

important debate in such a timely fashion. It offers an
important and early opportunity for Member States to
engage with Secretary-General Guterres in his areas
of priority, namely, conflict prevention and sustaining
peace. In that regard, we thank the SecretaryGeneral for outlining his vision, to which we listened
very carefully.
Malaysia aligns itself with the statements made
by the representatives of Thailand, Venezuela and
Finland on behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and
the Group of Friends of Mediation, respectively.
Malaysia reaffirms its support for the principle
that conflict prevention should lie at the heart of the
Security Council’s work and activities. Effectively
addressing the myriad challenges to international peace
and security today requires significant shifts in the
way in which the Council and the United Nations as a
whole work. We also welcome the increased emphasis
on partnerships across and beyond the United Nations
system that seek to ensure that possible responses are
more comprehensive, credible and sustainable.
Moving forward, the Security Council must
work more holistically with the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Peacebuilding Support Office and
the Peacebuilding Fund, and break through the silos
that hamper the Organization’s work. Predictable
funding is also important for sustaining peace. We
would encourage non-traditional donors and other
partners to consider making voluntary contributions
to the Peacebuilding Fund with the goal of ensuring
predictable and sustainable funding for future
peacebuilding efforts. In the light of the renewed focus
on the primacy of politics, the Security Council should
take more proactive steps aimed at acting preventively,
including by empowering its President to conduct lowkey, quiet-diplomacy dialogues with representatives of
the countries on its agenda.
Throughout Malaysia’s recently concluded term
on the Council, we saw that approach deployed, and
we believe that its more frequent use would benefit
the Council. At the very least, it would provide an
avenue for direct engagement with the countries
concerned. Timely action and proactive measures
are essential, if the Council is to effectively pursue
the conflict prevention agenda. At the same time, we
should not lose sight of the broader strategic objectives

17-0061291/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

of addressing the root causes of conflict, which may
include poverty, inequality, human rights violations
and even environmental destruction.
Malaysia believes that the Security Council remains
uniquely and centrally placed to take steps to implement
the conflict-prevention agenda. As elaborated on by
previous speakers, the Charter provides the necessary
tools; what is required is the political will and leadership
on the part of the Council to utilize and implement
them, working, of course, in close coordination and
cooperation with the Secretariat, Member States and
other partners and stakeholders.
In concluding, Malaysia renews its commitment
to work with and support the Secretary-General in the
discharge of his role and mandate, and we also pledge
to continue supporting the work of the Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Namibia.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): As this is my first address
since presenting credentials to Mr. António Guterres
yesterday, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for
the opportunity to address the Council, while at the
same time congratulating Sweden and you, Sir, on
assuming the presidency and wishing you and the new
non-permanent members of the Security Council all
the best during this tenure. Let us make this year the
year for peace, as the Secretary-General reminded us.
In congratulating Mr. Guterres on his appointment as
our new Secretary-General, may I take this opportunity
to thank him for putting peace and conflict prevention
as the priority coordinates on the compass for our work
this year.
My delegation fully aligns itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Venezuela on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The Council will recall that for many years
Namibia was a discussion point of the Security Council.
Following our independence in 1990, we are now
proud to say that Namibia is a child of international
solidarity midwifed by the United Nations. We have
gone through long and intense negotiations between the
warring parties, and those, as well as our decision now
to implement a policy of national reconciliation, have
been at the heart of our stability for the past 26 years.
Our efforts at conflict prevention have revolved around
our policy of national reconciliation and ensuring the
92/108

10/01/2017

rights of all Namibian citizens regardless of identity and
despite our awareness of the deep divisions in society.
We have not forgotten the policies of deliberate
oppression and disempowerment that resulted from
colonialism and apartheid. However, we have chosen to
celebrate our independence, embrace our freedom, and
treasure peace and harmony to solidify a prosperous
future for our children. If there is anything that we
have learned through the Namibian experience, it is
that unity and diversity are crucial to sustaining peace.
To nurture this unity, open and honest dialogue in all
societies is indispensable.
On 8 June 2014, Pope Francis said:
“Peacemaking calls for courage, much more
so than warfare. It calls for the courage […] to
say yes to respect for agreements and no to acts
of provocation”.
Conflict prevention means committing to peace
and making the deep changes needed to maintain
peace, even when uncomfortable. Here at the United
Nations, we must begin to make such deep and possibly
uncomfortable changes for peace. Our structures at the
regional, continental and global levels must be revisited
and improved upon. Since the concept note (S/2017/6,
annex) for this meeting observes that the tools for peace
and for conflict prevention are available in the United
Nations Charter, our core political solution must begin
here, at the United Nations. We must ensure that the
benefits of democratic practice become normalized
in a restructured Security Council and a revitalized
General Assembly.
The 1995 Beijing Platform for Action declared that
the full participation of women in decision-making,
conflict prevention and resolution, and all other peace
initiatives, is essential to the realization of lasting
peace. My delegation is proud that Namibia sent the
very first all-female police contingent to Darfur, and
we aim to maintain that method of operation.
Namibia fully associates itself with the African
Union and its African Peace and Security Architecture
and the related road map focused on conflict prevention,
conflict management and peacebuilding, which are all
fundamental to silencing the guns by 2020. However,
it also requires commitment to implementing the
Sustainable Development Goals, including the threat
posed by climate change to development.
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7857

Nuclear disarmament is central to conflict
prevention. But to ensure its practicality, we must begin
promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear technology,
linking safety to the use of nuclear energy and sharing
technology. Our future generations depend upon it.

However, my country, as a Member State, promotes the
principles of the Security Council of peace and unity
through diplomatic cooperation and the use of peaceful
dialogue so as to mitigate the causes and consequences
of conflicts and threats to world peace.

Finally, allow me to remind the Security Council
that Namibia continues to call for the recognition
and implementation of the inalienable right to selfdetermination of the Palestinian people. In the same
vein, I remind this House that the case of Western
Sahara remains outstanding; that this is an issue which
must be part of our discussions on conflict prevention;
and that we must ensure that United Nations resolutions
on that occupied territory are implemented forthwith.

The security challenges facing humankind today
are not exclusive to a given State, region or continent.
The rise in inter-State conflict and violence has become
a global phenomenon as conflicts have become more
complex and multidimensional.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Equatorial Guinea.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me at the outset, on behalf of our
Head of State and Government, His Excellency Obiang
Nguema Mbasogo, to express my delegation’s most
sincere congratulations on Sweden’s assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council, a task that it
is carrying in a manner that reflects its skill and great
leadership qualities.
With a view to formulating more concise
observations on the issue before us, I will focus on
Africa, where, in the context of conflict prevention
and sustainable peace, we would make a critical note
that the United Nations must recognize the need
for and implement a Security Council reform that
acknowledges, inter alia, the claim made by the African
Union in keeping with the Ezulwini consensus and the
Sirte Declaration.
Peace and security are necessary conditions for
development, growth and stability. In pursuit of its
national interests, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
strives for peace and freedom and remains firmly
committed to supporting the Security Council in its
primary role of the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Since becoming a Member of the United Nations
on 12 November 1968, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea has not had the opportunity to serve as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council. We
are striving now to achieve that goal under the principle
of equitable geographical rotation, which underpins
the legitimacy of United Nations decision-making.

To ensure that the mandate of the Security Council
is carried out in a cooperative manner, as my country’s
Permanent Representative I have held more than
100 bilateral meetings with my fellow ambassadors
and concerned stakeholders to inform them about
Equatorial Guinea, in particular its role in the Central
African subregion and Africa at large.
In pursuit of international cooperation, the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea has also worked with
intergovernmental organizations, such as the African
Union and its organs, civil-society organizations, the
Equatorial Guinean Child Aid Committee and others, in
order to achieve most of the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs). My Government is now working
tirelessly to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
many other initiatives that promote peaceful pluralism.
Equatorial Guinea’s Horizon 2020 initiative, a
national socioeconomic development framework,
demonstrates our commitment to implementing conflict
prevention and sustainable peace through economic
empowerment. Our commitment to the initiative has
yielded commendable results — we achieved five of
the eight MDGs.
The commitment of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea to sustainable peace and security is evident
in its policy of multilateralism and collective
responsibility, and is bolstered by our participation in,
and support from, intergovernmental organizations and
working groups.
Through those programmes, we continue to
build consensus and avenues for partnership through
meetings, conferences and events on social, economic,
political, health and environmental issues. We have
hosted African Union Summits, the Africa Cup of
Nations, the International Conference on Africa’s
Fight against Ebola, the UNESCO-Equatorial Guinea

17-0061293/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

International Prize for Research in the Life Sciences,
the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization’s
Food Security Programme meeting, the Southern
Africa Summit, the Africa-South America Summit, the
Turkey-Africa Cooperation Summit, the Africa-Arab
World Summit and many other events.
According to the 2016 Global Peace Index report,
the state of peace in the world is abysmal and is at
risk. The report concluded that the world has become
somewhat less peaceful, as compared to previous years.
Violence is the consequence of human conditions, and
its psychosocial effects are pervasive. Daily, we read
the headlines and witness the effects of complex and
multidimensional conflicts — images of violence,
destruction and humanitarian crises that arise from the
precarious state of security. Men, women and children
are at risk as the result of decisions taken by internal
and external political actors and institutions.
Conflict resolution requires integrated approaches
to addressing the root causes and drivers of
inter-State violence. In Africa, statistics tell us that
through partnerships with subregional, regional and
intergovernmental organizations, such as the United
Nations and its organs, African States can create
responsible public institutions capable of achieving
inclusive development and sustainable peace.
Research shows that two thirds of the Security
Council’s activities in recent years have been focused
on violence and conflict in Africa. However, Africa
is not fully represented in the governing bodies of the
United Nations and its organs, in particular the Security
Council. There are currently nine United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Africa. It is therefore
inconceivable and unjustifiable that Africa, which has
54 Member States in the United Nations and whose
problems account for more than 70 per cent of the issues
handled annually by the Security Council, does not yet
have a single permanent seat on the Council.

10/01/2017

peace and does not necessarily mean a non-democratic
Government. In the case of Equatorial Guinea, the
longevity of our leader has been a key factor for our
unity, morale and strength, and for the development of
key infrastructure and sustainable peace. Multilaterally,
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, under the leadership
of President Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, continues to
play a vital role in resolving conflicts in the region
with a view to ensuring peace and stability in Africa.
Accordingly, in the Global Peace Index report,
Equatorial Guinea is among the 10 most peaceful
countries of Africa. In addition, our literacy rate is one
of the highest in Africa, at 93 per cent and, as a result
of sound investments, my country can boast one of the
highest gross domestic products per capita in Africa.
In conclusion, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
strives to promote comprehensive structures for the
maintenance of international peace and security through
diplomacy and compromise. The virtuous qualities
and values of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea rest
on the pillars of hard work, dynamism and innovation.
In our view, the effectiveness of the United Nations
needs to be enhanced. In that regard, we recommend
that the Security Council improve the monitoring and
coordination of responses among Member States in
order to minimize the impact of conflicts and continue
to promote peace and the maintenance of peace and
security worldwide.
I once again congratulate the new members of the
Security Council and hope that their efforts will bring
the world lasting peace in 2017.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.

The failure to include African States when dealing
with issues relating to their affairs and security
creates sociopolitical and humanitarian conditions
that keep African States and institutions dependent on
insufficient and unstable foreign aid. Member States
must resist the temptation to mould other parts of the
world in their own image.

Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): We join others in
congratulating you, Sir, on the start of your two-year
term as a member of the Security Council. We also
welcome your presidency and applaud your choice
of theme for today’s open debate. This is indeed an
excellent opportunity to exchange views with the new
Secretary-General about the fundamental issue of
conflict prevention. We thank the Secretary-General
for his extensive analysis and his proposed surge in
diplomacy for peace. This subject matter is particularly
topical as we confront grave challenges to peace and
security at the global level.

Moreover, the Security Council must recognize
that longevity in leadership depends on the model of
democratization. It can contribute to the maintenance of

First of all, as a consistent supporter and promoter of
the concept and practice of conflict prevention, Armenia
particularly welcomes the focus on taking early action

94/108

17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

to prevent conflict. We must note, however, that the
issue poses a persistent challenge, as the operational
activities of the United Nations and its relevant bodies
often address conflicts as they occur — and collective
preventive action has not seen much success.
In addressing the question of prevention, Armenia
has consistently stressed the importance of synergy,
coherence and coordination among United Nations
bodies in order to sustainably achieve the mutually
reinforcing, interrelated and indivisible primary
objectives of the Organization — known as the three
pillars of peace and security, development and human
rights. In underlining the objective of achieving
tangible results, we have consistently emphasized early
prevention, as inaction gives rise to conflicts, major
humanitarian crises and, not least, atrocity crimes.
We believe that, over the years, the United Nations
and its States Members have reached the reasonable
conclusion that conflicts are detectable at a considerably
earlier phase because they are, more often than not, a
reaction to persistent injustice, discrimination and the
denial of rights — which are generally the root causes
of conflict. We speak from experience. The human
rights aspect of conflict prevention should therefore
receive particular attention across the entire United
Nations system. In other words, all human rights are a
function of security.
Secondly, the regional context of conflict
prevention requires broader recognition and support. A
division of labour and coordination and non-duplication
of efforts and activities are the building blocks for
enhancing the capacity of regional organizations to
prevent and resolve conflicts. We serve as a example of
success in applying such efforts in our region. Armenia
welcomes the support of the international community,
the United Nations and the Secretary-General for the
work of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) Minsk Group co-chairmanship,
which is seeking the peaceful resolution of the Nagorno
Karabakh conflict.
In that connection, Armenia once again draws the
attention of the international community to Azerbaijan’s
ongoing obstruction of tangible progress towards
reaching a peaceful settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh
conflict in conformity with the internationally agreed
format. Most recently, on 29 December, Azerbaijan
carried out a diversionary incursion attempt into
Armenia, which resulted in human losses. That heinous

S/PV.7857

act took place only months after its large-scale attack
on Nagorno Karabakh in the beginning of April 2016.
Through such acts, Azerbaijan continues to inflict
considerable damage on the peace process.
Furthermore, the habitual glorification of the
atrocities, beheadings and mutilations committed by the
armed forces of Azerbaijan, as witnessed most recently
during the April 2016 aggression, represent a grim
demonstration of the incapacity of the authorities of
Azerbaijan to adhere to the basic norms of the civilized
world. The perpetrators of such heinous crimes should be
brought to justice. The irresponsibility and belligerence
of the authorities of Azerbaijan should receive forceful
condemnation by the international community.
In a statement on 29 December 2016, the Foreign
Ministry of Armenia stressed that, at a time when the
most serious damage caused to the settlement process as
a result of the Azerbaijan’s aggression against Nagorno
Karabakh in April 2016 had not yet been overcome,
Baku embarked upon a new bit of adventurism, grossly
violating the agreements reached at the Vienna and St.
Petersburg summits and the commitment to settle the
issue through peaceful means. Azerbaijan has been
acting in blatant defiance of the most recent statement
of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the OSCE Minsk
Group co-Chair countries, issued in Hamburg on
8 December 2016, in which they strongly urged a strict
adherence to the 1994/1995 ceasefire agreements.
In their related statement of 9 December 2016,
the OSCE Minsk Group co-Chairs once again urged
strict observance of the agreements reached during
summits in Vienna and St. Petersburg, including the
obligations to finalize in the shortest possible time an
OSCE investigative mechanism. To date, Azerbaijan
has continued to reject the implementation of the
agreements on the expansion of the OSCE monitoring
team in the Nagorno Karabakh conflict area and the
establishment of an OSCE investigative mechanism
on the ceasefire violations. The most recent military
actions of Azerbaijan, on 29 December 2016, can only
stand as proof of its intention to deny the verification
of ceasefire violations, evade the responsibility that it
bears for those violations and sustain the escalation
of tensions.
Armenia remains fully committed to the peaceful
settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict within
the internationally agreed format of the OSCE Minsk
Group co-chairmanship and urges, as an immediate

17-0061295/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

priority, the full implementation of the agreements
reached at the Vienna and St. Petersburg summits in
May and June 2016, respectively.
In conclusion, the prevention of conflict or of
relapse into conflict also entails a change of mindset.
We strongly urge Azerbaijan to grasp the basic fact that
there is no alternative to the peaceful settlement of the
Nagorno Karabakh conflict and that there can be no
military solution to the conflict nor justification for the
human losses associated with it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): Afghanistan wishes
to thank Her Excellency Foreign Minister Margot
Wallström of the Kingdom of Sweden and her delegation
for convening today’s important debate, and we hope
that this meeting will mark the start of a new phase
in United Nations efforts to embed conflict prevention
at the core of the Organization’s peace and security
architecture. We are also particularly grateful to
Secretary-General António Guterres for his visionary
and inspiring briefing earlier today.
Toda we witnessed yet another bloody day in my
country. The Taliban committed multiple terrorist
attacks in the Kabul, Kandahar and Helmand provinces
of Afghanistan. Based on the most recent reports,
approximately 135 people, mostly civilians, including
women and children, were killed or wounded in the
carnage. Among the wounded are our Governor of
Kandahar province, the Ambassador of the United
Arab Emirates to Afghanistan and a number of other
diplomatic colleagues. We pray for those who lost
their lives and wish those who were injured a speedy
recovery. Let me thank Ms. Wallström for extending
her message of support this morning to the victims and
to the Government and the people of Afghanistan.
Today’s attacks in my country and the views
expressed in this debate illustrate in clear terms that
sustaining peace is a complex undertaking that requires
consistency across multiple lines of effort. It also
highlights that the United Nations is simultaneously
preoccupied with an unprecedented number of security
and humanitarian crises and that more focus is needed
to overcome current conflicts and prevent those of
tomorrow. A glimpse at the current international
landscape reveals that violent extremism and terrorism
feature dominantly in several conflict settings around
the world. We believe that terrorism can be defeated
96/108

10/01/2017

only through a multidimensional approach that focuses
on both its internal and its external drivers.
The United Nations Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism constitutes a key preventive tool
for addressing some of the internal drivers of violent
extremism at the societal level, above and beyond
security and military measures. However, the United
Nations must also pay greater attention to some of
the external drivers of such phenomena. The cycle of
violence and insecurity in Afghanistan and our part
of the world is inextricably linked to the presence of
sanctuaries and safe havens in the region, from which
and in which extremist groups are sustained and enjoy
an incessant flow of political, financial, material
and logistical support for the continuation of their
malicious activities.
In that light, the United Nations, and the Council in
particular, should devise a viable approach to identify
situations where elements in some State institutions
facilitate violence and extremist activities by
non-State proxies as a means to advance their foreign
policy agenda.
The sustaining peace agenda goes hand in hand
with the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
and provides a key tool by helping to prevent conditions
that may give rise to conflict and instability, such as
poverty, lack of development and dire humanitarian
conditions. Consistent with SDG Goal 16, the continued
partnership of the international community with fragile
States remains crucial for helping States to implement
their national development goals.
National dialogue, mediation and reconciliation
aimed at fostering understanding aimed at preventing
conflicts, as well as resolving them through peaceful
means, are other important components of the conflict
prevention and sustaining peace agenda. In our case,
the Government of National Unity is making every
effort to ensure lasting peace for our peoples. In that
effort, we are reaching out to reconcilable elements
within Afghan armed groups who are willing to give
up violence and embrace a new future as peaceful and
law-abiding citizens.
We are pleased that our peace efforts enjoy broad
support from regional and international partners,
which is imperative for the success of our endeavours.
Neverthless, it is imperative, whether in our case
or any other peace process, that the principles of
national leadership and ownership be fully upheld, in
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations, including the principle of respect for the
national sovereignty and territorial integrity of States.
In that context, we have expressed strong reservations
with regard to open declarations by some in our region
about their contacts with armed opposition groups
active in Afghanistan, conducted without the consent
of the Afghan Government. Let me reassert that any
kind of talks on the situation in my country has neither
any value nor legitimacy without the participation
and approval of our Government, which is the most
democratically elected Administration in the history of
our nation.
What are the additional steps required by the
Security Council and within the United Nations system
to bolster existing efforts and how can current preventive
tools be better utilized to prevent conflict and sustain
peace? The United Nations is well positioned to help
address the trust deficit associated with harmful State
rivalries, which often lead to conflict and wherein some
actors go to all lengths, including the use of violent
proxy forces, in the pursuit of political, security and
economic objectives. That phenomenon is predominant
in our region. The United Nations, and the Security
Council in particular, can play an important role in
addressing the root causes and structural drivers of
conflict, and in furthering efforts to foster mutual
trust and confidence for common gain at the national,
regional and international levels.

S/PV.7857

prevention and sustaining peace and we look forward
to working with him on its implementation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belarus.
Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus): Before today’s meeting
I had my qualms about taking part in this discussion.
What is the chance of being heard if one is number 86
on the speakers list? The consideration that tipped the
scales of my reasoning was the Swedish ownership of
today’s event. I personally owe it to the courage and
humanity of legendary Swedish diplomats — the names
of Raoul Wallenberg and Dag Hammarskjöld come to
mind first — that I could expect today’s meeting to be
more straightforward and less conventional than what
the Security Council setting might usually invite.
Call me alarmist or easily impressionable, but I
choose to believe that the creeping erosion over the
past couple of decades in the rules- and principlesbased environment of international engagement has
steadily increased the risk of an all-out global nuclear
annihilation conflict between the world’s major Powers,
be it by intent, mistake or tragic coincidence. Barring
a meaningful accord between the world’s major nuclear
Powers on their common primary responsibility for
preventing the final global war and for establishing the
collective framework for peace, all our attempts to find
lasting solutions to smaller-scale conflicts will most
likely prove to be futile.

Unity and consensus in the Council, along with
efforts to ensure justice, are imperative for conflict
prevention and sustaining peace. Far too often, a lack
of consensus in the Council has blocked the effective
action needed to avoid the exacerbation of a particular
conflict and to create fertile ground for healthy
dialogue on the peace and negotiations front. Moreover,
strengthening the United Nations early-warning system
requires greater coordination among the relevant
United Nations offices to monitor fluid and conflictprone settings in order to identify viable approaches to
averting potential crises.

The United Nations has been doing a lot of good in
the peace and security area, trying to micromanage a
system that is deregulated at the macro level. But it can
do better. We have to admit that reckless stress-testing
of the degree of endurance in the world’s sustainability
has to stop. The world has to wake up to a sobering
realization of the true degree of the fragility of our
environment — physical, social, cultural and political.
That realization will not come about through a majority
vote in the General Assembly or the Security Council.
No amount of strength or collective goodwill can, by
itself, compensate for the lack of leadership on the part
of leaders. Leaders have to lead.

In conclusion, we hope that the year 2017 will mark
the start of a new era of beneficial efforts by the United
Nations to place prevention and the sustainability of
peace at the forefront of its efforts to ensure a more
peaceful and prosperous international landscape for
humankind as a whole. We fully support the vision of
the Secretary-General, presented today, on conflict

A watershed in modern history may happen once
the world’s militarily most powerful nations publicly
agree, with regard to global security, that, for them,
there is no fork in the road, that there is no alternative
to world peace — world peace based on a collective
legal framework jointly guarded by those Powers in
good faith and to the best of their abilities.

17-0061297/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

The world is anxiously waiting to see if the recently
reborn hope for better understanding between the
world’s super-Powers can materialize. Does the premise
of the special responsibility of the leaders make other
members of the Council redundant? Not at all: elected
members of the Council do matter. But the true measure
of the value of a country’s contribution to the work of the
Council is hardly the number of statements made, side
events held or votes cast. The true measure of success
of the work of the Council is the ability of individual
members — acting in the absence of publicity, probably
unreported to the world — to create within the Council
a sense of greater moral urgency that can move the big
Powers to connect and empathize.
All of us have perfected the art of imparting to our
interlocutors what we know is right. Some of us excel
in public shaming our opponents for their wrongdoings.
Very few of us can display the courage to step back,
give others the benefit of the doubt and tone down our
rhetoric for the sake of reaching better understanding.
The world does not need the Security Council to
be yet another political theatre. The world does not
even use the Security Council much as a forum for
public speaking. Yet the world badly needs the Security
Council, defined not so much by the turning wheels of
its political machinery as by the sincere interaction of
human beings who make the most commendable effort
of reaching out to a counterpart and can master the art
of talking to and not at each other.
At the risk of inviting the wrath of the President for
breaching the sacred time limit for statements, I would
like to end with a most precious prompt for the use of
the best instrument available to humans for ending and
preventing wars and conflicts.
“Forgiveness breaks the chain of causality
because he who ‘forgives’ you — out of
love — takes upon himself the consequences of
what you have done. Forgiveness therefore always
entails a sacrifice. The price you must pay for your
own liberation through another’s sacrifice is that
you in turn must be willing to liberate in the same
way, irrespective of the consequences to yourself.”
Those words of wisdom belong to a great Swede,
the second Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Dag Hammarskjöld.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cambodia.
98/108

10/01/2017

Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): At the outset, I would like to
join previous speakers in congratulating Sweden and
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council this month and for organizing today’s
important debate.
Before delivering my national statement, I wish
to align myself with the statements made on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
I would like to take this opportunity to express my
delegation’s gratitude to Secretary-General António
Guterres for outlining his vision on global conflict
prevention and sustaining peace. Cambodia fully
supports the Secretary-General’s vision for making
2017 a year for peace, and we assure Secretary-General
Guterres of Cambodia’s full cooperation in making that
vision a reality.
The international community remains committed
to the full implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, but the global security
situation remains worrisome. The first 10 days of the
new year have been marked by numerous terrorist
attacks across the globe. Those attacks undermine the
social and economic development that the Organization
has worked so hard to achieve.
Long-standing conflicts perpetuate violence,
thereby contributing to radical thought and action.
Conflict prevention is the prerequisite for sustainable
peace and development. In order to ensure sustained
peace, the global community must address the deeprooted causes of conflict, including the negative social,
political and economic conditions that contribute to the
cycle of violence. In that context, the United Nations
and its organs, including the Security Council, have a
vital role to play. The Charter of the United Nations
outlines the Organization’s responsibility to promote
the pacific settlement of disputes, thereby bringing
about sustained peace, security and prosperity for the
world’s populations.
Accordingly, the prevention of conflict must be at
the core of the work of the United Nations, meaning
that action to curtail disputes must be taken early
and decisively. My delegation believes that, for that
to be an effective strategy, greater political will must
be exercised by all parties. Nevertheless, conflict
prevention should not be viewed through a narrow lens,
where it is limited to the maintenance of international
peace and security through military means. On the
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

contrary, the promotion of socioeconomic development
and addressing climate change should be given the
highest priority by every organ of the United Nations.
Therefore, in order to provide the necessary political
leadership so as to be able to fully capitalize on the
opportunities for preventive action, comprehensive
and purposeful international cooperation must be
promoted. The Security Council must be open to
working with the greater United Nations membership,
while remaining politically accountable and transparent
in its engagement. The views of the General Assembly,
the most representative and democratic organ within
the United Nations system, must be fully considered by
the Security Council in its work, particularly as those
views concern issues of development and its link to the
conflict-prevention agenda.
The Royal Government of Cambodia believes that,
by focusing on such a broad view of conflict prevention,
greater political will, along with strong United Nationsbased leadership, can pave the way for a safer and more
prosperous world for all. My delegation reiterates the
importance of establishing a more effective working
relationship between the Security Council and the
Secretary-General, while taking full account of the
views expressed by the broader membership of the
United Nations. The role of the Secretary-General is
undeniably important in that context, and his reports
and other documents with his recommendations should
be based on clear, accurate and verifiable data, which
will help our understanding of issues and inform
our actions accordingly, thereby contributing to
sustained peace and development globally. Enhancing
the working relationship between the Council, the
Secretary-General and the General Assembly will
promote transparency in our work while keeping the
Organization accountable to its global constituency.
In conflict prevention it is important to reject the
use, or threat of use, of force in international relations;
that principle is stated in the Charter of the United
Nations. Member States must be fully respectful of the
Charter, including the principles of sovereignty, the
territorial integrity of States, self-determination and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
The Royal Government of Cambodia stands ready
to actively engage with all its partners on the issue of
conflict prevention with a view to promoting the global
agenda for sustainable development.

S/PV.7857

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya.
Mr. Kamau (Kenya): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January. I commend you, Sir, for the manner in which
you have conducted the affairs of the Council so far. I
thank you for organizing this timely debate on conflict
prevention and sustaining peace and for providing us
with a concept note (S/2017/6/annex) to frame it.
I thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
briefing on how we can prevent conflicts so as to
achieve sustainable peace, as guided by the Charter
of the United Nations. We believe that the priorities
that he set out in his briefing, particularly on conflict
prevention and sustaining peace, will re-energize and
refocus our collective commitment towards achieving
the objectives of the Charter. We agree with the
Secretary-General that the world urgently needs a
“surge in diplomacy for peace”. Kenya stands ready to
play its role in that surge.
I also thank the previous speakers for their
insightful statements.
We believe that, in order to succeed in our goal of
sustaining peace, we need to reframe and reprioritize
our responses. Sustaining peace must run through all
our collective efforts, ranging from conflict prevention,
peacekeeping,
peacemaking,
reconstruction
to
development. And we agree with the Secretary-General
that the primary responsibility for conflict prevention
lies with Member States.
The renewed approach to sustaining peace that
the Secretary-General laid out today presents a solid
opportunity for the United Nations to adapt better to
today’s global realities. We need to reintegrate peace
in our security, development and human rights agenda.
We must place emphasis on conflict prevention and on
addressing the root causes of conflict.
We know that the United Nations peace and
security architecture has benefited from three reviews
in 2015 on peace operations. Similarly, the 2030
Agenda on Sustainable Development provides us
with a solid foundation for achieving and sustaining
peace and prosperity without leaving anyone behind.
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) provide
the basis for addressing the root causes of conflict,
including poverty.

17-0061299/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

Our strong, collective political will can help us in
achieving lasting peace only when we invest financial
and other resources in prevention. That will ensure that
we are able to build a greater common understanding of
conflicts, share early-warning information and develop
the proper analysis of potential hotspots to guide timely
early interventions.
The United Nations has an important and unique
character that reinforces its role in conflict prevention.
It is the only truly universal entity that can guide and
develop norms for guiding Member States as they
seek to react to conflicts and prevent them. But for the
United Nations to play its leadership role in conflict
prevention effectively it needs to break down the silo
mentality within its system, which undermines its
ability to prevent conflicts. We therefore agree with
the Secretary-General that United Nations responses
remain overly fragmented.
Allow me to highlight a few areas and steps that we
believe the Council can take to ensure more effective
conflict prevention among Member States and across
the United Nations system.
First, sustainable peace requires the development
of national institutions with the capacity to address
the root causes of conflict. National ownership and
inclusive leadership of such institutions are key to
achieving success in efforts to prevent conflicts and
sustain peace. In designing special political missions,
including
mediation,
peacekeeping
operations,
peacebuilding programmes and other preventative
actions, strong coordination and cooperation between
the United Nations and national authorities, based on
mutual complementarity, are vital for success. The
inclusive participation of youth and women in national
institutions is also vital to sustaining peace.
Secondly, the United Nations, including the
Council, should continue encouraging and reinforcing
mutually supportive partnerships on conflict prevention
with regional and subregional entities. Modern conflict
is increasingly intra-State in nature, with crossborder tendencies in particular regions, occasioned
by unique political and socioeconomic grievances.
Regional entities have better knowledge of their areas
of operation, including the minute details on conflict
dynamics, whereas the United Nations has unique
expertise and tools sourced at the global level to resolve
the problems we face.
100/108

10/01/2017

Thirdly, the Security Council, as the custodian of
international peace and security, needs to prioritize the
financing of conflict prevention, including through the
Peacebuilding Fund, so as to ensure that sustainable and
predictable funding is available. Flexibility in resource
mobilization and partnerships with international
financial institutions and regional development banks
are key.
Fourthly, conflict prevention is impossible without
effective early-warning mechanisms. It is essential for
the United Nations, including the Council, to assist
Member States and regional and subregional entities
to develop capacities for early-warning analysis,
information-sharing and the development of common
approaches to prevent the eruption of violent conflict.
That is normally far cheaper and more efficient in
addressing conflicts than the usual reactive tools
employed once violence has erupted.
Fifthly, it is essential to strengthen the
interlinkages relating to sustaining peace and conflict
prevention among the various United Nations entities,
including the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council. Unique
intergovernmental bodies, such as the United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission, should be strengthened
so that they can play their role in conflict prevention
and sustaining peace more effectively, while enhancing
coherence in United Nations efforts.
In conclusion, I want to state that progress in
prioritizing conflict prevention and sustaining peace
will depend upon sustaining people’s trust in political
institutions, enhancing inclusivity, justice and the
rule of law within credible national institutions and
diversifying economies through the implementation of
the SDGs in order to address the root causes of conflict.
The primacy of politics in preventing and resolving
conflicts is key to sustaining peace. The Council must
therefore continue to strive to keep all solutions to
conflict political.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Haiti.
Mr. Régis (Haiti) (spoke in French): Allow me,
first of all, on behalf of the delegation of the Republic of
Haiti, to congratulate Sweden once again for its election
to the Security Council and for taking the initiative to
organize this very important open debate, which is
based on the need to take a new look at peacekeeping,
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

that privileged tool for crisis management and
conflict prevention.
Today’s meeting is taking place within a specific
international context marked by the return of the
dynamic of war as an option for settling conflicts,
and by the threatening spectre of a new arms race,
the sustained expansion of violent extremism and
terrorism and the proliferation of crisis hotbeds where
the Council’s authority and its credibility are often put
to the test owing to its inability to provide collective
responses in accordance with its mandate. Those
crises in various parts of the world do not end and
provide a perfect example of the problem. Those crises
underline, as if it were necessary, the appropriateness
of making certain changes to the right of veto, whose
scope should clearly be limited or reduced, particularly
in situations where human rights are being brazenly
violated and where crimes amounting to crimes against
humanity and serious violations of humanitarian law
are being committed.
On another front, over the past few decades
peacekeeping operations have been undergoing genuine
qualitative changes. Many of the intra-State conflicts
that the United Nations is concerned with today occur
against a backdrop of extreme poverty. In most cases,
it is no longer simply a matter of Blue Helmets acting
as an intervention force or monitoring a ceasefire
between the belligerents. These are increasingly
multidimensional operations involved in a whole range
of interrelated actions aimed at facilitating political
processes, establishing or restoring the rule of law and
creating momentum for security, stability and peace.
For its part, my country, where the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) has been
working to stabilize it for almost 13 years, considers the
ongoing review of strategic priorities for peacekeeping
particularly timely. My delegation fully endorses a
number of the key concepts that various United Nations
bodies have put forward in recent years in the context
of conflict prevention and resolution. Those proposals,
which have not lost their relevance in the light of
current challenges, give the most weight to solutions
that take into account the root causes of conflicts and
their underlying structural factors. In that regard, I
would like to make four points.
First, we consider it crucial to ensure that the
Security Council takes the lessons of the recent past
on board by fully reclaiming the mission entrusted to

S/PV.7857

it by the Charter of the United Nations, with a view
to providing strong responses to the string of current
threats to peace and security. Secondly, we cannot
stress the virtues and advantages of conflict prevention
enough. Thirdly, when considering the spectrum of the
factors that often lead inexorably to war, whether civil,
local or regional, we must not underestimate or obscure
the underlying causes of conflict — economic poverty,
social injustice, political oppression, marginalization
and exclusion. Lastly, we should emphasize that, in
every aspect of its conflict-prevention and peacekeeping
activities, the United Nations should never shirk its
responsibilities to the peoples it is called on to protect,
including in cases of moral and material prejudice
of which it is itself the cause and in the name of the
respect for human rights standards that it is its essential
mission to promote.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to briefly sketch the most recent developments in Haiti,
which I know the Council has been monitoring and is
keenly interested in. On 3 January, Haiti’s Provisional
Electoral Council confirmed the election of Mr. Jovenel
Moïse as our new Head of State, after a vote that will
undoubtedly become a historic marker. On behalf
of my delegation, I would like to pay tribute to the
United Nations for its support, particularly through
MINUSTAH, which made an enormous contribution to
the result. Of course, we know that elections are not an
end in themselves. But the success of the municipal,
legislative and presidential contests will unquestionably
make it possible for us to turn the page on the political
instability that has so heavily mortgaged my country’s
chances of socioeconomic development.
At a time when we are embarking upon a new
course, away from the path of internal struggles and
conflicts that have done nothing but hold back our social
and economic modernization, one need hardly stress
how important strengthening international solidarity is
for us. Haiti continues to rely on the support of every
component of the United Nations to enable it to continue
with its reconstruction process and make steady progress
along the road to democracy and the rule of law, which
is the only possible path to a stable, peaceful political
system and towards growth and poverty reduction — in
other words, sustainable development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.

17-00612101/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Komada (Slovakia): I am delighted to be able
to congratulate you warmly, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council,
and to wish Sweden every success in promoting global
security and stability during its term as an elected
member of the Council for 2017 and 2018. I would also
like to join others in thanking the Secretary-General
for his briefing on how he intends to improve our peace
and security architecture’s functioning in the areas of
conflict prevention and sustaining peace.
I would like to take this opportunity to condemn
the terror attacks that took place in Afghanistan today
and to express our condolences to the families of the
victims and our wishes for a speedy recovery for the
injured. We believe that the perpetrators of such acts
must be held accountable for them.
While we align ourselves with the statement
delivered early by the observer of the European Union,
we also support the statement made by the Chair of the
Group of Friends of Mediation. I would now like to
make some observations in my national capacity.
In 2015, all the major peace and security reviews
stressed the centrality of conflict prevention to the work
of the United Nations. We believe we should consider
taking eight steps to help to implement that prevention.
First, we should increase the sensitivity to conflict
and strengthen the foundations for conflict prevention
across the whole United Nations system, so that the
Organization is in a better position to prepare and
implement preventive action and mediation in order
to address threats to international peace and security
more efficiently.
We also need continuing engagement and greater
coherence and coordination among the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council, consistent with their mandates as set
out in the Charter of the United Nations.
With regard to early warning, we should put
considerable emphasis on the importance of detecting
emerging conflicts early, in order to prevent them from
erupting in the first place. The Secretary-General
should provide the Security Council with good analysis
and correct, detailed information and advice.
Where mediation and gender equality are
concerned, we should to draw on the best available
expertise in the global community of mediators, both
men and women. By now it is a well-established fact
102/108

10/01/2017

that women’s involvement in mediation and conflict
prevention is essential rather than optional.
Strengthening and streamlining the Secretariat’s
political, strategic, analytical and deployment
capacities would benefit both the Security Council and
the wider membership.
Regarding engagement with regional organizations,
we should consider taking further steps to promote
closer operational cooperation between the United
Nations and its regional partners.
In the area of national capacities, the United
Nations should do more to help countries build their
own national capacities for conflict prevention.
Last but not least, we believe that we can arrive at
more effective measures by examining the root causes
of conflict. We encourage the Secretary-General to
propose the measures needed to improve management
and financing within the Secretariat, including
suggesting and identifying funding for strengthening
and streamlining prevention and mediation capacities.
My delegation is ready to work with the SecretaryGeneral on developing a comprehensive, modern and
effective operational peace architecture that integrates
prevention more systematically into the three pillars
of the work of the United Nations. In that context,
Slovakia stands ready to support and contribute to the
preparation and holding in September 2017 of a highlevel meeting on peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
In spite of the many successful efforts that the United
Nations has made in the past to help entire nations and
millions of people, in many situations we have either
arrived late, or were unable to intervene, or have been
prevented by subjective political interests from even
discussing the possibility of how to prevent conflicts,
despite having plenty of evidence of emerging threats.
It has been generally recognized that nationally
owned institution-building efforts are at the core
of peacebuilding. When the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2151 (2014), it
reaffirmed that reforming the security sector in postconflict environments is critical to consolidating peace
and stability; promoting poverty reduction, the rule of
law and good governance; extending legitimate State
authority; and preventing countries from relapsing
into conflict.
Slovakia, as a long-term troop-contributing country
that places strong emphasis on applying prevention
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

measures to broader multilateral concepts, stands ready
to contribute and offer its capacities and experience,
in particular in the area of security sector reform, in
collaboration with members of the Group of Friends of
Security Sector Reform, the relevant departments of
the Secretariat and external partners.
A recent report of the International Peace Institute
states that sustaining peace is “a goal and a process to
build a common vision of society”. While this process is
hard to define and harder to break down into concrete,
operational steps, we have a number of building blocks
at our disposal, including, but not limited to, greater
links between peace, development and human rights;
inclusive national ownership, where local actors have
a consistent voice and women and youth play a critical
role; and more strategic and close partnerships with
diverse stakeholders that are better utilized.
Last year, during the Secretary-General campaign,
the words “prevention” and “sustainable development”
were among those most quoted by all candidates,
and rightly so. Prevention may make it possible to
save considerable resources needed for sustainable
development, and sustainable development may prevent
conflict relapse, which is clearly a win-win situation.
Finally, another word often quoted was
“implementation”. Indeed, if we implement our
agreements under the pillars of development and
peacekeeping/peacebuilding, and support the efforts
of the Secretary-General to strengthen those pillars
within the Secretariat, we may be very well on our way
to achieving a peaceful and sustainable planet.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cyrpus.
Mr. Mavros (Cyprus): At the outset, let me express
our sincere gratitude to Sweden for convening this
open debate, as well as to commend the new SecretaryGeneral for outlining his promising vision.
Cyprus aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union and would like to add the
following in its national capacity.
With the new Secretary-General taking office, we
welcome this opportunity to re-invigorate the focus
on conflict prevention and sustaining peace. As a
country facing a long-standing conflict, with first-hand
experience on the numerous ways in which a conflict
can be detrimental, we warmly welcome the vision of
the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, to drive

S/PV.7857

forward the sustaining peace agenda, with a particular
focus on conflict prevention.
It is undeniable that the United Nations is dealing
with an unprecedented number of ongoing conflicts,
which seriously impedes the effort to allocate resources
and funds in such a way as to achieve the desired shift
towards conflict prevention. It has been well established
that the costs associated with conflict resolution,
humanitarian assistance and peacekeeping operations
can be much higher than conflict prevention. That
clearly indicates how the conflicts currently under way
also limit the capacity of the United Nations to prevent
future conflicts.
One of the key determinants of building and
sustaining peace is timely political leadership.
Therefore, it is of paramount importance that the
Council and the new Secretary-General pave the
way for much-needed consensus within the Security
Council, especially on the political track and at times
of humanitarian emergencies.
In order to achieve lasting peace, the Council
must explore ways of improving its ability to prevent
conflicts and facilitate the establishment of dialogue on
a political level, in line with the principle of nationally
owned and nationally driven political processes. It has
been stated repeatedly in this organ and beyond that
there can be no sustainable military solution to ongoing
conflicts. We would add that there can be no sustainable
peace without ensuring local inclusive ownership of the
peace process and of the eventual peace agreement. We
encourage shifting the focus to political-level dialogue.
Moreover, we believe that the role of the Council and
the Secretary-General in the framework prescribed
by the Charter of the United Nations is vital to the
accomplishment of lasting peace.
Action in conflict prevention and peacekeeping
needs to be conducted in compliance with the
principles of neutrality, objectivity and non-bias, in
line with agreed mandates. Those principles should
be applied as an integral part of the role of the United
Nations to ensure the restoration of law and order and
compliance with international law. Neutrality must
not be interpreted as the median line between legality
and illegality.
It is necessary to highlight the link between
development and security as a key determinant in
preventing conflicts and sustaining peace. Widening
gaps and increased inequalities are the yeast of

17-00612103/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

new conflicts. In that regard, a shift towards a more
all-encompassing and diverse approach to conflict
prevention is imperative, including incorporating the
basic elements of the sustaining peace agenda and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
interlinking the recommendations and proposals for
action put forward in the reports on peacekeeping
reform (see S/2015/446), the peacebuilding architecture
(see S/2015/490) and the women and peace and
security agenda.
In conclusion, there is significant political and
financial justification for a collective, United Nations
system-wide recommitment to conflict prevention.
This open debate provides a valuable opportunity for all
Member States to express their individual commitment
to the new vision of conflict prevention and sustaining
peace. Therefore, Cyprus also calls upon Security
Council members to reiterate their own commitment to
demonstrate the political will and leadership necessary
to ensure that conflict prevention and sustaining peace
can be tangible goals for the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Marshall Islands.
Ms. Kabua (Marshall Islands): The Republic of
the Marshall Islands aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Federated States
of Micronesia on behalf of the Pacific small island
developing States.
I wish to thank the delegation of Sweden for
convening this debate and to congratulate it warmly
on assuming the Security Council presidency for this
month. I also wish to extend congratulations on behalf
of my Government to the new members of the Security
Council. I wish them every success during their tenure.
Moreover, through you, Mr. President, I would also
like to convey my personal gratitude to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Sweden, Ms. Margot Wallström.
It is wonderful to have met her in person and to have
witnessed her exemplary leadership. Furthermore, I
would also like to congratulate the Secretary-General
and to thank him for taking on such a tremendous
challenge at this time.
As we begin this new calendar year, it is of
paramount importance that the Security Council be
better able to demonstrate credible and responsive
leadership. If indeed the world is at a moment where
a large question mark hangs over multilateralism, then
confidence must be strengthened.
104/108

10/01/2017

The Marshall Islands is a small nation but it is
very much a full and equal Member of the United
Nations — one whose deeper history is also marked
by the imprint of global conflict and threat. Our firm
view is that more proactive approaches are needed to
address to conflict prevention, and stronger political
will is necessary to drive it forward. That will further
build global confidence and avoid or minimize security
disasters before they occur.
We fully support the Council’s increased attention
and appropriate engagement on the role of women and
young women in conflict prevention and resolution. The
Marshall Islands affirms the Pacific Islands Forum’s
Regional Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security,
adopted in 2012, and we call for renewed efforts to
take it forward. I do not see the treatment of gender
and security as something rooted in an ideological high
ground or any particular political agenda. Rather, I
urge the Council to look at it through a very practical
lens, and consider the impacts upon, and the active role
of, half of the world’s population in addressing peace
and security.
I would call the Council’s attention to the July
2015 open debate on peace and security challenges
facing small island developing States (SIDS), which
was convened by the presidency of New Zealand (see
S/PV.7499). The debate revealed new dimensions of
security analysis across SIDS regions and it should
not be an isolated event. It is imperative that the
Council establish a regular agenda item or regularized
treatment of this topic. Small islands States make up
nearly 20 per cent of the membership of the United
Nations. Our populations are small, our water is vast,
and our location often sits between the edges of major
and often conflicting global Powers. Yet based on
the Council’s agenda, one would think that we barely
exist. However, basic math reveals that the Council is
overlooking concerning emerging trends across our
region. Long-term risks of instability are growing
and are coupled with growing youth populations and
overwhelming unemployment.
The treatment of our security cannot be considered
apart from that of much larger geostrategic interaction.
For many, including those in the Pacific, our baseline
is State fragility and we are uniquely vulnerable to
external shocks. Others might see our sovereignty and
marine resources as just a string of pearls to be collected
in a contest between the growing rivalries of major
world Powers that is fought across the Pacific Ocean.
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Our Pacific regional statement made a compelling
case for increased attention to the relationship between
climate change and security, where there are important
linkages within and across all regions. As a low-lying
nation, it is important that we understand such linkages
in the wider security and political context. We recall the
Council’s 2011 presidential statement on climate and
security (S/PRST/2011/15), which states that there are
security implications on the loss of territory for lowlying nations and the risk of aggravating certain threats
to international peace and security. Those are not words
to be ignored. They must be understood in regions like
ours where fragility is a worsening baseline.
I urge the Council in its future work not only
to strengthen engagement on conflict prevention
resolution, but also to assure that there is an agenda
item and regularized treatment of small island States.
It is unlikely that we will be at the immediate front
of conflicts, but the longer-term trend points in very
dangerous directions. If the Council is serious about
conflict prevention, then it should take to heart our
voice and that of other small island nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Sparser (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein thanks
the Swedish presidency, and in particular Foreign
Minister Wallström, for this Security Council open
debate on conflict prevention and sustaining peace.
After a year of overwhelming conflict-induced human
suffering, a discussion on how to strengthen preventive
action in the United Nations is indeed timely and
pertinent, not least in the light of the Security Council’s
difficulties in finding appropriate responses to many
of the predominant crises of our time. We also warmly
welcome the Secretary-General at his first official
appearance in the Council and thank him for outlining
his vision for a renewed emphasis on prevention, as well
as his commitment to stronger diplomacy for peace.
A close and well-functioning working relationship
between the Secretary-General and the Security
Council will be a crucial element in that regard.
Liechtenstein welcomes the shift initiated by
General Assembly resolution 70/262 and Security
Council resolution 2282 (2016) towards a more
comprehensive approach to sustaining peace that
spans the entire conflict cycle — from early warning
and action to reconciliation, reconstruction and
development — and flows through all three pillars of

S/PV.7857

the United Nations, including development and human
rights. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
reflects such a comprehensive approach, in particular in
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 16. If thoroughly
implemented, the SDGs can be a powerful prevention
tool, and the same holds for the United Nations body of
human rights obligations. At the same time, substantial
gaps in the implementation of sustainable development
commitments and consistent violations of human rights
obligations are important early warning signs that can
constitute the basis of a decision by the United Nations
to take early and preventive action.
The Security Council and the General Assembly
have both committed to a comprehensive approach to
transitional justice when reviewing the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture. Transitional justice is an
important prerequisite for consolidating peace and
preventing conflicts, and it decreases the likelihood
that post-conflict societies relapse into conflict.
Research on transitional justice has turned attention
to the possibility of using transitional justice while a
conflict is ongoing in an attempt to resolve disputes
and grievances sooner, thereby bringing the conflict to
an end more quickly. That is one of many reasons that
Liechtenstein initiated General Assembly resolution
71/248. It was in order to establish an international,
impartial and independent mechanism that will collect
and preserve evidence of the most serious crimes
committed in Syria since March 2011. In addition to
contributing to justice, the mechanism will also have a
deterrent effect.
Deterrence is a key preventive tool and one of the
main achievements of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) when it comes to preventing mass atrocities.
As the international judicial institution promoting
accountability and an end to impunity, the ICC
directly contributes to preventing the commission of
future atrocity crimes. It is also an important global
institution in the context of resolution 1325 (2000) for
its pioneering work on gender justice. By recognizing
a range of sexual and gender-based crimes experienced
by women in conflict, the ICC also acts to deter the
commission of such crimes in the future.
Membership in the Security Council is a privilege
that entails the responsibility to take action when
confronted with mass atrocity crimes in conflict
situations. The code of conduct on Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity
or war crimes, as elaborated by the Accountability,

17-00612105/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

Coherence, Transparency Group, is an expression
of the commitment that Council members will take
timely and decisive action aimed at preventing or
ending said crimes. The code of conduct is also a
pledge not to vote against a credible draft resolution
before the Security Council that is aimed at ending
or preventing the commission of genocide, crimes
against humanity or war crimes. Recent experience
in the Council shows that, unfortunately, we are still
far from realizing that vision. One hundred and twelve
Member States have signed the code, among them a
majority of Council members. Those 112 States expect
the code to be applied in practice, including on the basis
of information provided by the Secretary-General. We
therefore encourage the implementation of the code
in the Council and call on all the remaining Member
States, especially Council members and those aspiring
to become members, to join the code of conduct.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea.
Mr. Kim In Ryong (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): First of all, allow me to join previous speakers
in expressing our appreciation to Her Excellency
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sweden and His
Excellency the Secretary-General for organizing
this open debate of the Security Council on conflict
prevention and sustaining peace.
Today the role of the Security Council is important
in discharging the mission of the United Nations, which
is to maintain international peace and security. We
believe that the Security Council should be directed
towards ensuring impartiality and objectivity to
fulfil the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations with regard to the maintenance of
international peace and security. We cannot but take
this opportunity to point out the attitude of the Security
Council towards the issue of the Korean peninsula,
where an explosive situation prevails. The Korean
peninsula faces extremely aggravated tensions. Nobody
knows when a nuclear war will break out owing to the
manoeuvres of the United States and its followers to
stifle the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea with
unprecedented politico-military and economic isolation
and pressure.
Every year the United States has continued to hold
large-scale joint military exercises, escalating military
threats against the Democratic People’s Republic of
106/108

10/01/2017

Korea and bringing into the Korean peninsula all
kinds of nuclear strategic assets on the pretext of the
exercises. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
made a request on several occasions to the Security
Council to convene an emergency meeting with regard
to the aggressive and provocative large-scale joint
military exercises, which are undermining international
peace and security. Nevertheless, the Security Council
declined our request every time. On the other hand, it
takes issue with the righteous self-defence actions being
taken by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
safeguard its sovereignty, dignity and national security.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
no other choice but to arm itself with nuclear weapons.
Nevertheless, the Security Council concluded that
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea ongoing
nuclear and ballistic-related activities are a clear threat
to international peace and security, including the socalled resolution 2321 (2016), which was fabricated
most recently against the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea.
We sent letters to former Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, dated 23 May and 5 December
2016, respectively, questioning if there is any article in
international law that stipulates that nuclear tests and
satellite and ballistic missile launches constitute a threat
to international peace and security as legal grounds
for Security Council sanctions resolutions against the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. However, to
our regret, the Secretariat has only mentioned Article
39 of the Charter of the United Nations, without a single
word in response to our question in the letter dated
20 December 2016 addressed to Mr. Jeffery Feltman,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs.
Article 39 of the Charter cannot be legal grounds
for sanctions resolutions, as was already discussed
in the international law community. In 1966, when
former Rhodesia declared independence from the
British colonial regime, the Security Council adopted
a sanctions resolution invoking the Article 39 as its
legal grounds for the first time in the history of the
United Nations. In thit regard, the international law
community asserted that a declaration of independence
is not a threat to the peace or a breach of the peace and
labelled the adoption of the sanctions resolution as an
act of abuse of power. Even the writers of the Charter
of the United Nations clarified that they had drafted
Article 39 referring to an act of aggression, not to be
invoked for sanctions during times of peace.
17-00612

10/01/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

The hydrogen bomb test, nuclear warhead test and
the test firing of various strikes, which the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea conducted, including the
preparation for intercontinental ballistic missiles and
other rocket launches, are fully in line with the exercise
of the legitimate right tipulated in the Charter of the
United Nations as a self-defence measure for deterrence
in case of encroachment upon our sovereignty and the
right to survival by hostile forces.
As long as the United States and its followers
continue their nuclear threats and blackmail, and
as long as they do not stop their war games at our
doorstep, disguising them as annual events, our selfdefence capability and our capability for pre-emptive
strikes with nuclear armed forces as their pivot will be
bolstered significantly.
Finally, I hope that the Security Council will
discharge its responsibility to the international
community by strictly observing impartiality
objectively to fulfil the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations with regard to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The President: It is my understanding that two
delegations have requested the floor to make further
statements. It is my intention to accede to those
requests. However, I would ask each delegation to limit
itself to one additional statement.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Arcia Vivas (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela is grateful to the Swedish presidency
for organizing this constructive debate and the
conclusions it has brought about for the strengthening
of international peace and security. Nonetheless, our
delegation regrets the fact that we have to take the floor
once again to underscore that, unfortunately, during this
debate on conflict prevention and sustainable peace, the
delegation of Morocco, in violation of the methodology
and practice of these debates, dedicated paragraphs of
its statement to slander our country and spread untruths
and misinformation by referring to the internal situation
in Venezuela and our principled position during our
membership in the Security Council.
Those unacceptable allusions are motivated by
the fact that our country has presented before the
Security Council the undeniable facts of a topic that

S/PV.7857

affects international peace and security and which is
on the Council’s agenda and is the cause of resolutions
and debates in the General Assembly and in its
subsidiary committee — the Special Committee on
Decolonization — the question of the Western Sahara,
an issue has been awaiting for a political, definitive,
lasting and mutually acceptable solution for more than
20 years.
This unjustified attack is regrettable, but not
unusual, because it is part of the repeated strategy of
insults and attacks by the delegation of Morocco in any
authoritative United Nations body that tries to fulfil
the mandates of the Security Council and the General
Assembly with regard to the situation in Western
Sahara, which is the case with the work of the Special
Committee on Decolonization, the attacks on former
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the unilateral
expulsion of the civilian staff of the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara.
It is important to point out that Venezuela
presented in its statement today undeniable facts,
such as Morocco’s occupation of Sahraoui territory
in Western Sahara, that country’s ignoring of United
Nations resolutions and its failure to hold the selfdetermination referendum, which should have taken
place 25 years ago. However, instead of making an
argument, the Moroccan delegation adopted a rude and
aggressive attitude, which is far removed from how
it should conduct itself in the diplomatic sphere and
which we condemn.
We regret these attitudes, which do not intimidate
us, nor do they undermine the Venezuela’s position
that we should respect the principles that govern
the Organization, or our commitment to the cause
of decolonization.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): I regret
the fact that Morocco must take the floor once again at
this late hour to respond to Venezuela.
Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations, to
which all of us at the United Nations have subscribed,
confers upon the members of the Security Council the
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. In that capacity they act on behalf
of the Members of the United Nations. Unfortunately, a
country that has been a member of the Council and that

17-00612107/108

S/PV.7857

Maintenance of international peace and security

cannot purport to maintain peace and security for the
simple reason that it is a country with only one agenda,
never spoke of the great difficulties concerning its own
crisis. He focused on my country. I find myself in a
situation in which I have the obligation to respond to
what he has just said.
The people in our southern provinces are living in
peace and calm. That is not the case with regard to the

108/108

10/01/2017

people of Venezuela, who must leave their country to
find food to eat and bury their children because they do
not have medicine.
I will conclude my statement by saying that a
country that kills its own judges cannot represent
the international community and act in the name of
promoting peace and security in the world.
The meeting rose at 8.10 p.m.

17-00612
