S/2005/131*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 March 2005
English
Original: French

Letter dated 28 February 2005 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Please find enclosed herewith the text of a letter and its annex dated 8 February
2005 that I received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization.
I should be grateful if you would arrange for the text of this letter and its
annex to be circulated to the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

* Reissued for technical reasons.

05-25279* (E) 030305 040305

*0525279*

S/2005/131

Annex
Letter dated 8 February 2005 from the Secretary-General of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to the
Secretary-General
[Original: English]
In accordance with Security Council resolutions 1386 (2001) and 1510 (2003),
I attach a report on the operations of the International Security Assistance Force
covering the period from 11 August 2004 to 25 January 2005 (see enclosure). I
would appreciate your making the text of the present letter and its enclosure
available to the Security Council.
(Signed) Jaap de Hoop Scheffer

2

S/2005/131

Enclosure
Quarterly report to the United Nations on the operations of the
International Security Assistance Force
I.

Introduction
1.
In its resolution 1510 (2003), the Security Council requested the leadership of
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) to provide reports on the
implementation of its mandate. This is the fifth such report by NATO, and covers
the period from 11 August 2004 to 25 January 2005.
2.
As at 25 January 2005, ISAF total strength was 8,027 personnel from 26
NATO nations plus 268 personnel from 10 non-NATO nations. Overall troop figures
fluctuated during the reporting period, reaching a total of approximately 9,000 at the
end of 2004 owing to the presence of election support forces.
3.
The successful holding of presidential elections has resulted in the naming of a
new Government, with the announcement of the cabinet made on 23 December 2004.
The main challenges facing the new Government will be the coordination of policies
between ministries, implementing President Karzai’s ambitious agenda and preparing
for upcoming parliamentary, provincial and district elections. On 30 December 2004,
President Karzai issued a notice to recruit deputy ministers, directors of independent
directorates and heads of governmental organizations.
4.
ISAF continues to expand its mandate to provide a secure environment and
assist in the reconstruction of the country. Since August, ISAF has taken over new
provincial reconstruction teams at Pol-e-Khumri and Feyzabad. Germany completed
bilateral agreements with Denmark and the Czech Republic to provide troops for the
Feyzabad provincial reconstruction team and another bilateral agreement with
Croatia which will bring a Croat contribution of a long-term civil cooperation
component to the German provincial reconstruction team. NATO also has continued
its role in running Kabul Afghanistan International Airport (KAIA), with the
expected handover from Iceland to Turkey due to take place on 31 January.
5.
Transition between Headquarters ISAF VI and Headquarters ISAF VII is to
take place in February at a change-of-command ceremony in Kabul.

II.

Security situation
Security in the ISAF areas of operation
6.
The overall security situation in Kabul and its environs over the reporting
period has been relatively calm but unstable, with continual warnings of attacks
against ISAF, coalition forces and the Afghan Government. There have been several
isolated attacks which caused relatively minor damage and casualties. On
11 October, two rocket attacks occurred in Kabul hitting the Afghan National Army
(ANA) garrison adjacent to ISAF Headquarters. On 23 October, a suicide bomber
detonated three grenades as three ISAF vehicles from KAIA passed by. As a result
two ISAF personnel sustained minor injuries and one was more seriously injured.
On 29 October, two civilians opened fire using small arms against an ISAF patrol.

3

S/2005/131

7.
In Area North, there is a continued presence of militant forces in the Konduz
and Balkh Provinces and of local commanders who oppose the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process and are involved in illegal activities. In
terms of the overall security situation, a number of incidents occurred during the
presidential election period.
8.
On 29 September, there was a rocket attack on the German provincial
reconstruction team in Konduz which injured four ISAF personnel (one of whose
injuries were considered serious). On 7 September, there was a demonstration
against non-governmental organizations in Feyzabad. Although the evacuation
operation did not actually take place, the local provincial reconstruction team was
preparing to airlift 25 non-governmental organizations personnel to safety using
German helicopters. On 6 October, a bomb exploded in Feyzabad, targeting an ally
of President Karzai, Ahmad Zia Massoud. On 26 November, a German patrol
comprising two vehicles of the Konduz provincial reconstruction team was the
victim of an explosion, which caused slight injuries to three German soldiers and
damage to one of the vehicles. On 20 January, a suicide attack was carried out
against General Dostum in Sheberghan. General Dostum escaped unharmed
although 1 body guard was killed and 21 people were injured. A Taliban spokesman
claimed responsibility for the attack and General Dostum requested ISAF and
coalition support in investigating the attack.
9.
Italy has confirmed its intention to deploy personnel to the provincial
reconstruction team in Herat. On 20 January, an advance planning team of 7
personnel was deployed followed by a further 42 personnel in February.
10. ISAF has monitored the hajj and has provided security support in that context.
Outbound movements of 26,000 Afghan pilgrims to Saudi Arabia occurred without
incident. Key airports of debarkation for mass pilgrim movements were KAIA,
Mazar-e-Sharif, Herat and Kandahar.

III.

Support for the Afghan Transitional Authority and to the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
Presidential elections
11. The threat from opposing militant forces who wanted to derail the electoral
process failed to materialize. Small-scale attacks did occur, although none resulted
in serious consequences. ISAF provided enhanced area security and support through
the deployment of an additional 2,000 personnel. Provincial reconstruction teams
were also reinforced with additional troops and capabilities. Quick-reaction forces,
operational reserve troops and NATO air presence contributed to this enhanced
security.
12. During the election period, ISAF participated in the Afghan electoral
management structure with planners embedded in the Strategic Security Group,
Election Information Group and Electoral Security Operation Centre. ISAF also
provided limited support to international observers from the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the European Union.
13. Limited logistical support was also provided to the Joint Electoral
Management Body (JEMB), which has now transitioned to the Independent Election
Commission, set up to prepare for parliamentary elections anticipated in May 2005.

4

S/2005/131

The nine Commission members were appointed by President Karzai in an ethnically
balanced proportion. ISAF support for JEMB included handling of incoming
election material from Europe at KAIA and providing a number of flights between
Kabul and Pakistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran to move ballot papers of
Afghanis in refugee camps.
14. Prior to the presidential inauguration ceremony on 7 December, ISAF assisted
in demining operations around the presidential palace. Additional ISAF support
around this event included closure of KAIA to all civilian traffic and vehicle
movement restrictions in Kabul.
Support for security sector reforms
15. The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process is expected to be
completed by June 2005. The latest figures show that a total of 34,284 military
personnel have handed over their weapons. The ISAF heavy weapons cantonment
initiative, although not strictly speaking a part of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process, has proved successful, as 8,114 items of heavy weaponry
have been collected and placed in secure compounds. The last remaining significant
area containing heavy weapons is in the Panjshir Valley, where a small ISAF
detachment is providing assistance.
16. ISAF is increasing its training and development activities in terms of support
for ANA using a mentoring role to develop ANA headquarters. ANA has made
significant progress and in terms of recruiting, training and fielding of units, the
security sector reform process has exceeded its objectives. Seventeen ANA
battalions, or Kandaks, have been reorganized into one corps with three brigades.
17. As mentioned in the previous report (S/2004/785, annex, enclosure), current
reforms of the judicial system have been only marginally successful, which suggests
that greater coordination and involvement by the international community is
required. The ISAF legal office aims to organize, in coordination with the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, legal training sessions for Afghani
administrative and judicial personnel.
Civil-military cooperation
18. ISAF civil-military cooperation has begun to shift its focus from quickreaction projects and short-term assessments to a more long-term vision aimed at
meeting the requirements of the Afghan national priority programme and
harmonizing the activities of the international community and ISAF.
19. Improving the civil administration remains the first priority. ISAF is helping to
identify actual needs, promote the use of respective functional specialists, monitor
ongoing projects and act as a mediator for training and funding issues. A dialogue is
also maintained with the World Bank and the European Commission to provide
support for civil-military cooperation within the Afghan stabilization programme.
20. The United States-led counter-narcotics strategy meeting took place in January
2005 with representatives from ISAF and Joint Force Commander Brunsum in
attendance, as well as the Afghan authorities and the international community. The
aim is to provide a two- to three-year plan for counter narcotics measures.

5

S/2005/131

Kabul Afghanistan International Airport
21. ISAF is currently running KAIA. The long-term objective is the management
and operation of the airport to be transferred to the Afghan authorities. At the
meeting of the Clearing House on 19 January, chaired by the NATO international
staff, representatives from the international community and the afghan authorities
reviewed Steering Committee activities related to KAIA rehabilitation. The Clearing
House renewed the commitment of the international community to support the
Afghan Government in civil aviation.

IV.

Conclusion
22. Factional fighting in the northern region will remain a problem if the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process is not afforded its required
structure. Sporadic and isolated attacks against local authorities, Afghan security
forces and ISAF are likely to continue.
23. ISAF has provided security support to the Afghan Government and made a
significant contribution to the successful holding of presidential elections and the
subsequent inauguration of President Karzai. The provincial reconstruction teams
proved to be a valuable tool in supporting the United Nations and other international
organizations (governmental and non-governmental organizations) during the
electoral process. NATO has committed itself to providing similar support for the
spring electoral process.
24. ISAF has continued to fulfil its United Nations mandate to support the Afghan
Government in setting up a secure and safe environment within its area of
operations, in addition to conducting framework security operations, ISAF continues
to execute a supporting role in the security sector reform, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and associated heavy weapons cantonment.
25. Coordination between the coalition and governmental and non-governmental
agencies continues to improve to provide a synergy of purpose in creating a safe
environment suitable for the reconstruction of Afghanistan.

6
