Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

3. Invites also the Secretary-General and the executive heads of the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency to submit within the
same period their written comments and observations
on the said draft articles;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate, befare the twenty-seventh session of the General Assembly, the comments and observations submitted in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3 above;
5. Expresses its desire that an international convention be elaborated and concluded expeditiously on
the basis of the draft articles adopted by the International Law Commission and in the light of the comments and observations submitted in accordance with
paragraphs 2 and 3 above;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-seventh session an item entitled "Representation of States in their relations with international organizations";

111
l. Requests the Secretary-General to invite comments from Member States befare 1 April 1972 on the
question of the protection of diplomats and to transmit
them to the International Law Commission at its
twenty-fourth session;
2. Requests the International Law Commission to
study as soon as possible, in the light of the comments
of Member States, the question of the protection and
inviolability of diplomatic agents and other persons
entitled to special protection under international law,
with a view to preparing a set of draft articles dealing
with offences committed against diplomats and other
persons entitled to special protection under international law for submission to the General Assembly at
the earliest date which the Commission considers appropriate.
1999th plenary meeting,
3 December 1971.
2781 (XXVI). Report of the Special Committee
on the Question of Defining Aggression

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression on the
work of its session held in New York from 1 February
to 5 March 1971,9
Taking note of the progress made by the Special
Committee in its consideration of the question of
defining aggression and on the draft definition, as
reflected in the report of the Special Committee,
Considering that it was not possible for the Special
Committee to complete its task at its session held in
1971,
Considering that in its resolutions 2330 (XXII)
of 18 December 1967, 2420 (XXIII) of 18 December
1968, 2549 (XXIV) of 12 December 1969 and 2644
(XXV) of 25 November 1970 the General Assembly
recognized the widespread conviction of the need to
expedite the definition of aggression,
Considering the urgency of bringing the work of the
Special Committee to a successful conclusion and the
9 Of]icial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/8419).

137

desirability of achieving the definition of aggression as
soon as possible,
Noting also the common desire of the members of
the Special Committee to continue their work on the
basis of the results achieved and to arrive at a draft
definition,
I. Decides that the Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression shall resume its work, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 2330
(XXII), as carly as possiblc in 1972;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with the necessary facilities and
services;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-seventh session an item entitled "Report of
the Special Committee on the Question of Defining
Aggression".
1999th plenary meeting,
3 December 1971.
2818 (XXVI). Review of the role of the International Court of Justice

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the International Court of Justice is
the principal judicial organ of the United Nations,
Recalling further that, in accordance with Article 2,
paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations,
all Members shall settle their international disputes
by peaceful means in such a manner that international
peace and security, and justice, are not endangered,
Emphasizing that, in conformity with that principle,
as solemnly proclaimed in the Declaration on Principies of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, judicial settlement is one of the means to which States can have
recourse in seeking a just settlement of their disputes,
Considering the desirability of finding ways and
means of enhancing the effectiveness of the Court,
Noting that the Court has undertaken a revision of
its Rules,
Having noted the report of the Secretary-General1 º
containing the replies received from certain Member
States and from Switzerland to the questionnaire prepared in accordance with General Assembly resolution
2723 (XXV) of 15 December 1970 and the text of
the letter addressed to the Secretary-General by the
President of the Court,
l. Invites Member States and States parties to the
Statute of the International Court of Justice which
have not yet been able to do so to transmit to the
Secretary-General, by 1 July 1972, their comments on
the questionnaire prepared in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 2723 (XXV);
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit those
comments to the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh
session;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General to transmit
to the Court the above-mentioned report, 10 together
with the summary records of the discussions held in
the Sixth Committee on this subject at the twenty-sixth
session;
10 A/8382 and Add.1-4.

138

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

4. Invites the Court to submit its views on the
matter if it so desires;
5. Expresses the hope that the Court will complete
the revision of its Rules as soon as possible;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-seventh session an item entitled "Review of
the role of the Intemational Court of Justice".
2019th plenary meeting,
15 December 1971.
2819 (XXVI). Security of missions accredited to
the United Nations and safety of their personnel and establishment of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Security of missions accredited to the United Nations and safety of
their personnel" and the report of the Secretary-General
on the work of the Informal Joint Committee on Host
Country Relations, 11
Drawing attention to its resolution 2747 (XXV)
of 17 December 1970, in which it urges the Govemment of the host country to malee certain that the
measures talcen to ensure the protection and security
of diplomatic missions and their diplomatic personnel
are adequate to enable permanent missions to the
United Nations to perform properly the functions
entrusted to them by their Governments,
Expressing its gratitude to the Secretary-General for
bis valuable contribution to the work of the Informal
Joint Committee on Host Country Relations,
N oting with extreme concern the illegal acts of individuals or groups against the inviolability of various
missions accredited to the United Nations involving the
commission and the repetition of violent and other
criminal acts, including in sorne cases the use of bombs
or firearms, against their premises and the residences
of their personnel and also the assaults, the uttering of
threats and insults against such personnel, and picketing
accompanied by violence,
Expressing its deep sympathy with the missions and
their personnel that have become the victims of such
acts,
Recalling the responsibilities of the Govemment of
the host country with respect to the United Nations and
missions accredited to it and their personnel under the
Agreement between the United Nations and the United
States of America regarding the Headquarters of the
United Nations, the Convention on the Privileges and
Im.munities of the United Nations and general international law,
T aking into account the profound concem expressed
by representatives of States at the twenty-sixth session
of the General Assembly over the perpetration and
repetition of violent and increasingly dangerous attacks
against the premises of certain missions accredited to
the United Nations, and also over the repeated threats
and the hostile and intimidating acts against the personnel of these missions, which indicates a deterioration in the security of missions and the safety of their
personnel,
11 A/8474.

Considering that the problems related to the privileges and immunities of the United N ations and to the
status of the diplomatic missions accredited to it are
of mutual concem to Member States, including the host
country, as weil as to the Secretary-General,

1. Strongly condemns the acts of violence and other
criminal acts against the premises of certain missions
accredited to the United Nations and against their
personnel as being flagrantly :incompatible with their
status under intemational law;
2. Urges that the Govemment of the United States
of America, the host country of the United Nations,
should talce ali requisite measures to ensure, in conformity with its international obligations, the protection and security of the United Nations Headquarters,
of the missions accredited to it and of their personnel,
thereby ensuring normal conditions for the performance
of their functions;
3. Calls upan the Governrnent of the United States
of America, in consultation with the Secretary-General,
to talce ali possible measures, including the use of
information and publicity, to ensure a favourable
atmosphere for the normal functioning of the United
N ations and the missions accredited to it;
4. Notes with appreciation the assurances given by
the representative of the host country that it will
intensify in a diligent and energetic manner its efforts to
strengthen the protection and safety of the missions
accredited to the United Nations and their personnel;
5. Decides to establish a Committee on Relations
with the Host Country, composed of the host country
and fourteen Member States to be chosen by the
President of the General Assembly in consultation with
regional groups and taking into consideration equitable
geographic representation thereon;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to participate
acti.vely in the work of the Committee on Relations
with the Host Country with a view to ensuring the
representation of the interests concerned;
7. Instructs the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country to <leal with the question of the security
of missions and the safety of their personnel, as well
as all the categories of issues previously considered by
the Informal Joint Committee on Host Country Relations; the Committee is authorized to study the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United
Nations and shall consider, and aclvise the host country
on, issues arising in connexion with the implementation of the Agreement between the United Nations and
the United States of America regarding the Headquarters of the United Nati.ons;
8. Authorizes the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country to have summary records of its meetings
and to convene on a periodic basis and whenever it
is convoked by its Chairman at the request of any
State Member of the United Nations or the SecretaryGeneral;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to solicit the
views of Member States with respect to the measures
needed to ensure the future security of missions and
the safety of their personnel and to transmit such replies
to the Committee on Relations with the Host Country;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to bring to the
attention of the Committee on Relations with the Host
