S/PV.7414

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7414th meeting

Wednesday, 25 March 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Haniff
Mr. McLay
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Children and armed conflict
Child victims of non-State armed groups
Letter dated 6 March 2015 from the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral (S/2015/168)

15-08365 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1508365*

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Children and armed conflict
Child victims of non-State armed groups
Letter dated 6 March 2015 from the
Permanent Representative of France to the
Secretary-General (S/2015/168)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance with
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Albania,
Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Belgium, Benin, Botswana, Brazil, Burundi, Cambodia,
Canada, Colombia, Croatia, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Egypt, Estonia, Germany, Guatemala,
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Mali,
Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, the Netherlands,
Pakistan, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine,
Uruguay and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict; Ms. Yoka
Brandt, Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF; Ms. Julie
Bodin, Child Protection Technical Advisor, Save the
Children International in the Central African Republic;
and Mr. Junior Nzita, President of Paix pour l’enfance.
We sincerely thank them all.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
individuals to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations; His
Excellency Mr. Stephen Evans, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Operations of NATO; and His Excellency
Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the meeting, in accordance

2/94

25/03/2015

with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2015/168, which contains a letter dated 6 March 2015
from the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,
transmitting a concept paper on the item under
consideration.
I warmly welcome the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and I now give him the
floor.
The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I thank
the delegation of France for having organized this
important debate, which is being held at an appopriate
moment. The world’s children are increasingly under
threat in theatres of war. Last year seems to have been
one of the worst ever for children in areas affected by
conflict. An estimated 230 million children live in
countries and areas where armed groups are fighting.
Up to 15 million children were directly affected by
the violence. The perpetrators of violations against
children in armed conflict are increasingly diverse and
brutal. It is our responsibility to bring these issues into
the spotlight for discussion and action.
I would like to acknowledge the presence with us
today of Mr. Junior Nzita Nsuami, a former child soldier
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Junior’s
example teaches us that, with appropriate assistance, a
chance at education and continued support, it is possible
to overcome the violence of a childhood spent fighting
an adult war. Junior now dedicates his life to helping
underprivileged children in Kinshasa, and his goal is to
build a better future for them and for his country.
(spoke in English)
Globally, in conflict situations the main perpetrators
of grave violations against children are armed groups.

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

These groups constitute the vast majority of parties
listed in the annexes of my annual report on children
and armed conflict. Since I last addressed the Council
on this issue one year ago (see S/PV.7129), hundreds
of thousands more children have been confronted with
the emergence or intensification of conflict, and have
endured new and grave threats posed by armed groups.
Sadly, this includes some of the worst human rights
violations a child can experience, including death,
injury, imprisonment and torture, sexual abuse, forced
recruitment and abduction. There is rarely anyone to
hear their protests or advocate for their rights. The rise
of violent extremism in conflict areas is particularly
disturbing.
The tactics of groups such as Daesh and Boko
Haram make little distinction between civilians and
combatants. These groups not only constitute a threat
to international peace and security, but often target
girls and boys. No cause can justify such acts. Children
have the right to be protected in their schools, in
their homes and in their communities. Increasingly,
children are snatched from a normal life of school
and family, abducted by armed groups and thrown
into a life of violence and horror. From north-eastern
Nigeria to Iraq, from South Sudan to Syria, we have
witnessed a wave of such abductions used to terrorize
and humiliate entire communities. How can we forget
the images of the girls from Chibok, stolen from their
school dormitory and still missing? Our agencies on the
ground tell us that they are verifying more and more
cases of child abductions. That is why I urge Member
States to work with us to strengthen our prevention and
response mechanisms.
We agree that we cannot tolerate a world in
which children are killed and maimed, where they are
abducted, subject to sexual violence, forced to become
soldiers, and where schools and hospitals are attacked.
That is why we engage not just with Governments but
also with armed groups to stop grave violations against
children. My Special Representative has worked with
many such groups, and will work with more, to ensure
that we are doing our utmost to protect children in these
most difficult environments.
The resolutions adopted by the Council over the
past 16 years have built a solid framework and given us
tools to better engage with Governments and non-State
actors not only to end but also to prevent these violations.
We have seen concrete outcomes of our efforts that
have translated into thousands of children now going to

S/PV.7414

school instead of battle, and playing in fields instead of
fighting on them. By protecting children, we contribute
to building durable peace and to helping countries reach
their full potential. But we must act collectively, and
expeditiously. I call on the international community to
continue supporting this work and this mandate, and to
always ensure that the children’s best interests are at
the heart of any response we undertake.
Allow me to end on a positive note. I would like
to take this opportunity to commend my Special
Representative and UNICEF for their campaign
“Children Not Soldiers”, which they launched a
year ago to end the recruitment and use of children
by Government forces by 2016. The progress they
have accomplished to date is encouraging. With the
support of the United Nations, Chad completed all
the requirements to make its army child-free. Six of
the seven countries involved in the campaign are now
engaged with the United Nations to end and prevent
the recruitment of children in their security forces, and
some of them are making commendable progress. That
would have been unthinkable just a few years ago, but
we still have a long road ahead of us to transform those
commitments into reality for thousands of children.
I count on all the members of the Security Council,
the members of the international community and
all stakeholders to assist in those efforts wherever
possible. The children of the world should be students,
not soldiers. They deserve to grow up in communities
that offer them safety and a chance to reach their full
potential. Those are fundament rights of all children,
not aspirations. Member States have the obligation to
take all the necessary measures to fulfil them.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Zerrougi.
Ms. Zerrougi (spoke in French): Let me first thank
France for organizing this open debate on the plight of
children in armed conflict, and for its continued support
for my mandate. I am delighted that the Security Council
continues to consider the issue of children affected by
armed conflict as a priority.
However, I find it regrettable that, in spite of the
consensus and our combined efforts to spare children
the horrors of war, we are faced with new challenges
every year. At the beginning of 2015, it is the violence
of armed groups and the brutality with which they treat

15-083653/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

children that pose our major challenge. That is the case
in Syria, Iraq and Nigeria, but also in other countries.
Recurring conflicts have intensified, and the growth of
armed groups is taking on alarming proportions. The
members of the Council have just returned from the
Central African Republic, where thousands of children
continue to be associated with armed groups. The
challenges to protecting them certainly did not escape
the Council. Today’s debate is for all those children, for
we must continue our efforts and adapt our response to
the enormous challenges that face us.
As the Secretary-General reminded us, armed
groups constitute the vast majority of perpetrators
of violations against children. They make up 51 of
the 59 actors listed in the annexes to the reports of
the Secretary-General on the situation of children
in armed conflict. As he also just mentioned, armed
groups professing extremist ideologies seize large
areas, erase borders, use increasingly brutal tactics and
take advantage of modern communication technologies
as part of their recruitment campaigns as well as to
illustrate their brutality. As evidenced by the actions of
Daesh and Boko Haram, mass abduction of women and
children is becoming a tactic of war routinely used to
terrorize, humiliate and subjugate entire communities.
Abducted children are also used for recruitment
purposes and to carry out all sorts of tasks, including
acting as human shields and using little girls to commit
suicide attacks. The abduction of children has always
been a component of conflicts, and we report annually
to the Council on such violations. However, mass
kidnappings have increased in several conflict zones.
That is why I call on the Council to give its full attention
to this disturbing phenomenon.
Schools and hospitals are not spared, as evidenced
by the recurrent attacks by Boko Haram and the
attack last December by Tahrik-i-Taliban on school in
Peshawar, in which 132 children were massacred and
133 injured. But schools are not only attacked in order
to kill, they are also to indoctrinate and radicalize
future generations.
In virtually every conflict situation, girl victims
too often remain in the shadows. They suffer the same
abuse as boys, but also the violence that affects simply
for being girls. They are raped, “married” to armed
groups or forced into sexual slavery. Their right to
education is denied. While progress has been made,
much remains to be done to effectively address the

4/94

25/03/2015

challenges and complexity of the situations faced by
girls.
It is important to remember that it is possible to
engage in constructive dialogue with armed groups,
although such groups are not a homogeneous. Their
structure, claims and aspirations are diverse. Access
and communication with them are not always easy.
As part of my mandate, I try to favour an approach
that takes into account the context and uses every
opportunity possible for engagement.
As we commemorate the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1612 (2005), I want to emphasize that the tools
adopted by the Council have shown their effectiveness.
The majority of the 23 action plans signed so far has
been with armed groups. Other dialogue processes are
under way. The United Nations and other stakeholders
from civil society are also engaged on the ground to
stop the violations and negotiate the release of children.
That is the case particularly in South Sudan, where
the David Yau Yau armed group recently released and
handed over more than 1,300 children to national and
international child protection personnel. In the Central
African Republic and in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, United Nations awareness-raising activities
with armed groups led to the release nearly 4,000
children in 2014. In Darfur, an ongoing commitment on
the part of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur has led some groups to take
concrete measures to end the recruitment and use of
children. It is also the case in Mali, where the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission has been given a commitment by the National
Movement for the Liberation of Azawad and and other
armed groups to stop violations against children.
Mediation and peace processes represent an entry
point for securing firm commitments from the parties
to halt and prevent violations. That was possible both
in the Central African Republic with the Brazzaville
agreement, as well as in the context of the peace
process in the Philippines. However, we need to ensure
that child protection is part of coherent and systematic
negotiations and that it be reflected in any peace
agreement. I ask for the support of the Council and all
partners in including child protection as essential for
building a lasting peace.
For armed groups unreceptive to a dialogue with
the United Nations, it is imperative to identify and
activate the pressure means that each of us can use

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

to get them to stop violations against children. A
multidimensional approach is needed. In addition
to military pressure, which is beneficial in some
situations, we must not overlook the importance of legal
pressure and sanctions. But to achieve that we must
work to strengthen the national judicial response and
international cooperation in criminal matters. Those
tools are essential to combatting impunity, terrorism
and transnational organized crime.
The initiatives taken by States and the entire
international community to address the threat that
extremist groups pose to international peace and security
are needed, but we need to ensure that such measures
do not create new risks for children. The answer,
therefore, as the Council has often reminded — and I
thank it for that — must be conducted in compliance
with international humanitarian, refugee and human
rights law. The measures taken to combat these groups
should be well supervised to prevent violations and the
stigmatization of entire communities.
That is all the more important given the fact that
militias are often associated with the fight against
terrorism. The response must also address the root
causes that have led to the emergence of these groups.
That is the only way to isolate them, delegitimize their
speech and rally the support of the people.
Furthermore, it is not uncommon for children
involved in or suspected of association with armed
groups are arrested and detained, sometimes in
deplorable conditions and without charge or trial. When
they are charged, they are brought before special or
military courts, which deprives them of their right to
impartial justice or any kind of reparations and does
not take into account their status as minors. Children
associated with armed groups are first and foremost
victims, victims of these groups and of our inability
to ensure their protection. I would like to take this
opportunity to plead in their favour.
The successful reintegration of children from
armed groups is an essential component of sustainable
peace. It is also a tool for preventing the recruitment of
children. Nevertheless, is not always easy to develop
and support programmes that are well adapted to the
needs of children and communities where opportunities
are limited. New challenges can be seen with regard to
the reintegration of children associated with extremist
groups, who have been exposed to their violence and
indoctrinated by a radical ideology. The impact of

S/PV.7414

their association with such these groups can mark
them for life. Their reintegration requires structured
programmes that are specially adapted for their needs.
That is why I call for the Council’s support for such
programme, which are essential to rebuilding the future
of these children and their communities.
The campaign “Children, Not Soldiers” is a little
more than a year old now. It was launched jointly with
UNICEF and aims, as the Secretary-General pointed
out, to put an end to the recruitment and use of children
by Government armed forces in conflict by the end of
2016. The Council’s support has enabled us to make
significant progress. However, a little less than two
years away from that deadline, a tremendous amount
of work remains to be done. The conflicts in South
Sudan and in Yemen remind us that the progress made
can be reversed and give rise to new challenges. It is
essential that we learn lessons from these crises and
work with all our partners to build on what has been
achieved and ensure that the measures put in place are
institutionalized and sustained.
I should like to stress that the majority of the armed
groups mentioned by the Secretary-General operate in
the countries covered by the campaign. To put an end
to and prevent the recruitment of children in national
armed and security forces also requires that measures
be put in place that will help these Governments and
the international community address the violations
committed by non-State actors against children.
In conclusion, I urge the Council to continue its
efforts and use all of the tools at its disposal to protect
children affected by armed conflicts. Its mobilization
and support are indispensable in order to address new
challenges and better protect children.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Zerrougui for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Brandt.
Ms. Brandt: Let me start by thanking the SecretaryGeneral for his leadership and support; Special
Representative Leila Zerrougui for her relentless
efforts to protect children in the midst of conflict
and instability; France for using its leadership of the
Security Council to shine a light on the continued crisis
of children trapped by conflict; Malaysia, as Chair of
the Security Council’s Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict; Julie Bodin of Save the Children, an
essential partner for UNICEF in addressing the issue of

15-083655/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

the recruitment and use of children; and Junior Nzita
Nsuami, President of Paix pour l’enfance.
Last year, in 2014, the world celebrated the twentyfifth anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. And yet, in so many countries around the world,
as the Secretary-General just pointed out, 2014 was the
worst year in which to be a child.
This year, we celebrate the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1612 (2005), which established the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, and the eighth
anniversary of the Paris Principles, now endorsed by
105 States. And yet this year, the world’s youngest
citizens in Iraq, Syria, South Sudan, Nigeria, Mali and
the Central African Republic are still being recruited
into armed groups, used, orphaned, killed — their lives
stolen, their innocence lost.
When a boy is abducted from his village and made
to fight; when a girl is taken from her family, exploited
and abused; when children are targeted because of
their ethnicity or religion; and when a child witnesses
massacres and sees the worst of humanity, rather than
the best, we are rightfully outraged.
But our outrage is not enough. Our outrage must
be matched by action to end and prevent all grave
violations of child rights, by making abduction a trigger
for the listing of parties to conflict in the SecretaryGeneral’s report on children and armed conflict, by
encouraging more States to endorse the Paris Principles
and by working directly with all parties to release and
integrate children, and by working on measures such as
age verification, screening and improved monitoring to
prevent such things from happening.
Yes, we are seeing some signs of success. Recently,
as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
just stated, about 3,000 children were released from the
Cobra faction in South Sudan, and we hope that more
will be released soon, as the process is still ongoing.
But being released is only a first step. Imagine the
struggles such children face when they return to their
communities: their psychological wounds, the pain
and stigmatization they live with, the mistrust in their
neighbours’ eyes.
Consider the more than 140 Kurdish children
abducted by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
in Aleppo last May and held for four months. Now
released, they tell of horrifying abuse: beatings with
water pipes and electrical cables; being forced to watch

6/94

25/03/2015

violent videos of battles, beatings and executions; and
starvation. Yes, these children have experienced the
worst of humanity. After all they have endured, how
can we expect these children, and so many like them
around the world, to overcome their suffering and be
able, and willing, to build their lives anew? They need
our immediate support.
UNICEF and the South Sudan Government are
therefore working together to care for and protect
released children in interim care centres, where they
receive food, clothing and health care as well as
counselling and programmes to address sexual and
gender-based violence. Most are now reunited with
their families and will be going to school and receiving
vocational training to improve their chances of finding
a job, earning a living and contributing to their families
and communities. Let me here echo the call made by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
support to these essential programmes.
In the Central African Republic, over 2,800
children associated with the anti-Balaka and ex-Séléka
armed groups have now been released. UNICEF is
now working with the communities to reintegrate
these children and assist the nearly 10,000 others still
associated with these groups. Such efforts not only help
these children begin the long process of rebuilding their
lives; they also send a powerful message to each and
every child who has survived: “Your life matters, your
future matters, you matter”. They send a message to all
armed groups and armed forces that the use of children
in armed conflict, in any way, is unacceptable and will
not be tolerated.
They also send a message to these children’s
communities and, indeed, to the world, that children
who experience conflict are not without hope. We
cannot give up on them, and we can rebuild shattered
lives and shattered societies. Because as we heal these
children, we also heal divided societies by erasing the
stigma that released children face and building peace
and, most importantly, hope. As one released South
Sudanese boy said,
“I really want to go to school now. I have never
been to school, and, after I finish, I want to help
the people in my community — to help them get
food. If I had children, I would never let them be
soldiers”.
Together, let us make 2015 a year of progress for
children like this, who have great hope for the future

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

and the generous, humane spirit required to translate
this hope into reality.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Brandt
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Bodin.
Ms. Bodin (spoke in French): On behalf of Save the
Children, I thank you, Mr. President, for the invitation
to address the Security Council at this important debate.
Save the Children works in many countries affected
by armed conflict, delivering life-saving assistance
to millions of children and families in need. In New
York, we are also an active member of the Watchlist
on Children and Armed Conflict. As a child protection
adviser with Save the Children in the Central African
Republic, I work on a daily basis with girls and boys
impacted by conflict.
Drawing on Save the Children’s experience in
situations of armed conflict around the world, I will
focus my remarks today on three areas: engagement
with armed groups, building protective environments
for children and the reintegration of children.
Save the Children’s engagement with non-State
armed groups is guided by the single goal of protecting
children from violence, including their recruitment and
use by armed groups. Action plans in which parties to
armed conflict commit to measures to end violations
are one route to achieving the goal. In that regard, the
“Children, Not Soldiers” campaign, led by the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and by UNICEF, shows
the potential for impact with State security forces.
Action plans have also proven to be an effective tool
for ending grave violations against children by armed
groups and should be pursued proactively wherever
possible. We call on States to facilitate access for the
United Nations and other specialized child-protection
actors to armed groups, and we also call upon the
United Nations to redouble its efforts to engage with
armed groups to get them to agree to and implement
action plans.
However, interventions with armed groups must
be tailored to each group and the specific contexts in
which they operate. In the Central African Republic,
we are faced with multiple armed groups, often with
weak command structures and little or no knowledge
of international standards and norms. In that context,
formal agreements may not be feasible with the leaders.

S/PV.7414

Instead, Save the Children has adopted a case-bycase approach, enabling us to establish a dialogue
with around 20 individual anti-Balaka commanders at
the local level to build trust, We were also then able
to present the humanitarian protection principles and
secure the release of children. Since November 2013,
more than 800 girls and boys have been released
through interventions by Save the Children and other
organizations.
One of them, whom I will call Eric, is now 15 years
old. Eric joined an anti-Balaka group after his house
was burnt down and he became separated from his
parents during fighting between the anti-Balaka and
ex-Séléka groups in December 2013. While with the
group, he acted as a spy and a courier and took part
in attacks. In July 2014, following a series of child
protection training sessions and briefings run by Save
the Children’s national team with his commanders, Eric
and nine other children were handed over to us. Today,
we have yet to locate his parents. He is living with a
foster family and is learning to be a carpenter, and his
prospects are good.
Elsewhere, Save the Children seeks to support the
United Nations engagement with armed groups. In
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for example,
we
support
community-based
child-protection
networks to enable communities to alert and report
to the United Nations system and local authorities
on grave violations of children’s rights, including
the abduction and recruitment of children by armed
groups. However, where United Nations engagement
with armed groups is not possible, complementary
approaches should be supported. Commitments
secured from non-State armed groups by international
non-governmental organizations, such as the Geneva
Call or local community-based organizations, can
result in immediate protection for children. They can
also serve as stepping stones towards action plans. That
is why Save the Children calls upon the United Nations
to strengthen its cooperation with non-governmental
child-protection stakeholders to develop coordinated
strategies in pursuit of the shared goal of ending and
preventing the grave violations being committed
against children by armed groups.
We also stress the importance of supporting
national authorities in the design and implementation of
formal disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes. We must consider the gender issue. Securing
the release of girls associated with armed groups is a

15-083657/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

particular challenge in all of the situations in which we
work. They are often hidden from view and frequently
regarded not as members of the group but as “wives”.
We therefore remind the Council of the importance of
developing gender-specific strategies for the release
and reintegration of girls associated with armed groups.
In addition to the engagement with non-State armed
groups, Save the Children emphasizes prevention
as an important component of all our programmes.
In Colombia, for example, our programmes aim to
strengthen the protective environment for children
by working closely with communities, schools and
local authorities to build local resilience and response
mechanisms. Save the Children’s experience shows that
education and livelihood support are important factors
in both prevention and reintegration. Access to quality
education and income generation offers a route out of the
poverty that often underpins armed conflict and drives
child recruitment. For children formerly associated
with armed forces or groups, education also provides
a sense of normality and purpose and increases their
chances of successful reintegration.
For that reason, the protection of education is
critical. Pursuant to resolution 2143 (2014), we urge
Member States and all parties to conflict, including
armed groups, to take concrete measures to prevent
the military use of schools during armed conflict by
implementing and disseminating the available guidance
included, for example, in the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General’s Guidance Note on Attacks
against Schools and Hospitals and the Global Coalition
to Protect Education from Attack’s Lucens Guidelines
for Protecting Schools and Universities from Military
Use during Armed Conflict. State endorsement of the
Guidelines, through the signing of the Safe Schools
Initiative and the practical implementation of the
Guidelines, will contribute to establishing best practices
and thereby enhance the protection of schools.
Reintegration programmes also need to be adapted
to the context and must be planned as part of the
development of action plans or other strategies. In
the Central African Republic, because many children
are recruited by family or community members, we
are using community-based, rather than individual,
approaches. Our reintegration programmes there
and elsewhere promote psychosocial well-being by
creating opportunities for children and youth to rebuild
relations and develop critical life skills to enhance their
resilience. We also provide socioeconomic support to

8/94

25/03/2015

vulnerable youth, including those formerly associated
with armed groups, through livelihood training and
other means of community-based economic support.
However, the effective reintegration and
strengthening of protection systems require sustained,
long-term interventions. Save the Children calls on
States Members of the United Nations and donors to
provide long-term financial support to prevention and
reintegration programmes. Moreover, Save the Children
is pursuing coordination activities with various actors
aimed at supporting reconciliation and peacebuilding,
rebuilding education and child protection systems,
and economic recovery. That must be reinforced by
the actions of States and the international community
to ensure that there are consequences for those who
commit grave violations against children. Individuals
committing such violations must be held accountable
within the framework of the efforts being undertaken
to provide remedies for violations. Save the Children
calls on the Council to support comprehensive
transitional-justice measures in tandem with action
plans and other approaches to armed groups.
Our work and that of other child protection actors
relies on a minimum level of security, for which we
often rely on United Nations operations and other
peacekeeping operations. We call on Member States
of the United Nations to ensure the rapid deployment
of all forces authorized to participate in peacekeeping
operations and to ensure that peacekeepers will be
deployed where children are at most risk. However,
peacekeepers must be able to guarantee the safety and
rights of children and not pose a threat themselves.
For this reason, peacekeeping officers must receive
comprehensive training on child protection prior to
deployment.
Finally, Save the Children also wants to add its
voice to the call made to the Secretary-General to
develop a policy that prohibits listed Government
security forces from contributing their troops to United
Nations missions.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Bodin
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Nzita.
Mr. Nzita (spoke in French): First, I would like to
thank the presidency for giving me this opportunity to
come and speak here. It is a great honour for me to be
speaking for the first time before the Security Council

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

in order to make my modest contribution and share my
personal experience, as well as the experience of my
compatriots with whom I endured the ordeal of forced
recruitment. But before that, I would like to express
my full appreciation to the people and organizations
who have worked, and who continue to work, so that
the voice of the child victims of recruitment into armed
groups, who are victims of war, are heard, and the
scourge of recruiting children into armed groups and
armed forces can be eradicated.
As I speak to the Council today, I must say that
I have lived through these torments myself. I still
have difficulty in finding the right words to describe
this ordeal, which stole my childhood from me. I was
a victim of recruitment by the armed group called
Alliance des forces démocratiques pour la libération du
Congo-Zaïre, created in North Kivu to overthrow the
dictatorial regime of President Mobutu. I was 12 years
old. I and several of my friends were forcibly recruited
in our school, and we waged war, in spite of ourselves,
in order to overthrow the Mobutu regime.
The recruiters gave us expedited training. We were
sent to the front. We killed, we looted and we destroyed
infrastructure that was useful to the population. We did
everything that we were asked to do, violating the rules
of international humanitarian law. We transported cases
of ammunition, we walked thousands of kilometres on
foot with just one belief: we must fire on everything that
moves lest we be fired upon ourselves. Innocent lives
were destroyed for no reason. Allow me to reiterate my
apologies for all the harm that we caused to our fellow
human beings. I continue to regret it.
In order to make us more capable of performing that
dirty work, our recruiters succeeded in awakening in us
animal instincts that were slumbering there. In magic
ceremonies, they convinced us that we were invincible,
but reality always showed us that the opposite was true.
Many of my brothers-in-arms are no longer alive after
having climbed very high on the ladder of violence. I
was associated with the group for 10 years, and I waged
war for 3 of those years.
The hardest thing was to see young children of my
age playing on a football field not far from the plot of
land where I was standing guard. And at night, when I
was standing guard in the cold outside the gate, I saw
again the image of those children playing, and pain
filled my heart. My eyes full of tears, I asked myself
very softly: “Oh God, what did I do that I cannot be
like them?”

S/PV.7414

Fate intervened and in 2006 I was able to be
demobilized and was called upon to be reintegrated into
the society through a programme run by the national
commission for disarmament and reintegration, with
the assistance of the international community, the
Congolese Government and civil society. In that regard,
it is important to emphasize that, although my years as
a child soldier were an ordeal for me and other child
soldiers, demobilization and reintegration enabled me
to rebuild myself psychologically in order to face life
with confidence and to turn the page on my past. I was
able to resume my studies and take control of my life. I
also attempted to tell the story of what I lived through
in my book, If My Life as a Child Soldier Could Be Told.
Urged on by this confidence, I decided to create
a non-governmental organization (NGO) called Peace
for Childhood, which does a lot of work to promote and
protect the rights of the child. For those who would like
to know more about our association they can go to our
website: https://paixpourlenfance.wordpress.com.
I am dedicating my life to helping children and to
helping my country to rebuild a better future. In my
country there are still thousands of children who are
living through an anxiety that I know all too well.
Personally, I decided to fight to the end so that what I
went through myself will no longer happen to others. A
little more than a year ago, I was appointed as a Goodwill
Ambassador for the implementation of the action plan
to end child recruitment into the armed forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and, more broadly,
to end the recruitment and use of children by armed
groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I am
also an ambassador for the campaign “Children, Not
Soldiers” and for the Congolese campaign “No More
Kadogo”.
In October 2012, by signing an action plan with
the United Nations, the Government of the Congo
committed itself to bringing an end to and preventing
the recruitment of child soldiers in the Forces armées
de la république démocratique du Congo (FARDC).
For me, who was a member of an armed group that
was integrated into the FARDC, the commitment of
the Government of my country to bring an end to the
recruitment and use of children is historic, and represents
an opportunity that has the potential to protect the lives
of thousands of children. In the Democratic Republic
of the Congo the progress of the Government forces are
undeniable, but there are still dozens of armed groups,

15-083659/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

25/03/2015

particularly in the east of the country, that continue to
recruit thousands of children.

I thank the Secretary-General for his presence here
today.

While awareness-raising about the problems is
important at the international level, it is also essential
at the local level. We must dismantle false beliefs and
we must develop a consensus in post-conflict countries,
so that everyone understands that the place of a child is
with his or her family, in school, and not on a battlefield
or supporting military operations. Everyone must know
that children must be protected.

I would like, at the outset, to convey my warmest
appreciation to the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and
the Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF for their
briefings and their commitment. I also express my
heartfelt appreciation to Ms. Bodin and Mr. Nzita
for their poignant testimonies, which have enabled
us to better grasp the tragic reality and extreme
complexity of the situation of child victims of armed
groups and non-State actors. Their testimony is also a
powerful message of hope that confers on all of us the
responsibilty to act.

As a Goodwill Ambassador for the implementation
of the action plan and through my NGO, and with
the support of diplomatic missions in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, I have spent recent months
leading outreach meetings in schools in order to combat
the recruitment of children into armed conflicts and
to invite Congolese youth to commit themselves to
assisting and facilitating social reintegration of former
child armed forces and armed groups over the long
term. I also travel throughout the world to share my
experience and to spread awareness about the problem
of child recruitment.
To be a child soldier is to be torn from one’s life as
a child and to be forced to become an adult. In order
to succeed in reclaiming one’s life path, a former child
soldier should be viewed as a person in need of healing.
I would like to stress the importance demobilization
and reintegration programmes.
I cannot conclude my statement without commending
the tireless efforts of the United Nations and all the
organizations devoted to the protection of children,
especially UNICEF and the departments of child
protection of the various peacekeeping missions, in
particular that of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, along with the diplomatic missions in my
country, my country’s own missions and those of civil
society. Without them, we would be what our recruiters
wanted us to be. I hope they feel duly recognized by my
humble contribution to this debate and that this meeting
will be the occasion to set in motion solid strategies
capable of saving the thousands of children who await
our help.
The President (spoke in French): I warmly thank
Mr. Nzita for his briefing and for his moving testimony.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of France.

10/94

The scenes of violence depicted in Mr. Junior
Nzita’s book, If My Life as a Child Soldier Could Be
Told, is unfortunately the daily reality of thousands
of children in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
South Sudan, the Central African Republic, Syria, Iraq
and other countries. Among those serious violations,
I would like today to stress the role of abductions,
80 per cent of which are committed by non-State armed
groups and have become a systematic terror tactic used
by extremist groups such as Boko Haram and Daesh.
The situation is especially difficult for girls, who are
subjected to sexual violence and forced into slavery,
marriage and pregnancies, which make it all the more
difficult to separate them from armed groups. It is
important to forcefully condemn the barbaric violence
of armed groups, but that is not enough. The time has
come for us to act more effectively on the ground, as we
have heard today.
In that regard, the work being overseen by
Ms. Zerroughi is remarkable. Today, 14 non-State
armed groups have signed action plans that commit
them to cease violations with regard to children; seven
of them have been removed from the lists annexed to the
Secretary-General’s annual reports. By the same token,
UNICEF has also made considerable progress. In the
Central African Republic, 1,623 children associated
with non-State armed groups were demobilized
and reintegrated in 2014, thanks to a programmed
supported and financed by France. But the Security
Council’s efforts with local authorities and civil society
during its trip to the Central African Republic 10 days
ago showed that the challenges remain immense. Given
the scale of the task we face, we need to be prepared,
proactive and concrete. In that regard, I would like to

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

propose three new modes and levels of action as a blue
print for action plans.
First of all, we must act at the diplomatic and
political levels. States are the key actors for establishing
the necessary climate of trust for the United Nations,
the Special Representative and actors on the ground to
be able to promote action plans. Such efforts produced
results in the Philippines, for example, where the
Moro Islamic Liberation Front reaffirmed in 2014 its
adherence to the action plan signed in 2009 to prevent
the recruitment of children. Mediators and special
envoys need to more systematically integrate activities
related to child protection in their projects. The
protection of children must be a concern and a priority
not only within the framework of peace accords, as in
the case of Mali or the Central African Republic, or in
ceasefire agreements, but also in the absence or even
the failure of peace negotiations, as is often the case.
France therefore proposes the development of United
Nations guidelines for mediators on the protection and
liberation of children. Negotiators are able to wield
greater weight when they can apply pressure through
mechanisms such as sanctions and the SecretaryGeneral‘s black list. It is time to update resolution
1612 (2005) to include abduction as a serious violation
capable of triggering the addition of the guilty parties
to that list of infamy. We fully support the efforts by
Malaysia in that regard.
Secondly, we must act at the operational level,
throughout all the phases of a conflict. In a world in
which preventive action is essential, particularly in
the realm of education, we might look to Pakistan, for
example, where terrorist groups are fighting against the
education of girls and are targeting schools. Elsewhere,
for example in Central African Republic, in Boali and
Yaloke, some children who were already attending
school before the conflict ended up leaving their
classrooms to join the anti-Balaka forces. Preventive
measures must also therefore include information
campaigns about armed groups in schools and on the
radio or via other forms of communication in order
to discourage children from joining such groups.
And in the midst of conflict, tools adapted to those
already involved in combat must be provided. Military
personnel, peacekeepers and regional security forces
must be provided with clear strategies or operational
concepts as well as with regular training to enable them
to act with caution when they find themselves faced
with child soldiers, often on the front lines, whom they

S/PV.7414

seek to separate from armed non-State groups and hand
over to child protection services. In that context, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations has a clear
role to play in maintaining its strategies and proposing
specific, targeted training. The document recently
adopted by NATO on the protection of children in
armed conflict is also an interesting example.
Finally, once a child has been freed from the clutches
of an armed group we must facilitate and, above all, as
has been rightly emphasized, ensure his reintegration
into his family and community. States are responsible
for implementing strategies for demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration specifically designed
for children, with special attention to the situation of
girls. The situation of girls needs to be the subject of
a more granular and methodical statistical follow-up
as part of the follow-up reporting mechanism; only
that will make it possible to implement solutions more
adequately adapted to their protection and reintegration.
My third and last proposal concerns the need to
deepen our actions with respect to the law. The fight
against impunity, which has also been mentioned,
remains indispensable for discouraging and preventing
serious violations by new actors. I would like to
highlight the message from the International Criminal
Court (ICC) whose first judgement, upheld on appeal,
found Thomas Lubanga guilty of the crimes of
enlisting and conscripting children under the age of
15. The ICC is currently developing a comprehensive
strategy on the protection of children, an initiative that
we fully encourage and commend. States must take
responsibility by ratifying international instruments
such as the Additional Protocols to the Geneva
Convention of 1977 and the Optional Protocols to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child of 2000 and
2011. France also calls on all countries to adhere to the
Paris Principles and Paris Commitments of 2007 as an
essential point. For non-State armed groups, the signing
of action plans or acts of engagement is essential. Such
tools usefully guide our action against violations of the
rights of children in armed conflict.
This year marks 10 years since the adoption of
resolution 1612 (2005). It is our collective duty to
be more visibly active and more committed, more
responsive and more effective with respect to the
protection of children in armed conflict. The fight to
protect children in armed conflict involves each and
every one of us. The community of nations must join
together to condemn it and, above all, to take action. As

15-0836511/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

Mr. Junior Nzita’s testimony has taught us, we should
and we can win the battle together.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): At the outset, allow me to
commend you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate on children and armed conflict. We believe
that the focus of today’s debate on children victims
of non-State armed groups is timely and important.
We are also appreciative of your efforts to synthesize
the discussion today and of the proposals put forth
in a non-paper, which we hope will provide a useful
reference for our future work on this issue.
I wish to thank Secretary-General Mr. Ban Ki-moon
for his remarks, as well as Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and Ms. Yoka Brandt, Deputy
Executive Director of UNICEF, for their briefings.
My delegation also wishes to express our special
appreciation to Ms. Julie Bodin and Mr. Junior Nzita
for sharing their valuable and insightful experiences
on the ground in the Central African Republic and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Malaysia associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Viet Nam on behalf
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
There can be no doubt of our shared international
commitment to safeguarding and protecting children
in situations of armed conflict, developed over
the past 15 years in the Security Council. We are
pleased to recognize that this year marks the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1612 (2005), which endorsed
the establishment of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism to document grave violations against
children in armed conflict and set up the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, which
Malaysia is privileged to Chair. Successive Security
Council resolutions and presidential statements have
further reinforced our resolve and expanded the range
of instruments that can be used to shield children from
the harms of warfare.
Yet the consequences of warfare remain a grim
reality for millions of children affected by armed
conflict. UNICEF reported that 2014 was the worst year
for children, with up to 15 million suffering the fallout

12/94

25/03/2015

from armed conflict in the Central African Republic,
Iraq, South Sudan, the occupied Palestinian territories,
Syria and Ukraine. For instance, last year’s war in Gaza
led to the deaths of over 500 Palestinian children, some
of whom were deliberately targeted and killed while
playing at the beach or seeking refuge at United Nations
centres. More than 3,000 children were injured or
maimed for life, schools were attacked, 54,000 children
were made homeless and at least 373,000 children in
Gaza are currently in desperate need of psychosocial
support.
Clearly, more needs to be done to end impunity and
prevent grave violations committed against children. In
that regard, Malaysia strongly believes that all parties
should be held accountable for gross violations of
children’s rights, be they State or non-State actors. No
one should be allowed to be above the law.
We underline that Governments hold the primary
responsibility for the protection of children within their
territory. In this light, we are heartened by the progress
made in the “Children, Not Soldiers” campaign, which
galvanizes Government action to end and prevent the
recruitment and use of children by armed forces in
seven countries. We call for the strong support of the
international community to ensure that the objective of
the campaign is achieved by 2016.
At the same time, we are conscious of the fact that
non-State armed groups make up the majority of the
parties listed in the annexes to the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2014/339). The listings are representative of
a wide array of organizations, with a host of diverse
motives and operating in vastly different circumstances.
With this in mind, it is important to acknowledge that
there can be no one-size-fits-all approach in addressing
non-State armed groups — each must be dealt with
while taking into account the unique contexts in which
they operate. In that regard, we believe that further
analysis on non-State armed groups would be valuable
to ensure a tailored approach, both by operational
actors on the ground as well as by the Security Council.
Our discussion today raises crucial questions
as to how the tools at our disposal can be best used
to influence non-State armed groups to safeguard
the lives of children. We wish to highlight several
non-exhaustive areas where we believe concrete action
can be undertaken in this regard.
We emphasize the importance for the United
Nations and Member States to consult and cooperate

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

closely with each other in dealing with non-State
armed groups to ensure that sustainable measures to
improve the situation of children in armed conflict can
be undertaken. Malaysia believes that peace processes
provide a critical forum of engagement with non-State
armed groups. We call for child protection provisions
to be integrated into all peace processes, negotiations
and agreements. In that regard, we recognize the great
value of the Guidance for Mediators on Addressing
Conflict-Related Sexual Violence in Ceasefire and
Peace Agreements, issued by the Mediation Support
Unit of the Department of Political Affairs in 2012.
We believe that a similar guidance note to address
grave violations against children would provide a
much needed reference to ensure that child protection
concerns are mainstreamed into ceasefire and peace
agreements.
In January this year, the international community
was shocked by the use of a seven-year-old girl by
Boko Haram as a suicide bomber, tragically killing
herself and five others at a marketplace in Nigeria.
We express our strongest condemnation of the gross
violations and abuses committed by terrorist groups,
such as Boko Haram and the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, against children, including the recruitment
and use of children as combatants, suicide bombers and
executioners.
We are also deeply concerned about the alarming
trend in the abduction of children by terrorist groups and
militias. Hundreds of children have been abducted in
the past year by armed groups in Africa and the Middle
East, many of whose fates are still unknown, including
the 276 schoolgirls from Chibok, Nigeria, taken in April
2014. Others, such as the 89 boys abducted in South
Sudan in February 2015, have been forcibly recruited
for combat purposes. Just today we read reports that
500 more women and children had been abducted by
Boko Haram. Those violations are deplorable and cause
untold suffering to families and communities.
While the horrific mass abductions have brought
widespread attention to these occurrences at the
international stage, abduction has long been used as
a tactic by non-State armed groups, and is often the
precursor to other grave violations. We continue to
call for the immediate and unconditional release of all
children held captive by armed groups. In that regard,
we believe that it is timely for the Security Council
to underscore its condemnation of child abduction by
recognizing abduction in armed conflict as a trigger for

S/PV.7414

listing in the annexes of the Secretary-General’s annual
report.
We must be clear that ending and preventing grave
violations against children is only one side of the coin.
Equally important is ensuring that mechanisms and
programmes are in place to facilitate the reintegration
and rehabilitation of children who have been victimized
by armed groups back into their communities. In that
regard, the Paris Principles remain an instrumental
framework that continues to guide efforts in the release
and reintegration of children associated with armed
groups.
As the Principles themselves detail, the special
needs of girls, who are at greater risk of rape and sexual
violence, sexual exploitation and abuse, must be taken
into account in reintegration strategies. We also wish
to highlight the plight of second-generation victims of
armed conflict, namely, the children born of war, and
the need to recognize this segment as a victim group in
post-conflict settings.
We emphasize that reintegration is a long-term
effort that requires the collective responsibility of all
stakeholders, including the international community.
In that regard, we also fully support community-based
reintegration programmes that can foster a spirit of
unity and reconciliation among communities that have
been ravaged by war.
In conclusion, the concerted efforts of all actors is
vital in reigning in and ending the grievous violations
and abuses committed against children, whether
by States or non-State actors. I assure you of my
delegation’s commitment to play a constructive role
towards that end.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate and for giving
us three action points: action at the diplomatic level,
action in operational terms, and stepping up judicial
cooperation, all of which are very much at the core of
the issues we have to discuss, and which I will address
in the course of my statement.
I thank the Secretary-General for his strong
statement and for the ongoing commitment of the
United Nations to this cause. I would also like to thank
the four briefers, not just for their statements, but also
for their dedication to what is, by any standards, a noble
cause. New Zealand strongly supports the children and
armed conflict agenda, and reaffirms its support for
the Paris Commitments and the Principles on Children

15-0836513/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups.
It also supports the development of the Safe Schools
Declaration. We share the outrage of UNICEF at the
many situations that we deal with day to day.
As you emphasized, Sir, the majority of those
who commit some of the most egregious violations
of international humanitarian and human rights law
against children listed in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2014/339) are non-State armed groups. And,
for that, as the representative of Save the Children
emphasized, there must be consequences. There can be
no impunity. Good work has been done to address this,
with effective cooperation between the United Nations,
States and non-State actors, but we must do more. As
States, our own actions must match those we expect of
non-State armed groups. Whether it be agreeing on an
action plan, supporting the “Children, Not Soldiers”
campaign, or providing child protection training for our
peacekeepers, all 193 of us can do much better. We can
certainly do something.
For its part, the United Nations must effectively
implement its own human rights due diligence policy,
and it must undertake thorough vetting of its staff. As
you have proposed, and as the representative of Malaysia
also emphasized, child protection training should be
mandatory for all uniformed and civilian peace-keeping
personnel. More can be done to mainstream child
protection approaches across the whole of the work of
the United Nations. We would particularly welcome
the provision of guidance for mediators on addressing
conflict-related violations against children in ceasefire
and peace agreements, and the inclusion of relevant
child protection expertise in expert groups on sanctions.
Regional organizations also have a role to play. The
declaration agreed between the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence
against Children and the African Union is an excellent
example. As the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict made clear
to us, engaging non-State armed groups to prevent
abuses against children is complex and sensitive. They
have different motives, tactics, structures and degrees
of cohesiveness. Extremist groups can also often pose
particular challenges. However, experience does show
us that, in the right circumstances, engaging such
groups can produce results — particularly agreement
on action plans.

14/94

25/03/2015

We therefore encourage enhanced cooperation
between governments, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and relevant child protection actors
to ensure that more of these action plans are agreed
with non-State armed groups. It is critical that we find
ways to incentivize their engagement — and there, civil
society often enjoys an access and legitimacy that is
denied to others. The example of Eric, given to us by
Save the Children, bears witness to that.
In our own Pacific region, New Zealand has
supported civil society envoys who can engage
communities most affected by day-to-day violence, and
can often address highly sensitive issues in a culturally
appropriate manner. The Asia-Pacific Group also offers
other examples of effective engagement, tailored to
local circumstances. We applaud, for example, that in
Myanmar the United Nations has agreed on an action
plan with State security forces. Engaging ethnic armed
groups can be more challenging, but civil society there
can often help secure commitments from armed groups,
particularly to release child combatants.
We must also address the causes that lead children to
join non-State armed groups, including socioeconomic
marginalization. In situations of protracted conflict,
joining armed groups can be a means of survival, or
a way out of poverty. It can also confer status on self
or family. To reduce the risk of rerecruitment, we need
comprehensive reintegration programmes, particularly
for girls, and children with disabilities. So we would
encourage the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, UNICEF and others to continue working on
that.
It is important that we continue to improve
child protection practices. We therefore propose
that, in collaboration with the United Nations and
other stakeholders, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General develop a working paper on
engaging non-State armed groups, drawing on the best
practices and innovative tools available, some of which
have already been identified in the statements made
today. That paper could form a basis from which we
can work to develop durable solutions to better protect
children in armed conflict, giving real meaning and
purpose to the present debate, and giving real meaning
to the phrase “children, not soldiers”.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Mr. President,
allow me to commend you for holding this timely
open debate on the critical issue of children in armed

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

conflict, with particular emphasis on child victims of
non-State armed groups.
We welcome and thank the Secretary-General
for his remarks, and we equally thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui; the Deputy
Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Yoka Brandt;
the Child Protection Advisor of Save the Children,
Ms. Julie Bodin; and Mr. Junior Nzita Nsuami, exsoldier. We thank him in particular for coming and
sharing his experience, one lived under very difficult
circumstances, with the Council. It is important that he
is here and that he speak directly to the international
community.
Current armed conflicts have an undue impact
on children. Indiscriminate attacks targeting civilians
and terrorist tactics have troublesome consequences
on children, as stated in the latest special report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2014/339). In Syria, for instance, the hostilities
have led to widespread abuses against children. In the
Central African Republic, the recruitment and use of
children has become endemic. The resumption of the
conflict in South Sudan has led to egregious violations
of children’s rights. Those are just a few examples of
the troublesome realities of the past year.
The challenging character and tactics used in armed
conflict pose even more serious threats to children. The
deliberate targeting and military use of schools, the
indoctrination of children to commit despicable crimes,
their use to carry explosive devices and their abduction,
sexual abuse, forced recruitment, murder, rape, killing
and deliberate maiming are examples of violence and
abuse committed by extremist groups against children
such as Boko Haram, the Islamic State in Iraq and Sham
(ISIS) and others.
This open debate marks the first anniversary of
the “Children, Not Soldiers” campaign, which was
launched by Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Leila Zerrougi and UNICEF, which is finding
success in mobilizing high-level political commitment
in support of its objective to end the recruitment
and use of children by Government security forces
by 2016. However, the vast majority of parties listed
in the most recent annual report (S/2014/339) are
non-State armed groups operating in 15 areas, which
highlights the timeliness of our debate this morning. In
fact, the recruitment and use of children by non-State

S/PV.7414

armed groups continues to be a serious violation of
international and human rights law and entails longterm consequences for children exposed to huge
violence. Its persistence is a stark reminder that the
progress achieved thus far should be measured not only
by improvements in the normative framework, but also
in the way that the international community and the
Security Council in particular implement decisions in
specific contexts.
The United Nations endorses efforts to identify
concrete commitments that translate into action and
measures to engage with armed groups in order to
attain action plans to put an end to the recruitment and
use of children as soldiers.
At this point, we would like to share the experience
of Angola in relation to this issue in the aftermath of
the painful civil strife endured by my country for many
years, which had visible repercussions for the Angolan
population and children in particular. According
to a World Bank report, Angola’s demobilization
process was one of the most extensive in the history
of the United Nations, and the United Nations was
instrumental in the formulation and implementation
of that programme. It was perhaps the first time that
the issue of child soldiers was specifically included
in the provisions of a peace process. The children’s
demobilization and integration was declared a priority
in the first resolution adopted by the commission set up
to implement the peace agreement. A comprehensive
prevention,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programme was developed, taking into account the
specific needs and rights of children, including girls
and the disabled, and based on emphasizing three main
pillars: family reunification, psychological support and
education and economic opportunity, including family
livelihood needs.
The legal framework adopted in that context
recognized the principles of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and providing for the minimum
age for military service, which was set at the age
of 18. As a measure to prevent re-recruitment, all
underage soldiers were granted an availability status
that guarantees their full exemption from future
military service. It was based on our experience that
we supported the incorporation, in the peacekeeping
and peacebuilding process, of specific commitments
related to child protection by providing opportunities
for the rapid release of children from armed forces and
non-State armed groups and their social reintegration.

15-0836515/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

The year 2014 was marked by the high-profile mass
abductions of children perpetrated by several terrorist
groups, including the 14 April abduction of 276
schoolgirls in Nigeria by Boko Haram, the abduction of
153 Kurdish boys in Syria and the abduction of hundreds
of Yazidi children in western Iraq, both by ISIS. We
strongly condemn the mass abduction of children by
non-State armed groups and terrorists, including Boko
Haram, ISIS and groups in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Central African Republic and Yemen,
among others. We call for the immediate release of all
abducted children.
We call for an expansion of the listing criteria laid
out in resolution 1612 (2005) to include abduction as an
additional cause to be covered by the United Nations
monitoring and reporting mechanisms on children
in armed conflict, thus ensuring that the responsible
parties are identified and held accountable. We
recognize that United Nations peace operations play
a vital role in the protection of children and should
require adequate training for the fulfilment of such a
critical duty. Peacekeeping operations should establish
a mandatory predeployment requirement for children
protection training for all troop-contributing countries
in order to make a crucial difference in the way they
address the challenges posed by the protection of
children.
In order to protect children from armed groups, it is
critically important that armed groups be impeded from
acquiring arms and weapons. The illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons resulting in the killing, injury
and maiming of children should be taken into account.
The Arms Trade Treaty, adopted by the General
Assembly in April 2013, is an important instrument for
arms control. It stipulates that exporting State parties
shall take into account the risk of trafficked weapons
that can be used in acts of violence against children.
We therefore encourage Member States that have not
yet done so to sign and ratify the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, and to
adopt and implement legal measures to prohibit and
criminalize the use and recruitment of children under
the age of 18.
To conclude, with the impending tenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005) and of
the various relevant commitments, principles and
guidelines on children associated with armed
conflict and armed groups and on their disarmament,

16/94

25/03/2015

demobilization and reintegration, we hope that more
States will support the various commitments and
principles and that more resources will be allocated by
the international community and concerned States to
ensure that such victimized children are reintegrated
into their communities.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): My delegation commends you,
Mr. President, for convening this very important debate,
which focuses on children as victims of non-State
armed groups. We commend the Secretary-General
also for his remarks and thank him for his unceasing
efforts to ensure that children are given protection in
situations of armed conflict. We also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Lelia
Zerrougui, for her commitment to this cause. She was
recently in Nigeria, where she engaged in discussions at
very high levels with Government officials, both at the
federal and state levels. The suggestions and advice she
gave were taken into consideration very carefully and
are being factored into Government policy, activities
and actions.
We listened very carefully to our briefers, namely,
Ms. Yoka Brandt from UNICEF, Ms. Julie Bodin
and Mr. Junior Nzita, whom we thank for their very
constructive marks, particularly with regard to the
impact on the psychology and physical trauma caused
by the hardship experienced by abducted children.
We also listened very carefully to the statements
of other representatives who have spoken before us.
We thank them for the concern they have shown with
respect to the plight of children in conflict areas in
north-eastern Nigeria.
We associate ourselves in advance with the
statement to be delivered on behealf fo the African
Union.
As the President of the Council has noted — and
as others have also said — the protection of children
is a core human rights issue. We also believe that
holding perpetrators of crimes and violations of the
rights of children responsible, wherever they may, be
is an obligation incumbent upon States Members of the
United Nations.
Conflict situations put children at great risk,
especially when non-State armed groups are involved.
Children risk getting abducted, maimed and even
killed, and are vulnerable in other ways as well. They
face sexual abuse, recruitment as soldiers, trafficking,
slavery and other atrocities committed by armed
15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

groups. This situation underscores the need for States,
the United Nations, regional organizations and other
stakeholders to take urgent measures to enhance the
protection of children in conflict zones.
It is a sad fact that armed non-State actors are
active in many parts of the world today. They can be
found operating in the Sahel region, the Middle East,
the Great Lakes region, Central Africa, the Horn of
Africa and, regrettably, in my own country, Nigeria.
It is also becoming increasingly clear that they are
responsible for grave violations of human rights law
and international humanitarian law. Their activities
show that they indeed pose a serious threat to the wellbeing of children.
Nigeria condemns in the strongest terms possible
the mass abductions of children by non-State armed
groups, including those carried by Boko Haram and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. We call for the
immediate and unconditional release of all abducted
children. We demand that parties to armed conflicts
immediately cease unlawful attacks and threats of
attacks against schools, students and teachers. They
must also refrain from actions that impede children’s
access to education, including the military use of schools
in clear contravention of applicable international law
and the relevant Security Council resolutions. For our
part, we have launched a safe schools initiative that
aims to provide a safe and secure learning environment
for children all over Nigeria.
As we have heard this morning, regional and
subregional organizations have an important role to
play in addressing the plight of children affected by
armed conflict. In that regard, we welcome the growing
cooperation between the United Nations and the African
Union. This important partnership is anchored in the
September 2013 agreement between both institutions
aimed at taking measures to protect African children
from the impact of armed conflict. Nigeria urges both
institutions to continue to strengthen their win-win
collaboration on this important issue.
At the subregional level, the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) has shown a strong
commitment to promoting the well-being of children
affected by conflict through its Accra Declaration
on War-affected Children in West Africa, which was
adopted as far back as April 2000. The Declaration
commits ECOWAS member States to taking a broad
range of measures to protect and rehabilitate war-affected
children. In order to live up to their commitments under

S/PV.7414

the Declaration, ECOWAS member States must continue
to enhance their domestic competencies and capabilities
in order to respond effectively in a multidisciplinary
way to the varying needs and vulnerabilities of children
in conflict situations.
Nigeria is firmly committed to meeting its
obligations under the United Nations Convention on
the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol on
the involvement of children in armed conflicts, as well
as the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of
the Child. These instruments have been incorporated
into our laws at both the national and state levels. They
contain extensive provisions against abusive practices
against children, and we are determined to enforce
them.
We are aware of allegations made by certain entities
about the purported enlistment and encouragement of
children and young persons by Nigerian authorities
to serve in neighbourhood watch groups, popularly
referred to as civilian joint task forces. We wish to take
this opportunity to assure the Security Council and
the entire international community that the Nigerian
military remains a professional force that is conscious
of its domestic and international obligations. There has
never been an attempt to recruit underage children nor
use them in any other capacity in the prosecution of the
current war against Boko Haram. The neighbourhood
watch groups were created by youth in different
communities across north-eastern Nigeria to defend
themselves and their neighbourhoods against the deadly
attacks of Boko Haram. We would like to make it clear
that membership in these groups is voluntary and
without any form of assistance, inducement or coercion
by the Nigerian military or security forces.
Finally, Nigeria believes that the Council should
continue to pay attention to the issue of children
and armed conflict. It is a growing problem that
requires a collaborative approach involving multiple
stakeholders — States, international organizations,
regional
organizations
and
non-governmental
organizations — in order for it to be addressed
effectively. We reaffirm our unwavering commitment
to the protection of the rights of children in conflict
situations. We are taking all the necessary measures
to meet the threat caused by Boko Haram to the
welfare of children. Together with our neighbours and
international partners, we are winning the war against
the terrorists and we are resolutely determined to bring
those captured alive to justice.

15-0836517/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the French initiative to hold today’s open
debate. I thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Zerrougui and Ms. Yoka Brandt, Deputy
Executive Director of UNICEF, for their briefings.
China has also listened attentively to the statements
made by representatives of the non-governmental
organizations.
Children represent the future of humankind. They
are the hope of human progress and development. In
recent years, the international community has made
positive headway in protecting children in armed
conflict, but, at the same time, horrendously evil acts of
killing, abducting and using children as human bombs
by terrorist and extremist forces still occur from time
to time in certain conflict areas, which has inflicted
physical and psychological harm on a large number of
innocent children. We are highly concerned about this
situation.
China supports the international community in
increasing its attention to the issue of the protection
of children in armed conflict and in taking further
specific measures in response. I would like to stress the
following four points.
First, the protection of children in armed conflict
starts with halting and easing armed conflicts. Only
by preventing the worsening of security situations
can we fundamentally attack the causes of children
being harmed in armed conflict. China supports the
Council in its efforts to assume, in accordance with the
responsibilities endowed upon it by the Charter of the
United Nations, a greater role in conflict prevention,
peacekeeping
and
post-conflict
peacebuilding,
among others, and in providing a firm guarantee
for the protection of children in armed conflict. The
Council should, in that connection make greater use
of the means of negotiation and mediation provided
under Chapter VI of the Charter in an effort to defuse
disputes peacefully and prevent the further escalation
of conflicts so as to create favourable conditions for the
protection of children in armed conflict.
Secondly, the Government of the country in
conflict bears the primary responsibility for the
further protection of children in armed conflict.
The sovereignty of the country in conflict should
be respected. In executing Council resolutions and
effectively implementing the various programmes,
plans and initiatives for the protection of children, the
18/94

25/03/2015

role of the Government in question is irreplaceable.
The international community should make full use of
the leading role of the particular Government, attend
to and support that Government’s efforts, and mobilize
the international community to assist the Government
in overcoming financial and other difficulties and in
strengthening its capacity-building.
Thirdly, the international community should
urge any party to conflict to observe the relevant
international law and obligations and stop acts of
violence against children. The Council should not
condone acts by terrorists and extremists forces and
other armed groups, including the killing of children,
the use of children as human bombs and the compulsion
of children to kill hostages. We should adopt a zerotolerance policy and measures that form a deterrence
against the armed groups in question in order to create
a peaceful and safe environment for the protection of
children.
Fourthly, all United Nations bodies should leverage
their respective strengths and advantages and act
in synergy to protect children in armed conflict.
United Nations peacekeeping operations should
comprehensively fulfil their mandates and strengthen
their protection of children. Related agencies and
institutions, such as UNICEF, UNESCO and the World
Bank, should engage in close cooperation, join forces
to support the countries in conflict to launch their
peacebuilding efforts, promote the socioeconomic
development of the countries, safeguard children’s
physical and psychological health and ensure their
rights and opportunities for equal access to education.
The international community should also aid children
in returning to their homes, societies and schools as a
priority incorporated into post-conflict peacebuilding
strategies in order to help children in armed conflict to
resume normal lives.
The protection of vulnerable groups, such as
children, from being harmed by armed conflict is the
shared responsibility of the international community.
The key lies in resolving conflicts and achieving
development. The international community should
provide countries affected by conflicts with financial
and technical assistance, and aid them in economic
development and in improving their people’s livelihoods,
thereby lifting them out of poverty as soon as possible
and removing the root causes of conflict. China is ready
to join the parties concerned in a concerted effort to step
up cooperation and effectively improve the situation of

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

children and other vulnerable groups in armed conflict
so that they can stay safely away from the scourge of
war and the problems resulting from displacement and
homelessness and soon lead peaceful, stable and happy
lives.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for holding this debate. I also wish to extend
my appreciation to the briefers today for their stark
presentations. Lithuania aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered on behalf of the European Union later
today.
More than a year ago, 59 students were shot and
burned to death at a boarding school in Buni Yadi and
more than 270 girls were abducted in Chibok by Boko
Haram in Nigeria. As others have noted, abductions
have continued as recently as yesterday. There were 150
Kurdish boys kidnapped by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant on their way home from school. Another 132
children were killed in a Taliban attack in Peshawar,
and forced conversions; public executions and killings;
mutilations; forced marriages; rape and sexual slavery,
including that of children, have occurred in areas under
murderous Daesh control. Girls as young as eight to
ten years old have been used as suicide bombers by
Boko Haram. In the past three months, Daesh recruited
at least 400 Syrian children — children who have
already suffered unspeakable hardships and horrors
as cubs of the caliphate for military training and hardline indoctrination. Even in the middle of Europe, the
phenomenon of child soldiers seems to be surfacing
under the lawless rule of the illegal militants ravaging
the eastern parts of Ukraine, where underage soldiers
were reported present among the militants, being used,
inter alia, to train other recruits.
All in all, around the world, some 300,000 child
soldiers are being deprived of everything that childhood
is supposed to be, mostly by non-State actors. Therefore,
in that light, today’s focus on children who are victims
of non-State actors could not be more pertinent. The
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and the Protocols additional to the Geneva
Convention oblige non-State armed groups not to use
children under any circumstances. The past year saw
the launch of the “Children, Not Soldiers” campaign.
At the national level, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo released some 4,000 children from the
armed forces, and groups have made progress in the
implementation of its action plan. Somalia created a
mechanism for the handover of former child soldiers to

S/PV.7414

the United Nations and established a child protection
unit. Progress in Chad enabled its armed forces to be
delisted from the annex of the Secretary-General’s
report. Yemen signed an action plan pledging to put
an end to the widespread recruitment of children by
armed forces and non-State groups. Today, however,
as the country balances on the brink, there are various
groups and particularly the Houthis that are violating
the commitments undertaken in the signing of the
plan. On the other hand, UNICEF secured the release
of approximately 3,000 children from the South Sudan
Democratic Movement/Army’s Cobra faction. In the
Central African Republic, more than 100 children
associated with anti-Balaka were released in the past
summer. The numbers of children who are forced to
carry arms, however, is much higher than those of
the children released. To date, merely 12 out of the
51 annexed armed groups have signed action plans. Just
one action plan has been signed since 2009, and that is
not enough.
As the UNICEF representative said, the release
of children is only the first step to ensure that
affected children can overcome, despite the risk of
re-recruitment, the horrific physical and psychological
traumas that they have experienced. They need to
be provided with all the necessary care, including
psychological and medical help. The lack of financial
resources and the stigmatization of the former child
soldiers threaten the sustainable reintegration of those
children and jeopardize their future. Governments
and financial partners must ensure adequate resources
for comprehensive reintegration programmes with
a specific focus on child soldiers, including the girls
among them. There is also a need to build community
and family support capacity and education and skillsdevelopment opportunities, without which those
children will not be able to regain their lives. The
uncontrolled flows of small arms and light weapons
play into the hands of those who abuse children and
use them as combatants. All efforts aimed at countering
child recruitment and violence against children must be
undertaken in conjunction with the initiatives aimed
at countering the illicit flows of small arms and their
misuse.
The Council has a whole range of tools at its disposal
to tackle violence against children in conflict. One
such tool is sanctions designations. Child recruitment
and violence against children must become routine
sanctions designation criteria. All grave violent crimes
against children should be used to trigger designations

15-0836519/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

and listings. The abduction of children should be
included as an additional trigger for the monitoring and
reporting mechanisms and for the listings.
Other tools at our disposal include regular
interaction between the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, whose work we appreciate very
much; the relevant sanctions committees and their
panels of experts; stronger engagement between the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and
the International Criminal Court, fact-finding missions
and commissions of inquiry; and the continued focus in
the Secretary-General’s country reports on attacks on
and the military use of schools.
Further pursuit of relevant action plans is also
needed, including with non-State actors. Flexibility
and openness are required in handling the complex
issue of contacts with these groups; otherwise, the
sad state of affairs will not change. We urge relevant
Governments to facilitate access to and engagement
with non-State actors operating on their territories by
the United Nations and other international, regional
and non-governmental organizations.
Another key aspect is the pursuit of accountability,
both as a response to the crimes committed and as a
deterrent. Much remains to be done on this, including by
strengthening national capacities of the judicial sector
and acting more systematically within the framework of
international justice, including by referring perpetrators
to the International Criminal Court (ICC); but also,
importantly, creating the political will to pursue justice
against those who commit crimes against children.
To date, however, we have seen only one verdict for
the recruitment and use of children — the Thomas
Lubanga case at the ICC. The recent appearance before
the ICC of Dominic Ongwen, a former child soldier
and a commander of the Lord’s Resistance Army, is
another welcome step. While we welcome these two
developments, such successes and cases are too few and
far between.
As terrorists increasingly use children and
adolescents both as targets of recruitment and
brainwashing and as perpetrators, coherent and
pro-active efforts are needed to inform vulnerable
communities on how to best protect their children under
given circumstances. Developing effective counternarratives, exposing the terrorist criminals for what
they really are, and cutting through the slick media and
online recruitment campaigns are required.

20/94

25/03/2015

To conclude, it is our collective responsibility to
stem violence against children, including by non-State
actors, by resolute and targeted action. We call on all
States to redouble their efforts to that end.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the French presidency of the Security Council
for having organized this important debate. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General; Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict; Ms. Yoka
Brandt, Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF; Ms. July
Bodin, Child Protection Advisor, Save the Children;
and Mr. Junior Nzita, President of Paix pour l’enfance,
for their informative briefings and their commitment to
protecting children.
Chad also associates itself with the statement to
be delivered by the Permanent Observer of the African
Union.
Today’s debate is an important step in focusing our
attention on the situation of child victims of non-State
armed groups as we approach the commemoration
later this year the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1612 (2005). The scale of the violence itself
and the emergence of new terrorist groups that use
shocking and brutal methods against children compel
the international community to adapt its approach to
and tools for protection to meet these new types of
challenges.
The abduction in 2014 of 270 high school girls from
Chibok by Boko Haram, 153 Kurdish boys from Ain
al-Arab in Syria and hundreds of Yazidi children in Iraq
by the Islamic State underscore the abhorrent use of
children by terrorists as tools to achieve their ends. The
use of children to carry bombs in attacks or as fighters
among the ranks of terrorist groups, such as Boko
Haram, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, Lord’s
Resistance Army, and terrorist attacks against schools,
such as that of 16 December 2014 against a school in
Peshawar, Pakistan, where 132 children were killed,
highlights the importance of debates such as that of
today and the urgency of finding ways to deal with such
acts. Of the 59 entities listed in the annex of the 2014
annual report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict (S/2014/339), 51 are non-State actors,
including repeat offenders. This shows the immensity
of the efforts that remain necessary to cut down and
eradicate violence committed against children by these
groups.

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

While the judgments handed down by the
international courts — against Charles Taylor in 2009
as principal leader of the United Revolutionary Front
of Sierra Leone and recently against Thomas Lubanga
by the International Criminal Court — are evidence of
the fight against impunity for violence against children,
they have far from deterred non-State groups, in
particular, terrorist groups. As a result, complementary
efforts aiming to seek ways and means to prevent and
respond to violations against children by armed groups
also requires us to consider the question of access to
such groups and dialogue with them. While such access
is made impossible in many cases due to security and
political reasons, we receive reports of new recruitment,
including the abduction and use of children on a daily
basis. In this context, we must consider how to protect
children under all circumstances and the difficulty
of establishing dialogue with armed groups. We
wonder whether turning to certain non-governmental
organizations that have the ability to access some
armed groups due to their neutrality could not be used
to facilitate, in some cases, negotiations of action plans
with such groups.
According to the report of the Secretary-General,
and as Ms. Leila Zerrougui recalled in her statement,
there armed groups that honour their commitments, and
with which the United Nations is in dialogue through
various strategies adapted to their characteristics and
diversity. Moreover, there is an important need to raise
awareness among communities that can at times be
complicit in the recruitment of children or which have
links with armed groups.
Faced with the scale of the violence committed
against children, the international community
thankfully remains mobilized, as evidenced by the
ratification by States of the Geneva Conventions,
human rights conventions and instruments, and the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its optional
protocol. These Paris commitments and the principle of
return relating to children linked to armed forces and
groups also enjoy broad international consensus.
My country Chad, for its part, has ratified the
majority of these international instruments and
adhered to the Paris principle of return. In September
2014, we signed a protocol of agreement with the
United Nations relating to the transfer of children
linked to armed forces and groups, which allowed for
the liberation of children linked to such groups from
a neighboring country, the Central African Republic.

S/PV.7414

Furthermore, following the for the subregional forum,
held in N’Djamena in June 2010, on the recruitment
and use of children, the Lake Chad Basin States, the
Sudan and the Central African Republic signed a
declaration committing them to facilitating access for
humanitarian protection organizations to children for
so as to carry out their identification and return without
conditions. This reflects the importance of subregional
and regional cooperation and highlights the need to
promote international cooperation in general when it
comes to protecting children. In this context, we call
on the States which have not yet done so to adhere to
or implement the various international conventions and
instruments as well as the Paris principle, and to join in
regional or subregional efforts to level to stop violence
committed against children by armed groups.
In addition, as we await the commemorative
events around the tenth anniversary of resolution 1612
(2005), we agree that abduction should be among the
criteria for listing armed groups in the annexes to the
Secretary-General’s annual reports. In order to improve
the international community’s efforts to combat
violence against children, we believe it is important to
consider, among other measures and actions, increasing
judicial agreements between States;strengthening
communication between the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict and some of the sanctions
committees and non-governmental organizations, and
broadening its purview; getting national legislatures to
adopt and include guidelines for protecting schools and
universities against attacks; and including the issue of
children and armed conflict in United Nations political
and peacekeeping mandates.
In conclusion, we say that children embody
humankind’s future, and therefore that protecting them
should be the absolute highest priority of the entire
international community, which should mobilize every
possible means to ensure that is achieved.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
important debate on the child victims of non-State
armed groups. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral, his Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict, Leila Zerrougui, and all the briefers for
their thought-provoking and bald statements. I welcome
the fact that the Council has heard from a wide range of
voices today to help inform our discussion, including
from a former child soldier and the community of
non-governmental organizations.

15-0836521/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

Since we last met to discuss this issue (see
S/PV.7259), a number of high-profile and abhorrent
abuses have been committed against children by
non-State armed groups. In Nigeria, Boko Haram sent
three young girls to their deaths in suicide bombings. In
Syria, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant filmed
children taking part in arbitrary executions of prisoners,
and in Pakistan in December 132 children were brutally
murdered in their school by the Taliban. Those are just
three of many recent examples. It is such shocking acts
of violence that illustrate the scale of the challenge that
faces us and show that we must redouble our efforts to
prevent them happening in future. Today I will focus on
three ways of doing so — by ensuring accountability,
fostering reintegration and promoting action plans and
inclusive peace processes.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) plays
an invaluable role in the fight against impunity. The
Court’s conviction and sentencing of Thomas Lubanga
for recruiting and using child soldiers in conflict sent
a very clear message that perpetrators will be held
accountable even if many years have elapsed since they
committed their crimes. Action through the ICC has
not always been possible. Despite reports of the deaths
of more than 11,000 children in Syria, last year the
Council failed to agree on a draft resolution referring
the situation there to the ICC (S/2014/348). But that has
not deterred us from other efforts to document humanrights violations committed by States and human-rights
abuses by non-State actors, in readiness for a time
when perpetrators can be held to account. The Security
Council, the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and civil society must therefore use all the
tools available to ensure accountability for violations
and abuses committed against children. The expansion
of the listing criteria for resolution 1612 (2005) to
include abductions is another step that will enhance the
international community’s ability to hold perpetrators
to account, and more action plans with non-State
actors will give the United Nations valuable metrics for
measuring whether progress is being made.
We welcome the release this week of as many
as 250 child soldiers by the Cobra Faction in South
Sudan. We commend the efforts of UNICEF to secure
their freedom and call for the release of the remaining
3,000 child soldiers in the Cobra Faction over the
coming days. But we must recognize that their release
is only the first step. The trauma for those children
is far from over, as Mr. Nzita told us this morning.
22/94

25/03/2015

Children formerly associated with armed groups are
often marginalized by their communities, making
reintegration more difficult. Moreover, without
successful rehabilitation and reintegration, children are
left vulnerable to re-recruitment. In that context, we
must also ensure that children associated with armed
groups are not arbitrarily detained and have access
to rehabilitation and long-term stability following
their release. I emphasize the importance of the Paris
Principles on Children Associated with Armed Forces
or Armed Groups in ensuring that children are treated
as victims, not perpetrators.
While the picture may often seem bleak, many
non-State actors have shown some willingness and
commitment to working with the United Nations to end
violations and abuses committed against children by
entering into action plans and committing to protecting
children in peace processes. More than half of the
action plans signed by the United Nations, and half of
those that have been successfully implemented, have
been with non-State actors. We urge all listed non-State
armed groups to agree on concrete, time-bound
action plans designed to end violations committed
against children and secure their release. As seen in
the Philippines, Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia, non-State
actors’ involvement in peace processes can also provide
the momentum for ending the recruitment and use of
child soldiers. We support the integration of childprotection provisions, including children’s release and
reintegration, into all peace and ceasefire agreements.
There are clear steps for non-State actors and
the international community to take in order to stop
the exploitation of children in armed conflict, but in
doing so we must not lose sight of the role that States
themselves play in enabling and even supporting the
growth of violent non-State actors. The breakdown of
good governance, the abuse of the rule of law and the
denial of basic security allow such groups to flourish,
leaving some 15 million children living in countries
embroiled in major conflicts. Whether such violence
occurs in Syria, Yemen or eastern Ukraine, the Council
must do its utmost to end it, to protect children and to
give a strong voice to those who are most vulnerable.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, for holding this
important meeting. Our thanks also go to the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict, Ms. Zerrougui, as well as to Ms. Yoka
Brandt, Ms. Julie Bodin and Mr. Junior Nzita.

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

I would like to emphasize the importance of today’s
debate on children who are victims of non-State armed
groups and their fate in times of conflict. A lot of
progress has been made in improving the criteria and
legal frameworks for protecting children in armed
conflict, and in the international community’s efforts
to protect them during and after such conflict. Despite
such improvements, however, we are still seeing an
unprecedented increase in violations and in the number
of child victims around the world, particularly in the
Middle East and Africa. The exploitation of children by
non-State armed groups has reached dangerous levels,
particularly owing to the increasingly modern methods
used to recruit them and to how easy it is manipulate
them, particularly owing to children’s ignorance about
the dangers they are facing.
Many extremist groups have committed horrendous
crimes and violations against children, exposing them to
scenes of violence and encouraging them to participate
and make such crimes their own. Girls and boys are
forced to work as combattants, suicide bombers or
even executioners. They are reduced to sexual slavery
or to working as miners. They may even be paid after
their abduction — $1,200 a month in some conflict
regions. Daesh recently opened special centres to
recruit children in an organized and systematic manner
so as to entrench its ideology and extremist ideas in
the heads of these children. The main danger posed by
terrorist groups like Daesh is that they are training a
generation to champion their extremist ideology, which
will complicate the eradication of such thinking in the
future.
Among the methods used by extremist non-State
actors to recruit children is the dissemination of
social media on the Internet in order to mobilize them
intellectually to join these groups throughout the world,
and not just in conflict zones, either by interacting with
them directly on certain websites or by other means. It
is important to encourage those sites to find effective
ways to counter terrorist propaganda and advertising,
and to establish guidelines to identify content that can
be published on social media pages so that they cannot
be used as forums for the recruitment of children.
One of the most pressing challenges facing the
international community today is how to constrain
non-State groups to respect international humanitarian
law and inalienable right, and to impose on them a
sense of responsibility for fighting the impunity of
those who use abuse children’s rights. There is no

S/PV.7414

magic wand that we can wave, I know, but we have
to establish a mechanism and preventive strategies
to address these challenges. That will require greater
cooperation between the Security Council and the rest
of the United Nations in using the means at our disposal
to prevent conflicts more effectively, including through
early warning mechanisms and preventive diplomacy.
Pressure must be brought to bear on parties to conflict
to sign on to plans of action for the protection of children
and commit themselves to such programmes.
The United Nations entities need access to such
pockets of conflict so as to provide necessary support
to children and stop them from joining armed groups
in order to earn money to support themselves. We must
also focus our efforts on educational and reinsertion
programmes for children who have already been
recruited, which will help build a foundation for the
protection of children in armed conflict. It is essential to
launch awareness-raising campaigns to inform children
of the dangers of joining armed groups in conflict areas,
and to create special commissions to identify violations
committed against children by non-State armed groups
in order to ensure that their instigators are brought to
justice. The names of these criminals, particularly those
who perpetrate sexual violence and mass abductions of
girls, should be included in sanctions lists.
Jordan is working to provide children in Syria with
a better future and to prevent them from participating
in the ongoing conflict. We are giving them educational
and health-care services of the highest quality, to
the fullest extent of our capacities. International
organizations have supported Jordan in the provision
of such services, including through coordination
with the United Nations specialized agencies and
non-governmental organizations. With the help of
UNICEF, a care centre has been established for refugee
children that offers an educational and preventive
framework, in addition to psychological and social
support. Jordan has opened public and private schools
to Syrian refugee children. The number of school-age
children in and outside the camps now exceeds 120,000,
yet despite such efforts it has been recognized that the
current funding of programmes targeting children in
armed conflict is neither sustainable nor sufficient. The
international community must work in earnest to find
adequate funding to fill the gap so as to guarantee the
provision of such services.
Finally, we are forced to ask: How many violations
of children’s rights will have to be committed, and

15-0836523/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

how many children will have to endure the most
odious abuse before everyone signs the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict and
before States can find the common resolve to fight the
recruitment of children in armed conflict?
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I should like to thank the delegation of France
for its initiative in convening today’s meeting. We also
thank the Secretary-General and the invited briefers
for their dedication to preventing and addressing the
violation of children’s right in armed conflict and for
the valuable information they have presented today.
We especially thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
for her dedication and active work in assisting children
throughout the world.
We share the concern that has been expressed over
the difficult situation of millions of children affected
by armed conflict. A year ago, Ms. Zerrougui, together
with Anthony Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF,
launched the “Children, Not Soldiers” campaign to end
the recruitment and use of children in national security
forces by 2016. We can now note with satisfaction that
the initiative has been successful. With respect to the
activities of non-State armed groups, however, the
severity of the problem has not abated. According to the
most recent report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2014/339), out of the 59 parties
listed 51 are non-State actors.
Today, the danger posed by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) and other terrorist groups has
become a priority. Information is being spread on the
Internet and social networks to hypnotize children and
adolscents under religious pretexts and to recruit them
for participation in military action or as terrorist suicide
bombers. Not so long ago, media worldwide broadcast
barbaric images from an ISIS video in which a 12-year
old boy shot a prisoner. We continue to receive shocking
information on the abduction of children in Nigeria by
Boko Haram. These are just the most grievous of recent
crimes committed against children.
Fighting crimes against children is an important
component of the range of measures adopted for the
settlement of conflicts and post-conflict reconstruction.
It is clear that thorough and consistent efforts are needed
to reintegrate children formerly associated with armed
groups and to treat the psychological, socioeconomic
and other impacts on child victims of violence. Most
24/94

25/03/2015

States affected by armed conflict are striving to improve
the situation of children, but they often require the
assistance of the international community. The United
Nations main task in that regard is to complement and
support national efforts. The Security Council and its
mechanisms can work most effectively in cooperation
with the States where armed groups are active. The role
of Governments, alongside United Nations structures,
in cooperating on child protection with non-State armed
groups is clearly articulated in resolution 1612 (2005).
We believe that, in carrying out the complex
mission assigned to her under her mandate, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General can find the
best way to help children in each specific case. The
ways of exerting pressure on violators can vary given
the differences in the nature, goals and strategies of
armed groups. We believe that the Council, including
its thematic working group, has the necessary tools
under the Council’s resolutions in order to find the most
effective ways to solve problems pertaining to grave
violations against children in armed conflict. Moreover,
those mechanisms must deal first and foremost with
the largest and most acute situations of armed conflict
on the Council’s agenda that lead to serious violations
against children.
We decisively condemn violations of the norms of
international law, international humanitarian law and
international law relating to human rights and the rights
of refugees with regard to children, regardless of who
commits them. Following the requisite investigations,
parties guilty of committing such crimes must be
brought to justice. Both premeditated attacks and the
indiscriminate or excessive use of force, which have
comparable effects, are unacceptable.
This year we commemorate the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), which
established the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. We wish success to the Permanent
Representative of Malaysia, the group’s new Chair, in
particular on the Council meeting on this issue to be
held in June. Today’s meeting can make a contribution
to the preparations for the upcoming meeting, as well
as to future meetings of the Working Group. In that
regard, we note the intention of the French delegation
to prepare a relevant non-paper in its national capacity.
In accordance with the Council’s past practice, we do
not view that document as expressing the views of
the members of the Council or as an outcome of the
meeting.

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I
would like to begin by thanking the Secretary-General,
his Special Representative Laila Zerrougi, Deputy
Director Brandt, Ms. Bodin and Mr. Nzita for sharing
their insights to day and for the work they are doing to
safeguard the world’s children.
In this Chamber we make choices about international
responses to conflict through our resolutions, the work
of our peacekeepers, the weight of our sanctions and,
sometimes, tragically, through our inaction. We have
a duty to make choices so that children do not fact
impossible ones. We have seen many worthy efforts to
protect children, but we would not be doing our jobs if
we did not use our time here today to focus on what we
can do better.
States Members of the United Nations must be held
to the highest standards. At an absolute minimum, we
must ensure that national armed forces do not unlawfully
recruit and use children. To that end, we applaud the
work of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and the “Children, Not Soldiers” campaign,
but recognize that this is a collective responsibility and
a challenge that can be addressed only through difficult
choices being made in capitals to take a stand against
abusers.
The United States is doing its part. In 2008, the
Child Soldiers Prevention Act was signed into law in
the United States. That law requires the publication of
an annual list of countries whose countries unlawfully
recruit and use child soldiers, or Governments that
support armed groups that do so. The law goes further
than publicly naming those countries; countries on
the list can also be subject to certain restrictions on
assistance provided by the United States Governments.
We know those tools can work. Public listings and
assistance restrictions, in coordination with the
concerted engagement of other Member States and
international actors, are useful tools and have helped to
encourage Governments to take important action.
In response to that kind of multilateral engagement,
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo signed an action plan with the United Nations to
end the unlawful use and recruitment of child soldiers
within its armed forces, as well as sexual violence and
other violations and abuses committed against children
by the armed forces and security services. They have
made significant progress towards meeting their goals,
as documented in the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2014/339). The United Nations has been

S/PV.7414

given greater access to State security facilities and
detention centres in order to identify and separate
minors, and important new policies have been adopted.
Of course, much more remains to be done. But
tools like those can be helpful, and we encourage other
Member States to establish legislation and employ
similar tools to press countries to take meaningful
action to address the unlawful recruitment and use of
child soldiers. We of course know that the solution to
this problem is more complex than any single piece of
legislation or act of bilateral pressure can solve, and
the risk posed by non-State actors is great. To that end,
there is more that we can do at the United Nations in the
common cause for children.
First, we can insist on strong human rights
reporting in peacekeeping missions, which includes
accurate and timely information on violations and
abuses committed against children. And then we can
act on that information with all the tools we have at
our disposal to hold perpetrators accountable for their
actions.
Secondly, we can ensure that child protection issues
are on the table during the difficult work of negotiating
peace agreements. There has never been a conflict
that did not involve children. The peace that we seek
should be for their benefit. Child protection is an issue
around which all sides should be able to agree, even if
they cannot agree on much else, and it is a choice that
warring parties can affirmatively make when making
peace.
Thirdly, we must be ready to receive children
coming out of conflict with more robust disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes.
Kidnapped at the age of 10 along with four other girls
by soldiers of the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda (FDLR), a Congolse told representatives
of a non-governmental organization that when FDLR
soldiers raped a woman in front of her, she had no choice.
“I did nothing”, she said, “I could not do anything
to stop the rape.” After seven years as s soldier, she
deserted the group and ran through the forest for two
days, avoiding certain execution if caught by the search
party sent after her. Bilaterally and through our United
Nations agencies, we must bolster the shortcomings in
the DDR process so that children do not have to make
the choice to continue fighting or to return to fighting
simply because they are unable to escape and they
see no other path. One programme — an $8 million
DDR programme in the Democratic Republic of the

15-0836525/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

Congo, funded by the United States in cooperation
with UNICEF — is working to separate and reintegrate
children from armed groups into safe, secure and
stable communities. More than 1,000 children have
been separated from armed groups to date. There is an
urgent need for more such work.
I want to raise another choice, a terrible one,
confronting some children today with which we must
contend. We are increasingly seeing young people go to
great lengths to join organizations intent on fomenting
violence and instilling terror. Children are being lured
into war zones to join terrorist organizations committed
to a barbaric and violent confrontation with humankind
and modernity. On 17 February, three young girls
boarded a flight from London to Istanbul and reportedly
crossed into Syria with the goal of joining the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). A family member
of one of the girls described her as “an A-star student”.
Her family has publicly begged her, implored her, to
come home. Those girls were likely lured by ISIL’s
false promises of righteousness and glory, while in
fact all that awaits them, and too many like them, is
terror, murder and suffering. The propaganda employed
by ISIL in its effort to recruit terrorists is innovative,
shockingly effective and prolific — and estimated
90,000 tweets and other social media responses per
day. Even as we engage ISIL on the battlefield to win,
we must also contest and expose ISIL’s malignant lies
and its pernicious efforts to recruit and exploit young
people from lands near and far.
Therefore today, when we speak of children and
armed conflict we are no longer just speaking of
conflict chasing after children like the young girl who
mustered the courage to escape into the forests from the
murderous FDLR. We are also speaking, frighteningly,
of young people who leave behind their families and
seek out conflict. Perhaps we can never understand
what drove those three young girls to seek to join
ISIL’s campaign of cruelty and hate, but it merits our
uninterrupted attention and unwavering resolve to stop.
Whether victimized by terrorists or exploitative
Governments, or armed groups, children deserve
and need our protection. From better reporting to
new accountability measures established by Member
States to inclusive peace negotiations and robust
demobilization efforts — we must make those policy
choices here and in our capitals so that our children do
not have to confront impossible choices in our stead.

26/94

25/03/2015

Junior Nzita was forced to become a soldier at
the age of 12, and, as he so eloquently briefed us and
wrote: “My childhood was not like other children’s.
It was stolen, confiscated and deprived of the love
of my mother and the protection of my country”. But
Mr. Nzita’s story is not only about loss; it is about
what he has created. His organization provides support
for marginalized children and helps to reintegrate
them into society. Given the opportunity, he chose to
make life better for others who have suffered what
he has suffered. We must ensure that all children in
all societies are shielded from conflict and have the
opportunity to become leaders who can build strong,
stable communities and carry out the important work
of making peace.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): In
the framework of the tenth anniversary of resolution
1612 (2005), next July, we would like to thank France
for having convened this open debate. We would also
highlight the leadership of Malaysia in the informal
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
We appreciate the briefings by the SecretaryGeneral and invited participants, especially civil
society and Junior Nzita. The encourage us to continue
to work decisively for girls and boys in conflict
and post-conflict situations. We thank the Special
Representative, Leila Zerrougui, for her work in this
area and her call to prevent and eradicate the brutal
actions of non-State actors against children, which we
strongly condemn.
My delegation endorses the statement to be made
later by the Austrian delegation on behalf of the Human
Security Network, to which my country belongs.
Chile, in its capacity as a State party to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocols, and Convention 182 of the International
Labour Organization, and a signatory to the Paris
Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with
Armed Forces or Armed Groups, believes that focusing
on non-State actors, as we are doing here today,
should not delay the efforts being deployed through
the “Children, Not Soldiers” campaign to prevent
and eradicate the recruitment and use of children by
Government armed forces by 2016.
States have the primary responsibility to
combat impunity and bring to justice and punish the
perpetrators of the most serious crimes committed
against children. If States do not have the capacity or

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

are unwilling to do so, it will be up to the International
Criminal Court to address those crimes that are
covered under the Rome Statute. The recent ruling of
the Court’s Appeals Chamber in the case of Thomas
Lubanga, which touches on reparations and the role of
the Trust Fund for Victims, is a specific example in that
respect. International commissions of inquiry should
also address this issue and redouble their efforts to
preserve evidence of these most serious of crimes.
Chile reiterates its condemnation of the six
categories of the most serious violations identified
by the Council and of all of the other violations and
abuses committed against children affected by armed
conflicts. We therefore condemn in the strongest of
terms the abduction of girls and boys and their use
as suicide bombers or sex slaves by extremist armed
groups. No religion or ideology can justify these
actions, which must be firmly condemned, prevented
and eradicated by all actors that participate in conflicts
and by the international community as a whole.
We encourage cooperation in formulating strategies
aimed at preventing and eradicating violent extremism
and the abduction and recruitment of children by armed
groups. In this regard, we hope that the Council will
soon address the issue of the abduction of girls and boys
in conflict and post-conflict situations. Likewise, we
vehemently condemn the use of children by non-State
actors in the exploitation and trafficking of natural
resources, which is used, inter alia, to acquire weapons.
Cooperation by Governments, non-governmental
organizations or other parties with non-State armed
groups that recruit and use children for any purpose
should be punished, even when such groups do not
intend to violate the rights of children. The system
can play a role in this regard through the sanctions
Committees and peacekeeping missions. The work of
the Office of the Special Representative, UNICEF, the
human rights and child protection sections of those
missions, and the groups of experts of the sanctions
Committees is crucial to information-sharing and a full
listing of non-State groups that use children and the
organizations and individuals that are cooperating with
these armed groups.
We hope that resolutions concerning new
committees or the renewal of mandates will address
this issue, and we appreciate any recommendations
that the groups of experts of the sanctions Committees,
among others, might make with regard to controlling
small arms and light weapons.

S/PV.7414

Chile reiterates the need to promote effective and
inclusive processes of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration for children associated with armed
forces or armed groups, with the effective participation
of those affected and local communities, thereby
promoting social cohesion among the traumatized
social groups.
In order for resolution 2143 (2014), of which Chile
was a sponsor, to be effectively implemented, we
stress the importance of respecting the civilian nature
of schools and condemn all attacks and threats of
attacks against them, which contravene international
humanitarian law and the right to education. We call
on the parties to armed conflict to refrain from such
actions and hope that the Secretary-General will
continue to follow up and report, among other things, on
the military use of schools and hospitals. In this regard,
we view positively the preparation and implementation
of the Lucens Guidelines, aimed at preventing the
military use of schools and universities during armed
conflicts. We also believe that the issue of the protection
of education and educational establishments should be
addressed in ceasefire agreements and post-conflict
agendas.
Finally, given the transnational character of many
non-State armed groups, collective action is imperative
so that the multilateral system can deal effectively with
the threats facing children in armed conflict. This must
lead to a strengthening of cooperation and coordination
among regional and subregional organizations,
information-sharing, joint regional actions and
regional policies for the prevention and protection of
children, including the special needs of girls, as was
highlighted during the open debate held on 30 January
(see S/PV.7374).
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened today’s open
debate on the situation of girls and boys in armed
conflict, in which more than 80 countries have
shown interest by asking to speak. We believe that
this is very important debate. We are grateful for the
participation of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui;
Ms. Yoka Brandt, Deputy Executive Director of
UNICEF; Ms. Julie Bodin; and Mr. Junior Nzita for
their testimony and their participation in this debate.

15-0836527/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has acceded
to all United Nations conventions and protocols aimed
at effectively protecting boys and girls. In that regard,
our country condemns any violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
ibn the context of children in armed conflict, and
we call on all parties to meet their obligations under
the applicable provisions of international law. The
recruitment of girls and boys, whatever its form or
motivation, runs contrary to the better interests of those
young people and compromises their guaranteed right
to life and to development.
My country rejects all uses of children in armed
conflict and other abuses and violations committed
against the children thus affected. We deplore the
impunity that prevails in many areas of armed conflict,
where the parties persist in violating the relevant
provisions of applicable international law. We firmly
support the adoption of effective measures to ensure
the demobilization, rehabilitation, physical and
psychological recovery and social reintegration of child
soldiers.
Venezuela considers it tragic and ethically
questionable that a significant number of girls and boys
in situations of armed conflict live and grow up in a
culture of horror and violence. That situation affects
those children’s ability to build their country’s future
in a spirit of peace and sustainable development and
compromises their future. In various reports of the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, it can be
seen that the situation of children affected by armed
conflict throughout the world remains a source of major
concern. We regret that 2014 has been the worst year for
children in situations of armed conflict.
My country repudiates as robustly as possible the
atrocities and abuses against and large-scale abductions
of children in conflict areas perpetrated by extremist
and terrorist groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq
and Syria, Boko Haram and Al-Qaida, among others.
The situation is unacceptable and threatens our very
humanity. The persistence of cases of forced recruitment
or mass abductions by non-State actors, with a view
to compelling children to participate in fighting or
support work for armed conflict, is an ongoing reality.
Nevertheless, in a significant number of cases, children
join in the armed conflict because they are forced to
do so as the only option, given their socioeconomically

28/94

25/03/2015

vulnerable situation and the abuse, discrimination and
exclusion they face as a consequence of war.
We believe it imperative to move beyond the
exclusively punitive approach in order to address the
problem comprehensively by dealing with the root
causes of conflict. Preventing the use of children in
armed conflict and guaranteeing their protection and
rights in such situations with a view to reintegration
will be achieved only through adequate social, political
and economic conditions.
When we privilege the military option and invoke
national interests to carry out military interventions
or deal with conflict situations, thereby promoting the
proliferation of non-State armed groups, extremists and
terrorists, we create conditions conducive to the abuse
and violation of the human rights of girls and boys. The
funding and permanent flow of arms to such groups
must cease. The use of double standards in dealing with
those issues undermines international efforts to protect
children in armed conflict.
My country supports accountability for violations
against children in armed conflicts. No one can, whether
non-State armed groups or State military forces, is
exempt. In that regard, we cannot fail to mention the
situation in the Palestinian occupied territory, where
more than 300 children remain detained without being
accorded minor status, and are subjected to cruel,
inhumane or degrading treatment by Israel.
We consider it appropriate that in all peace
processes, ceasefires and implementing mechanisms,
the parties and mediators include the issue of child
protection as a required condition and principle. Child
protection must be an integral element of peacekeeping
operations and special political missions, with the
necessary resources and appropriate training prior to
deployment.
Measures to encourage non-State actors to
undertake commitments to protecting children in
armed conflict should be adapted on a case-by-case
basis. We should remember that national Governments
are primarily responsible for protecting children
within their territory. That is why the United Nations
and regional organizations must work with the States
concerned and in close cooperation with the respective
authorities.
Finally, Venezuela calls upon those States that
have not yet ratified the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and its Optional Protocol on the involvement
15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

of children in armed conflict to accede to those legal
instruments.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing
and to all briefers for their presentations, which were
sterling. However I expressing thanks not only for the
presentations, but also for the splendid efforts carried
out each day in defense of our children, who represent
our future.
I do not think it is going too far to say that before
1999 the Council had forgotten, or at least not focused
enough attention on the issue of children, because the
first relevant Council resolutions post-date that year.
It was about the year 1996 when we saw two truly
important milestones in the General Assembly: first, the
creation of the Office now ably led by Ms. Zerrougui,
and then the issuamce of the splendid Graça Machel
report (A/51/306), which awakened our consciences.
Since then, progress has been made in a number of
areas, five of which I will address. First, the Security
Council has adopted six resolutions addressing in
monographic fashion the serious issue of children and
armed conflict. I believe that the Council must insist on
their full respect and implementation.
Secondly, we have been able to identify six serious
violations of those rights and four triggers. In that
context, I express my unqualified support for the
Malaysian proposal that abductions be identified as
triggers.
My third point concerns the language of the
mandates of peacekeeping operations. In my delegation’s
view, the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is the mandate that best reflects the problem of
children in armed conflict. In that context, I wish to
make three specific proposals: first, that the Council
ensure that all peacekeeping operations are provided
with adequate language on the protection of children
in armed conflict; secondly, that an effort be made to
ensure that in peacekeeping operations the Council
has included special advisers on children’s issues; and
thirdly, that we ensure optimal training of our Blue
Helmets in those issues.
The fourth area of progress relates to the funds
and programmes, which I believe to have accomplished
extraordinary work. I would highlight the work of
UNICEF as a very specific case in South Sudan, in
the Bentiu area, where, in a very short time they have

S/PV.7414

been able to ensure education accessibility for 11,000
children, largely due to the efforts of UNICEF and its
donors.
Fifthly, I highlight the recognition of two
delegations — that of Luxembourg, for its fantastic
“Children, Not Soldiers” campaign and, of course,
that of Malaysia, for chairing the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.
What is the current immediate challenge? In the
very short term, I would propose that it should be zero
tolerance. In other words, we must prevent non-State
actors from using children in armed conflict. In that
regard there has been much success in terms of national
armies, but progress is necessary in terms of non-State
actors. Spain therefore enthusiastically supports the
ability to access non-State actors in order to discuss
that very serious issue with them.
Finally, what tools are available to ensure success
in the face of this difficult challenge? I would quote
three in particular.
The first is public opinion. A few days ago I read
about a 15-year old child, Walid, who was not being
covered by the media. He was saying proudly how at 15
he had a machine gun and he controlled a border post in
Yemen. Nobody paid attention to that. What we should
be doing is looking at social networks. Social networks
should be used to condemn cases of this kind so that
they are not forgotten.
The second is dialogue and action plans. As several
delegations have said, 23 plans of action have been
signed, 12 with non-State actors and 11 with States. We
need to further work on those plans and, if necessary,
sign new ones, as was mentioned by the Ambassador of
the United Kingdom, with non-State actors that have
not yet signed up.
Thirdly, we need to promote interaction between
the International Criminal Court and the Security
Council. I think it is good to remember that article 8
of the Rome Statute establishes very clearly that it is a
crime to recruit children for armed conflict. I would like
to make a very specific proposal to promote interaction
between the International Criminal Court and the
Security Council, in particular with the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict.
Finally, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate. I am convinced
that you, Sir, have been inspired by Victor Hugo’s

15-0836529/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

25/03/2015

celebrated hero, the young Gavroche, whom Mario
Vargas Llosa described as the most fascinating writer
of world literature. Today France has taken another step
in the right direction.

including resolutions 1612 (2005) and 1998 (2011).
Likewise, Brazil fully supports the “Children, Not
Soldiers” campaign to end the recruitment of children
by Government forces by 2016.

The President (spoke in French): I would like to
remind speakers to kindly limit their statements to
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate the texts
in writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber. I would like to appeal to
speakers to deliver their statements at a normal speed
so that interpreters are able to work properly. I wish to
inform all concerned that we will be continuing this
open debate right through the lunch hour, given the
very large number of speakers.

While acknowledging the magnitude of the atrocities
committed by certain non-State actors, we should keep
in mind that abuses against boys and girls also result
from unilateral Governmental military intervention
and illegal occupation. Let us also not forget that the
protection of children in armed conflicts is closely
linked to the promotion of development. While social
inequality impacts all groups, children are particularly
vulnerable to its negative consequences. According to
UNICEF, the poorest 20 per cent of children around the
globe are twice as likely as the richest 20 per cent to
be stunted by poor nutrition, or to die before their fifth
birthday.

I now give the floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. de Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in French):
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
on a very important issue.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
as well as Special Representative Leila Zerrougui,
UNICEF Deputy Executive Director Yoka Brandt,
Ms. Julie Bodin and Mr. Junior Nzita for their
enlightening briefings.
Deliberate abuses committed against boys and
girls in the context of armed conflicts have been under
discussion by the Security Council for 16 years now.
Over the years we have developed an increasingly
effective framework to tackle the issue. Yet the
situation has recently been exacerbated by the rise of
extremist non-State armed groups with little regard
for international humanitarian and human rights law.
Some of those movements have reportedly engaged in
raping, abducting, recruiting, maiming or murdering
girls and boys, while denying them their basic rights
and needs, including the right to education. Brazil
strongly condemns those violations and expects that
those responsible will be brought to justice.
The international community must join forces in
tackling these challenges with the utmost seriousness.
Brazil has endorsed the Paris Commitments and Paris
Principles on Children Associated with Armed Forces
or Armed Groups. During its most recent mandates as
a member of the Security Council, Brazil supported
the adoption of milestone documents on the matter,

30/94

In debating the situation of children victims of
non-State armed groups, it is of the essence to highlight
and uphold the basic political and legal distinction
between armed conflicts and situations of domestic
law enforcement. While both categories are currently
within the mandate of the Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, they obviously pose
entirely different challenges and must be addressed
through different policies. On the one hand, armed
conflicts being examined by the Council are subject to
the rules and regulations of international humanitarian
law, such as the obligation by all parties — including
non-State actors — to protect children and other
civilians. In these cases, diplomatic and legal measures
to prevent further violence and to ensure accountability
for serious violations all have a role to play. The
International Criminal Court in particular is an
appropriate mechanism to tackle impunity and to
dissuade would-be perpetrators from committing
atrocities against children and other vulnerable groups.
On the other hand, cases of domestic law enforcement
that do not represent a threat to international peace and
security, and therefore fall outside the mandate of the
Security Council, should be handled by Governments
through national legislation. A different set of standards
applies to those circumstances — that of international
human rights law, including the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and other instruments. International
cooperation is of course not to be excluded in this
domain.
The imperative to ensure their social reintegration
and their psychological rehabilitation is a vital aspect of
15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

our efforts to protect children formerly associated with
armed groups. Sports and cultural initiatives can be
instrumental in that regard. In the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Brazil has partnered with UNICEF, the
United Nations Development Programme and civil
society organizations in a project that has allowed
hundreds of children formerly linked to armed groups
in North Kivu to socialize and to develop new personal
identities through the practice of Afro-Brazilian
capoeira. This is a successful instance of peacebuilding
in practice.
Another approach to shield children from the
consequences of war is the granting of refuge. Since
2013, Brazil has adopted policies specifically aimed at
welcoming and integrating Syrian refugees and their
families. We have granted humanitarian visas to over
6,000 asylum-seekers who were affected by the lasting
conflict in Syria, many of whom are boys and girls
whose very survival was at risk.
In conclusion, allow me to once again underscore
Brazil’s firm commitment to the protection of children
in armed conflict, both at the multilateral level and
through bilateral initiatives. We will remain engaged
with the United Nations system and our international
partners to promote the safety, the security and the wellbeing of boys and girls affected by violence around the
world.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the Nordic countries — Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.
First, I would like to thank the French presidency
very much for the continued focus of the Security
Council on this important topic, especially today for
highlighting the question of non-State armed groups.
We would also like to acknowledge the crucial role
played by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Leila Zerrougui and her Office, as well as the
work of UNICEF, other United Nations agencies and, of
course, the many non-governmental organizations that
are doing very important work in the field.
This is a timely, highly relevant and very important
debate. As was stated in last year’s report of the
Secretary-General (S/2014/339), 51 of 59 parties to
armed conflict that have been found to perpetrate grave
violations against children are non-State armed groups.

S/PV.7414

The appalling violations by these — such as the mass
abduction of 276 schoolgirls in Chibok by Boko Haram,
of the 153 Kurdish boys from Ain al-Arab in Syria, and
the hundreds of Yezidi children in western Iraq by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, and the slaughter
of schoolchildren in Peshawar, Pakistan — have left no
one untouched. A crime against a child is an affront to
our basic value of human decency. We have failed those
children Flagrant violations like those just mentioned
need to be prevented and combated.
Women, girls and boys are among the most
vulnerable people in conflict-affected settings, and
we therefore call for dedicated attention to sexual and
gender-based violence. Children continue to be subject
to such unspeakable violations, such as rape, sexual
violence, sexual slavery and forced marriages. We
also know that reintegration into society is especially
difficult for child victims. Further attention is needed
to help children, adolescents and their communities in
these areas. We also need to continue to highlight the fact
that the recruitment and use of children as combatants
in armed conflict are war crimes. As recommended
through the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict, we also encourage States to refrain
from recruiting children under the age of 18 into their
armed forces in order to set an example.
Children’s right to quality education in war and
disaster is a vital part of protecting children during
conflict. Attending school can create a sense of
normality in an otherwise chaotic situation. Attacks on
schools deprive children may amount to war crimes.
We very much welcome efforts to deter the use of
schools by armed forces and non-State armed groups
in contravention of international law. We encourage all
States to engage in the ongoing consultations on a Safe
Schools Declaration.
The fight against impunity and assuring victim’s
access to justice remain crucial. Crimes against
children must be investigated and prosecuted to
the full extent of the law. Individual responsibility
must be upheld, and this means that all perpetrators
must be held accountable and punished accordingly,
regardless of their status or capacity. The International
Criminal Court plays an important role in ensuring
accountability, and we welcome the initiative of the
Prosecutor’s Office to develop a comprehensive policy
paper on children. We must not forget, however, that
States themselves bear the primary responsibility for

15-0836531/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

protecting their populations, including children, from
crimes.
It is essential that personnel in peacekeeping
missions have adequate training in the rights of the
child, including through predeployment training in
child protection. We are therefore happy to inform
that Sweden is once again planning to host a United
Nations child protection training-of-trainers course at
the Swedish Armed Forces International Centre this
autumn.
Children are particularly vulnerable in humanitarian
crises. We would welcome a particular focus on
protection in general and child protection in particular
in the run-up to World Humanitarian Summit. We note
the necessity of intensified dialogue through various
channels with non-State actors to prevent violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
As has been mentioned, there is an economic and
social dimension to children joining armed groups, as
they may be driven by poverty or social exclusion. The
Nordic countries are very pleased that ending violence
against children is now one of the priorities of the post2015 agenda.
Before concluding, the Nordic countries would
like to congratulate the Special Representative on a
successful first year of the “Children, Not Soldiers”
campaign, which aims to end the recruitment and use
of children in conflict by 2016, as endorsed by the
Council, and which we wholeheartedly support. It is a
victory for the campaign that six out of seven countries
concerned have now signed or recommitted to action
plans.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of India.
Mr. Bishnoi (India): We thank you, Sir, for
convening this open debate on the subject of children
and armed conflict, with a special focus on child
victims of non-State armed groups. We thank your
delegation for the concept note that has been prepared
(S/2015/168, annex). We also thank the SecretaryGeneral, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF and
other briefers for the information they have provided.
We note that 2014 was reported to be the worst year
as far as children and armed conflict are concerned,
and that the pattern continues. This is most distressing.

32/94

25/03/2015

Children are innocent, and they should not be victims of
what is not of their making. While we acknowledge the
importance of resolution 1612 (2005), the situation also
highlights its limitations. The focus on children and
armed conflict profiles the issue, as indeed it should.
The real solution, however, lies in the achievement of
durable peace, and that is what the Council’s actions
should focus upon.
It is important that United Nations access to
non-State armed groups be ensured through the
cooperation framework between the United Nations
and the concerned national Government. We must be
cautious that the United Nations actions not be such
as to bypass national Governments and give political
legitimacy to non-State actors. It is this legitimacy
that they seek the most and which may also, to some
extent, be a motivating factor. I will also add that, in
the context of monitoring mechanisms, the veracity and
credibility of field data can be maintained only through
the involvement of national Governments.
We note that the concept note refers to the need for
military operations, including peace operations, against
non-State armed groups to integrate child protection
issues into their operational planning, procedures
and operations so as to minimize and prevent child
casualties. The drafting of such important mandates
would require the Council to have the full cooperation
of the host Government of the peacekeeping operation,
as well as of the Member States not represented in
the Council that contribute troops to such operations.
Unfortunately, the latter consultation is not the practice
in the Council, although the provisions of Article 44 are
quite clear on this
The concept note also refers to the need to
encourage States to adopt legal measures to prohibit
and criminalize the use of children under the age of
18. We are not clear how this would help. Illegal armed
groups operate outside the law. They kill, torture and
maim the innocent. It seems most doubtful that those
who resort to illegal armed conflict and terrorism
would be deterred from recruiting children if they were
prohibited from doing so merely by the law.
Again, the possibility of sanctions and questions
of accountability should not lead us to be blindsided.
There are references in the concept note to putting
more pressure on non-State armed groups, to holding
commanders of such groups accountable for their
actions, and to raising the normative and political costs

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

for them. We should not end up in a situation of missing
the woods for the trees.
It is also our view that the international community
should also strive to address the broader issue of the
economic and social marginalization that drives
millions of children into the kind of childhood that could
make them part of the problem rather than tomorrow’s
solution. The socioeconomic issues plaguing the
poorest nations and the need to eradicate poverty must
be the imperatives of our development agenda in order
to enable an environment of lasting peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to congratulate the French Republic
on its assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month. I commend the efforts of the Permanent
Mission of China for its very effective presidency of
the Council last month.
The Iraqi Government has paid great attention
to issues related to children because it is our belief
that their well being is crucial for the future in all
its aspects, including the overall framework for
building a new democratic Iraq. However, today my
country is confronting serious challenges because
of the violent attacks of the criminal terrorists of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), which
seeks to derail the efforts to achieve those objectives
and the Government’s efforts to spread law and order
throughout the country. ISIL’s actions have a negative
effect on the general enjoyment of economic, social,
cultural, civil and political human rights. ISIL’s
criminal practices against children in the areas of
Iraq under its control have taken the form of killings,
forced displacements and expulsions, sexual violence
of all forms, trafficking in children, the deprivation of
education, forced recruitment and the use of children in
its media material, which contain scenes and ideas that
are in complete contradiction with children’s innocence
and the way they should be raised. All that is in addition
to attacks against health and educational facilities that
care for children, which constitute a serious challenge
and threat to children and the entire Iraqi community.
One of ISIL’s most dangerous practices in the
context of its attacks on children in Iraq was its attack
on the educational process in the areas under its control
in Iraq by seeking to change Government textbooks
and enforce the use of new textbooks and syllabuses

S/PV.7414

that focus on extremist ideas, the hatred of others, the
exclusion of others and involvement in acts of violence.
All that represents a threat to children’s future and a
danger to the educational values of the Iraqi community
and the Government’s plans in the area of education.
In addition to leaving thousands of children
without education or health care because of their flight
from ISIL’s terrorist attacks, there are tens of thousands
of children who remain and, unfortunately, could not
escape. They are now subject to ISIL’s control and
terror. This is a cause of great concern because these
entities do not abide by any international conventions
or instruments that guarantee the protection of
children, and one cannot negotiate with them to
guarantee the safety of these children. That leaves
the Iraqi Government to confront a huge dilemma.
The Government is not able to plead with that enemy
and urge it to refrain from recruiting children in the
fighting, from using them as suicide bombers or from
abusing them through their various brutal methods.
It is extremely important that the international
community reaffirm the principles that were adopted
over the course of many years for the protection of
women and children during wartime. Considering the
current situation of Iraq, which is faced with ISIL’s
terrorism, the Iraqi Government will work hard to
reintegrate children and the victims of terrorism in
the areas that are liberated from ISIL’s control after
the terrorist group is defeated. Therefore, the Iraqi
Government is focusing its attention and priorities on
combatting terrorism and rescuing its community from
extremism.
In conclusion, children living in the areas of armed
conflict in Iraq face increasing orphanhood because
of ISIL’s terrorist operations and they will have to
deal with ISIL’s negative effects on the future of the
country. Abducted Yazidi and Christian children also
face being forced to abandon their own faiths, adopt
brutal ideologies and carry out suicide attacks, as well
as being subject to heinous torture and death.
Iraq participates in every way possible in the
international “Children, Not Soldiers” campaign.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Braun (Germany) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this important
debate today.

15-0836533/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

(spoke in English)
Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union in just
a moment.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
statement, and the briefers for sharing their valuable
expertise and insight with us.
Allow me to congratulate the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict and UNICEF on the first anniversary of the
“Children, Not Soldiers” campaign. We believe that
the impact of the campaign to end the recruitment
of children by State actors is remarkable, and we are
pleased to have been able to make a contribution to it.
Despite the progress achieved, much more
needs to be done to tackle the violations committed,
especially by non-State actors. To reduce the number
of violations, we believe that it is imperative for States
concerned to allow direct contacts between the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and non-State
armed groups.
Allow me to make three operative points on how
we may improve the implementation of our children
and armed conflict agenda.
First, success depends on an open, constructive
and continued dialogue among all Member States,
United Nations institutions, civil society organizations
and academic centres. That is why Germany recently
organized a workshop on the implementation of
resolution 1998 (2011), on the protection of schools
and hospitals, at the German Institute for International
and Security Affairs in Berlin. During that meeting,
we touched upon a question posed by today’s concept
note (S/2015/168, annex): How can the documentation
of abuse be improved? One finding on this issue was
the potentially useful role of new technologies, such as,
for example, the Watchlist mobile phone application.
Germany therefore encourages all stakeholders to
explore ways and means to apply new technologies to
monitoring and reporting. Technological tools must
become standard best practice when documenting
grave violations against children in situations of armed
conflict.
Secondly, with regard to United Nations peace
operations, we believe that more can be done to protect
civilians, in particular children, and therefore these
aspects should be strengthened. That is why Germany

34/94

25/03/2015

has funded the development of respective Department
of Peacekeeping Operations training materials, and we
hope to see them applied across the board. Germany also
considers it important that the ongoing peace operations
review duly consider this aspect. This must start with
attention given to sufficient child protection capacity in
peace operation mandates right from a mission’s outset.
When needed and appropriate, a sufficient number of
dedicated child protection officers should be part of the
mission’s staff.
Thirdly and lastly, in order to strengthen
accountability for perpetrators, we encourage the
Council to include grave violations against children
as a designation criterion in sanctions committees,
and encourage the Special Representative to continue
to share information with appropriate sanctions
committees. We also believe that the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict should share countryspecific conclusions with the relevant committees.
Let me also underline the need for situations to be
considered by the International Criminal Court when
applicable. International justice mechanisms must play
their part in strengthening accountability. The recent
confirmation of the judgement against Thomas Lubanga
for recruiting and using child soldiers is a case in point.
More than 270 schoolgirls remain in captivity
in Nigeria; 153 Kurdish boys were abducted by the
so-called Islamic State from Ain al-Arab in Syria.
Hundreds of Yazidi children have been abducted
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/Daesh in
western Iraq. Many more brutal acts against children
are committed on a daily basis. Such acts not only
send families into deep distress, they also impact the
potential of future generations. Therefore, there needs
to be a call for States and the international community
to engage in further concerted action without delay. Let
me assure the Council of Germany’s readiness to assist
it in that effort.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
and its member States. The candidate countries of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

S/PV.7414

and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.

In addition, child protection provisions, including those
relating to the release and reintegration of children,
need to be addressed in peace negotiations.

I want to thank the speakers who have taken or
will take part in today’s discussions, in particular
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Zerrougui, to whom we reiterate our firm and
continuing support. We also wish to thank the French
presidency of the Security Council for organizing this
debate.

Furthermore, we need to ensure accountability.
Twenty-five non-State armed groups have been listed
for at least five years, and are therefore considered
persistent perpetrators. Fighting impunity needs to be
part and parcel of our actions and, whereas the primary
responsibility lies with States, the International
Criminal Court has an essential role to play in that
regard.

The fact that 51 of the 59 parties listed in the
Secretary-General’s report of last year (see S/2014/339)
are non-State armed actors illustrates the extraordinary
importance of today’s debate, namely, the way we
manage the issue of child victims of non-State armed
groups. The various conflicts we face today and that
involve non-State armed groups engender appalling
suffering for children. I shall give two examples. The
first is the scandalous atrocities perpetrated by Boko
Haram, in particular against children, as illustrated
by the abduction of approximately 276 young girls
from Chibok. Those girls were subjected to abuses,
including physical and psychological violence, forced
labour, coerced participation in military operations,
forced marriages with their captors, sexual violence
and rape. As to the second example, in Syria and Iraq,
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/Daesh commits
barbaric acts against children, recruiting them into their
combat units, forcing them to participate in executions
and inflicting various forms of violence and physical
and psychological abuse, such as cruel and degrading
treatment, sexual violence and rape.
(spoke in English)
It is the responsibility of us all to ensure that all
children are able to attend school and to grow up free
from fear and violence, no matter where they live. In that
regard, we must not forget the responsibility of States
to protect their populations, including children, from
atrocity crimes. We need to intensify efforts to address
abuses and violations committed by non-State armed
groups against children through a series of measures.
For example, we need to facilitate the adoption of
action plans and, more important, work towards their
effective implementation. So far, only 12 action plans
have been concluded with non-State armed groups. In
order to implement them it is essential that Member
States allow the United Nations unconditional access
to non-State armed groups for the purpose of ending
and preventing violations and abuses against children.

Moreover, we need to better protect schools against
attacks and deter their use for military purposes in
accordance with international law. We welcome the
decision in resolution 2143 (2014) to request enhanced
monitoring of and reporting on the military use of
schools. We also need to include child protection in
military training and standard operating procedures,
undertake targeted and operational training of United
Nations troop and police contingents and ensure the
inclusion of child protection provisions in the mandates
of peace operations.
We need to address the worrisome pattern of the
abduction of children. One measure in that regard
would be to add abductions as a new trigger for listing.
Recent abductions in Nigeria, Iraq and South Sudan are
just some examples for the need to act more decisively
in that area.
We need to give priority to combating sexual and
gender-based violence committed against children,
including violations committed by non-State armed
groups.
Finally, we need to ensure effective reintegration in
order to prevent re-recruitment by armed groups.
The EU and its member States have made
considerable strides to address the issue in a
comprehensive manner. Let me name just a few recent
measures.
We have strengthened our capacity on child
protection through regular training for our staff, and are
currently finalizing our predeployment child protection
training module for civilian and military personnel.
The European Union is working with the International
Labour Organization and UNICEF on a project to
reintegrate former child combatants in Somalia. We
also support the “Geneva Call” project’s review and
promotion of the implementation of the so-called deeds

15-0836535/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

of commitment for non-State actors. Soon, the European
will launch a €9.3 million call for proposals for conflict
prevention and peacebuilding that prioritize actions on
child combatants and child victims.
In conclusion, I also want to underline our strong
support for the United Nations campaign “Children,
Not Soldiers”, which celebrates its first anniversary this
month and which the European Union and its member
States have strongly supported from its inception.
Looking ahead, this summer will mark the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005),
which established the Council’s Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. That will be an excellent
opportunity to take stock of what has been achieved
and what challenges still lie ahead.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate France on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council this month, and I thank the French
Mission for its timely choice of this topic.
The latest world events have shown that children
are the most affected by the consequences of armed
conflict, a situation worsened by the involvement
of non-State terrorist armed groups. There is a trend
among such groups to abduct children in order to terrify
both Governments and populations. Those children are
sexually abused, injured, maimed or even killed. They
are also used as combatants for those groups. It is not
only abduction; unfortunately, children are persuaded
to join those terrorist groups because of economic,
social and security pressures.
While we celebrate this year the tenth anniversary
of resolution 1612 (2005) and the first anniversary of
the campaign “Children, Not Soldiers”, and despite
the great efforts exerted by Governments and different
United Nations agencies to reverse the negative impacts
of terrorist acts of those groups on children, that
negative trend is increasing steadily. In that context,
Egypt would like to stress the following points.
First, we condemn all forms of violence against
children by terrorist armed groups in Syria, Iraq,
Somalia, Central Africa, Nigeria, South Sudan, Libya
and other countries.
Secondly, there is a wide gap between the adoption
of relevant Security Council resolutions and their
implementation. In that regard, Egypt proposes the

36/94

25/03/2015

establishment of a more coordinated and consolidated
system to collect proper data and monitor the
implementation of the relevant resolutions. That new
system should include the updating of resolution 1612
(2005) to encompass non-State terrorist armed groups.
Thirdly, more efforts should be exerted regarding
transitional justice measures in order to bring the
perpetrators of such acts against children to justice,
with special focus on providing the necessary treatment
for children affected by such experiences, especially
girls.
Fourthly, affected children must be rehabilitated
and reintegrated economically, socially and culturally
in society in order to avoid their re-recruitment by the
same or other groups.
Fifthly, more financial resources must be secured
for the expeditious implementation of the children and
armed conflicts agenda.
Sixthly, discussions within the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations should continue so as
to find the best solutions to the challenges facing
peacekeeping missions in providing full protection for
children in armed conflicts.
The primary responsibility for protecting civilians,
including children, falls on countries, in accordance
with the various universally agreed legal instruments
and relevant Security Council resolutions. Based on
that conviction, Egypt believes that dealing with the
root causes of such conflicts, including poverty and
social exclusion, is the sole solution to any conflict.
There is no single formula for that solution. It should be
designed by each State in accordance with its priorities,
resources and national strategy in order to guarantee
national ownership of that solution and maintain
societal stability at the end.
We reiterate Egypt’s position in unequivocally
condemning all acts of terrorism, in all its forms
and manifestations, irrespective of its motivation
and objectives, and regardless of the nature of its
perpetrators, whether they are individuals, groups
or States. No sustainable development agenda can be
properly applied, given the increasing rates of insecurity
for our children, who are our coming generations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting. Allow me to take this
15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

S/PV.7414

opportunity to thank today’s speakers for sharing their
expertise and insights.

hospitals and civilian neighbourhoods as a base for
their terror activity.

Around the world today, children are exploited in
conflict, targeted with violence and used as instruments
of war. The crimes are horrendous. In January, Boko
Haram wrapped a young girl in explosives and sent her
into a busy Nigerian market. The explosion killed 16
people and injured another 20. This is not a world we
should accept — a world where 10-year-olds are used as
weapons of war. When we fail to protect children, we
fail to protect our future.

We saw abundant evidence of those crimes in
summer 2014. Here in New York, the underground
system is called the Metropolitan Transportation
Authority. In Gaza, Hamas built a metropolitan terror
authority — miles of dense terror tunnels that extended
like tentacles into Israel. Those tunnels were built
using Palestinian child labourers, many of whom were
killed in the process. Hamas’ terror tunnels opened at
the doorsteps of Israeli communities, outside homes,
kindergartens and playgrounds, with the deliberate
intention of targeting and murdering Israeli children.

I speak before the Council today as the Permanent
Representative of the State of Israel, but also as a father
and grandfather. I raised my sons, Lior and Tourer, and
my daughter, Oren, in Israel, and I know all too well the
abnormal normality of raising a family in Israel. Our
children go to schools with security guards stationed
at the door, we walk through metal detectors to enter a
mall, and our homes are built with reinforced concrete
to protect our families from rockets. Like other Israeli
parents, I want to see the day when our children can
grow up and grow old without hearing the wail of a redalert siren or the boom of rockets overhead. We want
our children to enjoy a life free from acts of terrorism,
but that day has not yet come.
In June 2014, Israelis were numb with horror when
they learned that Palestinian terrorists kidnapped and
brutally murdered three Israeli teenagers, Eyal, Gilad
and Naftali. We learned that terrorists will target an
Israeli child making his way home from school. In
August 2014, 4-year-old Daniel Tregerman was playing
with his younger siblings when a mortar fired by
Palestinian terrorists from Gaza struck his home and
killed him. We learned that terrorists will target an
Israeli child playing in his own home. In December
2014, Palestinian terrorists threw a firebomb at a car
carrying 11-year-old Ayala Shapira. Flames engulfed
the car, and Ayala suffered third-degree burns to her
face and upper body. We learned that terrorists will
even target an Israeli child sitting in the back seat of her
parent’s car. The Israeli people have learned too many
painful lessons. Terrorists have robbed our children of
their dreams, their childhood and their futures.
Hamas may claim to represent its people’s wellbeing, but its actions reflect countless wrongdoings.
The terrorist group deploys minors as suicide bombers
and recruits them to carry out attacks against Israeli
civilians and soldiers. It uses children as human shields
and places children in harm’s way by using schools,

The Palestinian leadership regularly turns to
the international community for financial support,
but when it comes to funding, training, arming and
indoctrinating thousands of young Palestinian children,
there is no shortage of money. In January, Hamas,
which sits in the Palestinian unity Government, sent
over 17,000 Palestinian youngsters to 18 new military
training camps. The boys who attend those camps are
trained to fire weapons, storm Israel Defense Forces
(IDF) posts and abduct IDF soldiers.
The indoctrination of Palestinian children is
nothing new. They are born in hospitals named after
violent Palestinian groups, attend schools named after
terrorists and taught from textbooks that describe
Zionism as racism. In mosques, religious leaders are
spreading vicious libel, accusing Jews of destroying
Muslim holy sites. In their free time, Palestinian
children play on sports teams named after murderers,
watch television programmes that teach that Jews
should be killed, and read cartoons urging them to
commit terror attacks against Israelis.
But the Council does not have to take my word for
it. Senior Hamas official Fathi Hamad said that,
“For the Palestinian people, death has become an
industry ... This is why we have formed human
shields of the women, the children, and the elderly.”
The evidence is overwhelming. Hamas has no interest
in building its people up. It is only committed to tearing
Israel down. Former Israeli Prime Minister Golda Meir
said, “We will only have peace when our enemies love
their children more than they hate ours”.
Across the Middle East, terrorists and extremists
are poisoning the minds of the next generation, teaching
them to hate, vilify and dehumanize Israelis and Jews.

15-0836537/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

We have lost an entire generation to incitement. Enough
is enough. Send the message that children should be
sent to playgrounds and not battlegrounds, that they
belong in schools and not on suicide missions and, most
importantly, that they have infinite value as human
beings and not human shields.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Bolaños Pérez (Guatemala): We thank the
delegation of France for organizing this very timely
open debate, which allows us to address violations
against the most vulnerable people — children — and
the comprehensive concept note (S/2015/168, annex)
that it circulated to all delegations. We also thank the
main speakers, especially Junior Nzita, former child
soldier from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and goodwill ambassador for the action plan in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, for his striking
statement.
The abuses committed against children by
non-State armed groups constitute a violation of
international humanitarian law and human rights law
and are an affront to our humanity, as they deprive our
children of a better world. They can have devastating
long-term consequences for victims, their families and
the communities where they reside. We must devote
special attention to the protection of children, who are
unquestionably most at risk in armed conflict. They
are recruited by armed groups and are the victims of
rape, sexual exploitation and abuse. As if that were
not enough, they are then stigmatized within their
own communities. We would like to highlight here the
“Children, Not Soldiers” campaign and the progress
achieved to date in the six countries committed to that
campaign.
As the Secretary-General noted in his briefing
this morning and suggested in his most recent report
on children and armed conflict (S/2014/339), the
world’s children should be students, not soldiers.
That is why the necessary assistance and support for
the rehabilitation of these children and their proper
reintegration into their communities should be
ensured. We urge Governments and the international
community to ensure that disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes receive the necessary
resources and funding to operate in the affected
communities.

38/94

25/03/2015

We consider it necessary to reiterate the provisions
of resolutions 1998 (2011) and 2143 (2014) in which the
Council called upon the parties to conflict to refrain
from actions that impede children’s access to education.
We once again call on Member States to consider
concrete measures to stop the military use of schools
by armed groups. We underline the civilian nature of
schools in accordance with international humanitarian
law and strongly condemn the attacks in recent months
in Côte d’Ivoire, Afghanistan, Yemen, the Democratic
Republic of Congo and Nigeria. We therefore have
supported initiatives to combat the problem, such as
the Lucens Guidelines for Protecting Schools and
Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict,
which we consider to provide a good framework for
calling both State and non-State actors to immediately
cease attacking and threatening schools, students and
teachers and refrain from actions that impede the access
of children to education.
We are concerned about the emergence of new and
more radical armed groups, the fragmentation of armed
forces and the expansion of other, harsher groups, such as
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Boko
Haram, which have changed the landscape of armed
conflict by forging alliances, as well as the emergence
of other structures, some in opposition to Governments
and others associated with them. We categorically
condemn the deplorable acts committed by extremist
groups, including the use of children in suicide attacks.
We are dismayed at the mass kidnapping of children
by these non-State armed groups. Who can forget the
276 girls abducted in Nigeria by Boko Haram, the 153
Kurdish boys abducted by ISIL in Syria and the case of
hundreds of Yazidi children who were also kidnapped
by ISIL in western Iraq? We call for the immediate
release of these children. These cases, among others,
show the need to broaden the criteria for inclusion of
other parties to armed conflict in the annexes of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict.
We would like to highlight the importance of
Member States improve their subregional, regional and
international cooperation, including through exchange
of intelligence and information, coordinated action and
the development of best practices to prevent, document
and address violations against children in armed
conflict. The fight against impunity must remain one of
the fundamental aspects of our efforts not only to react
to grave violations against children but also to prevent
them. We must make better use of tools available to

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

the Council — and use them consistently — to ensure
that those responsible are prosecuted, include them
in sanctions regimes, redouble efforts to strengthen
national capacity in the judicial sector and strengthen
the framework of international justice by, inter alia,
referring those responsible to the International Criminal
Court.
The conviction in 2012 of Thomas Lubanga Dyilo
and the referral to the Court in 2013 of the Bosco
Ntaganda case have sent a clear message about the legal
consequences of child recruitment, which is considered
a war crime. We are in favour of a closer dialogue with
the International Criminal Court.
Finally, we call on the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative to ensure that armed groups
listed in the annexes to his annual reports are informed
of these listings and guarantee that action plans to put
a stop to these violations are implemented. In addition,
strategies should be developed to ensure that armed
groups are informed of the conclusions reached by the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today’s important debate. We appreciate
the insightful briefings by the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative, as well as the perspective
provided by the Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF
and civil society representatives. We hope that our
deliberations today and the concept note circulated by
the French delegation (S/2015/168, annex) will become
useful guidelines on how to prevent and effectively
respond to the abuse of children by non-State armed
groups and bring the perpetrators to swift justice.
Violence and attacks on children, particularly
by non-State actors, are on the rise globally. Armed
groups have committed barbaric acts of terror against
children. But children are also victims of brutal force
in several situations of foreign occupation. We all
witnessed on our television screens what happened
to the children of Gaza. We join the international
community in condemning these atrocities in the
strongest terms. Terrorist groups have intentionally
targeted and attacked schoolchildren. They have killed,
abducted and inflicted serious injuries on thousands of
children in utter disregard of all norms of humanity and
international law.

S/PV.7414

The massacre of over a 100 school children — 132,
in fact — in my country’s city of Peshawar three months
ago was one of the worst atrocities perpetrated against
children. In so doing, these terrorist outfits have sunk
to new levels of cruelty and displayed a reprehensible
capacity to attack the core values of humanity. The
Peshawar school attack has strengthened the resolve of
the Government and the people of Pakistan to combat
terrorist violence and the groups that inflict it. It has
further reinforced our national consensus to defeat
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. That school
children across my country stood in solidarity with
the victims of Peshawar and expressed an unshakable,
collective resolve to confront terrorists sent a powerful
message that schools could not be forced to close
down in fear, nor would children be cowed by such
cowardly attacks. These children — in my country and
beyond — have been inspired by the power of Malala
Yousafzai, Pakistan’s Nobel Prize winner, who took a
bullet in her head rather than submit to the terrorists’
dictates or agenda. Her act of extraordinary courage
became a symbol of resistance to the evil designs of
violent groups.
Pakistan has embarked upon an effective law
enforcement campaign, which includes what we call
Zarb-e-Azb, a military campaign in our tribal area, to
take out terrorists, dismantle their networks and halt
the flow of finances to them from inside and outside
the country. We have learned by doing. That is why
Pakistan recognizes that while the use of force may be
necessary it is not sufficient to effectively eradicate
the menace. Non-kinetic measures such as developing
a counter-narrative to defeat the terrorists’ twisted
ideology, are just as important, if not more so.
Pakistan is implementing a comprehensive national
plan of action to address this very complex and
imposing challenge. It involves police and security
actions, building resilience in local communities
against radicalization as well as political, economic,
social and financial measures.
Preventing the recruitment and indoctrination of
children by extremist and militant organizations is
a priority area for us, as is focusing on education to
promote tolerance and harmony. Key steps that we have
taken include the registration and regulation of religious
seminaries, curbs on hate material and literature,
and the introduction of a modern school curriculums.
But even as Pakistan executes its campaign against
terrorists and acts to protect its children, sharing best

15-0836539/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

25/03/2015

practices and experience gained by different countries
can help strengthen our collective response to keep our
citizens and our children safe from the violent actions
of armed groups.

Secondly, Colombia ratified the Convention on the
Rights of the Child in the year 1992 and expanded the
definition of a child from under 15 to under 18 years
of age.

Finally, I would wish to underscore that the legal
parameters of the Council mandate must be respected.
Our focus should remain on situations of armed conflict
and those threatening international peace and security.

Thirdly, for almost two decades now, the ranks of
the armed forces of Colombia do not include minors
under the age of 18.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this debate of great importance to us.
(spoke in Spanish)
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative, Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
as well as the representatives of UNICEF and all the
non-governmental organizations for the testimonies we
have heard here.
The importance of this debate, organized by France,
is evident from having heard the moving statements of
the speakers who have preceded me, which illustrate
the turbulent times in which we live and that affects the
most vulnerable segments of the population, including
children, as pointed out by France in its concept note
(S/2015/168, annex). The year 2014 was the worst year
for children.
Unfortunately, my country has not been an
exception, because we must recognize that for more
than five decades of internal conflict, minors have been
victims of forced recruitment and abuse by non-State
armed groups. However, today there is a glimmer of
hope to end this phenomenon, because we have been
holding peace talks, which are currently under way
in Havana between the national Government and
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
(FARC).
The commemoration of the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1612 (2005) provides a good opportunity
to reiterate the commitment of the Colombian State
to the protection of all victims, particularly children.
I would like to share five key points that demonstrate
that commitment:
First, the 1991 Constitution of Colombia guarantees
in its spirit that the rights of children take precedence
over all other rights.

40/94

Fourthly, the Colombian Ministry for Foreign
Affairs has implemented a comprehensive programme
for children and adolescents aimed at preventing
forced recruitment by creating gateways to promote
educational, cultural and sporting activities.
Fifthly and finally, the Government established a
multi-sectoral commission in which 23 different State
agencies work in tandem. Thanks to that, between 2002
and 2014, we have been able to recover 4,067 minors
who had been recruited by the illegal armed groups,
both from the FARC and the Ejército de Liberación
Nacional.
As I have mentioned, Colombia is working
diligently to resolve the internal armed conflict with
the FARC. We are continuing negotiations on an overall
agreement on ending the conflict and building stable
and lasting peace. That agreement is being negotiated
in Havana, with the support of the United Nations and
a large part of the international community and with
Cuba and Norway acting as guarantors and Chile and
Venezuela as supporters. The FARC has begun to take
steps in the direction that Colombian society and the
international community demand, as expressed by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. In
the past month, the FARC announced its decision to
cease its recruitment of children under 17 years. That
is a significant development, but it is insufficient if we
consider that the FARC is responsible for 66 per cent of
the victims of child recruitment in our country — almost
3,000 children. We hope that step will be expanded to
cover all minors under the age of 18.
As part of the commemoration of the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1612 (2015), Colombia
believes this is the right time to review whether the
measures requested of States, such as the action plans,
have the same result when attempting to implement such
measures for non-State actors. Even today, when we
live in a world where conflict dynamics have changed,
illegal armed groups still constitute the bulk of the
armed groups that threaten the legitimacy of the State
and that of its citizens. In our view, the role of States to

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

bear the primary responsibility is indisputable, but we
must not lose sight of the specific contexts, nature and
modus operandi of the armed groups outside the law, as
well as the strategies that States implement to achieve
solutions to the grave situations that affect them.
In conclusion, all those points serve to bring to
the fore the fact that the support of the international
community will be essential, given that we are
immersed in in the most important undertaking in
50 years: to build peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Let me first extend my
delegation’s appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this timely open debate on a very important
challenge regarding the protection of children in armed
conflict.
Indonesia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Viet Nam on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
It is deeply regrettable that children and other
vulnerable segments of the population continue to bear
the brunt in a number of armed conflicts. Indeed, too
often children are despicably and with impunity used
as tactical agents, becoming fodder in a conflict and
enduring physical and emotional scars. That tragedy
is worsened when non-State actors are involved, as
they may simply refuse to heed the international
legal standards for safeguarding children and other
vulnerable groups, by which the States must abide.
Indonesia stands for zero tolerance when it comes
to violations against children in armed conflict.
Notwithstanding the valuable work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and other
United Nations entities to protect children — and while
we welcome the encouraging progress made thanks to
the “Children, Not Soldiers” campaign since its launch,
in March 2014 — the United Nations needs to send out a
more unequivocal message that is backed with actions.
Whether State or non-State actors, all perpetrators of
violence and abuse against children in armed conflict
must know that our international system will not give
them any space. They will have to answer for their
violations against children under the full extent of the
law.
We recognize that, in some situations involving
non-State actors, relief might be secured for children

S/PV.7414

and other vulnerable groups through negotiations.
Non-State actors may well be persuaded to exercise
restraint, and we should capitalize on such opportunities.
Therefore, we support the incorporation of the issue
into mediation in peacemaking. While we can only
support such a respite — and hopefully, the eventual
permanent rehabilitation of victimized children — the
United Nations and the international community should
develop a systematized approach. In that regard, we
would like to share some of our views.
First, the key and ongoing objective should be
to assist conflict-affected States to establish wellfunctioning institutions that are accountable to their
citizens, which can enable a legitimately representative
Government to extend its writ across the entire territory
of the country. The rule of law should prevail. There
must not be any no-go areas where non-State actors
can build sanctuaries, thereby providing oxygen for
domestic or external conflict and terrorism.
Secondly, we must all contribute more to
strengthening the implementation of the global
normative framework on the protection of children in
armed conflict, within the United Nations and beyond.
Our action should signal that there will be neither
tolerance for child soldiers nor lax measures in our
efforts to safeguard children and their rights in conflict.
Recognizing that sensitizing non-State actors on the
imperative and benefits of the protection of children
poses special difficulties, the United Nations and all
concerned entities should nonetheless be relentless in
their efforts. While those imperatives should be clear
in the United Nations peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding engagements, it is equally vital that
United Nations personnel continue and strengthen
their consultations and cooperation with national
Governments and local authorities.
Thirdly, regional and subregional organizations,
such as ASEAN in our region, have demonstrated that
they can be critical enablers for peace and development.
The United Nations should further strengthen its
partnerships with such organizations, as well as with
civil society groups that are carrying out useful work.
We are therefore pleased that the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General places priority on partnering
with regional and subregional organizations. That will
bolster the United Nations agenda on children and
armed conflict.
Standing resolutely together, we must all ensure
that the observance of international human rights

15-0836541/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

and humanitarian law on the protection of children is
given the utmost priority. Indonesia also underlines the
need to provide greater support for child victims, be
they former under-age combatants or those affected by
violence or displacement. Since their physical health
and educational and emotional needs may persist for
a long time, we also stress the role of the family and
the community in creating an enabling environment
for them. As a State party to the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, Indonesia is
internationally committed to improving the training and
capacity of its peacekeepers on the subject, including
through the use of its national peacekeeping centre.
Finally, I would like to underscore that the most
important step in protecting children’s rights is
preventing conflict itself. In addition, enhanced efforts
to protect children in armed conflict should be carried
out, even during peace time, including by building
national capacities and institutions and by sensitizing
the public at large to the issues. Indonesia will continue
to put a high priority on safeguarding children.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
flow to the representative of Estonia.
Ms. Lind (Estonia) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the French presidency for having organized
today’s open debate.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to thank the briefers for their
statements earlier today.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union.
The focus of this debate on non-State armed
groups is particularly pertinent, since, as the concept
note annexed to the letter by the French presidency
(S/2015/168, annex) reveals, the overwhelming majority
of the parties — 51 out of 59 — listed in the annex to
the Secretary-General’s 2014 report on children and
armed conflict (S/2014/339) are non-State actors.
We have seen progress with regard to national
security forces. Thousands of children have been
released as a result of action plans mandated by the
Security Council. We thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui
and UNICEF for their enormous work, most recently
through the “Children, Not Soldiers” campaign.

42/94

25/03/2015

We believe that the main measures that need to
be taken with non-State armed groups are similar to
those used when working with national security forces,
namely, to focus on prevention, action plans and ending
impunity for the crimes committed.
We all know that education is one of the key
elements for prevention. It is therefore important to
guarantee education for children, even in times of
crisis. During emergencies, children in schools can be
cared for, accounted for and protected from abduction,
recruitment and sexual and economic exploitation.
Schools should be for children and should never and
under no condition be used for military purposes.
Let me express our appreciation to UNICEF for
providing education to children in humanitarian crises.
Estonia has recently supported UNICEF’s work in
South Sudan, the Central African Republic, Gaza,
Syria and Somalia.
We urge all armed non-State actors listed in the
annex to the latest Secretary-General’s report on children
and armed conflict to adopt and implement action plans
committing themselves to end grave violations against
children, and we call on the Secretary-General and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Children and Armed Conflict to develop strategies
for outreach to armed non-State actors. We also urge
concerned Governments to facilitate and support the
engagement of non-State armed groups with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and UNICEF.
We see impunity as clearly being one of the main
reasons for the recurrence of such grave violations
against children. It is only by consistent prosecution
that we can deter the commission of such crimes.
To that end, we reiterate the important role of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in situations where
States are unable or unwilling to bring perpetrators to
justice domestically.
Furthermore, we also believe that the international
community should assist in strengthening national
judicial capacities so as to ensure accountability,
including through the development of legislation
criminalizing violations against children. Estonia
allocates development cooperation resources to assist
countries requesting help in the domestic prosecution
of Rome Statute crimes, and we encourage others to do
the same.
The Council itself has on numerous occasions
acknowledged that the fight against impunity for
15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

atrocious crimes, including against children, has been
strengthened through the work of the ICC. To make good
on its commitment to deal effectively with persistent
perpetrators, the Council could increase pressure on
them by including violations against children in the
mandates of all sanctions committees and by improving
the exchange of information between the Council,
the sanctions committees and the ICC to include the
individuals sought by the ICC on the sanctions lists.
The recruitment and use of children in armed forces
and groups is a grave violation of international law. We
categorically condemn the barbaric acts committed on
a large scale by violent extremists. We are appalled by
the mass abductions of children by non-State armed
groups, be it by Boko Haram in Nigeria or by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham in Syria or Iraq. We
call for the immediate release of all abducted children
without delay.
In that connection, we call on the Security Council
to introduce the abduction of children as an additional
criterion in the annexes to the Secretary-General’s
reports on children and armed conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
flow to the representative of Hungary.
Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): In all cultures, one of
the most important factors is the cohesion of families
and communities and the degree of nurture and
support that children receive. Indeed, one of the most
significant war traumas of all, in particular for younger
children, is simply separation from their parents. It is
universally true that such horrific experiences are so
deeply disturbing and overwhelming that a child will
try to suppress those bad memories rather than confront
them. The trauma of exposure to violence and death has
an emotional impact on generations of young people for
the rest of their lives.
Time does not heal trauma. A child must be helped
to express suffering and to confront such bad memories
with the support and guidance of an informed and
knowledgeable adult. The very act of talking or writing
about or even acting out the traumatic events is a way
for a child to begin healing and start on the road to
recovery.
I therefore thank France, and you, Sir, for having
organized this very important open debate. I must say
that I was completely gripped by the experiences of
Junior Nzita, who shared his very real traumas with us.

S/PV.7414

Hungary fully supports the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union and welcomes the
focus of today’s debate on non-State armed groups.
For children, 2014 was the worst year in many
years, as the proliferation of conflicts around the world
affected tens of millions of them. Today, we have
already talked about the fact that impunity continues
to be deeply entrenched and that most perpetrators are
never held accountable for the war crimes they commit.
I believe that the recent decision of the Appeals
Chamber of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
in December of last year, was an important milestone,
since it confirmed the verdict against Thomas Lubanga,
who became the first person ever to be convicted for
the enlistment, conscription and use of children in
hostilities. We share the view of the Prosecutor of the
ICC that the decision stands as a symbol of hope and an
important step towards putting an end to the suffering
of children who are still being forced to fight, kill and
die in armed conflicts. Hungary fully supports the
“Children, Not Soldiers” campaign, launched last year
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict.
Of course, children have always been caught
up in warfare. They usually have little choice but
to experience at a minimum the same horrors as
their parents. In such violent circumstances, girls in
particular suffer the added trauma of sexual abuse
and rape, which psychologists have identified as the
most invasive of traumatic events. Even girls who are
not physically forced to have sex may still be obliged
to trade sexual favours for food or shelter or physical
protection. Girls often face a greater risk of forced
abduction, sexual slavery and forced marriage. What
is also very frightening nowadays is the escalation
in the use of children as fighters. Extremist groups
successfully manipulate young boys and girls, and
we must find ways to counter the propaganda used
by terrorist groups to recruit susceptible children and
young people.
Hungary believes in the strength of education.
We are very concerned about the fact that attacks on
hospitals and schools have become a common feature
in most armed conflicts. The increasing use of schools
for military purposes is particularly worrying, since
that puts more children out of school and thus at an
increased risk of violence. But we truly believe that the
power of education in preventing young children from

15-0836543/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

25/03/2015

joining extremist groups is extremely important, and
something that all of us must think about and work for.

determining responsibility are important and effective
deterrents.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.

Finally, Belgium would like to recall the importance
of the Paris Principles on Children Associated with
Armed Forces or Armed Groups for child victims of
non-State armed groups. They include tools designed to
assist action to prevent children’s recruitment by such
groups, and we would invite those countries that have
not yet signed the Paris Principles to do so as soon as
possible.

Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium associates itself fully with the statement
delivered earlier by the observer of the European
Union. I would like to add the following remarks in my
national capacity.
Belgium deplores the fact that armed conflicts
continue to have a disproportionate effect on children.
The year 2014 has been called a very bad one for
children, and there are no prospects for improvement in
2015. As the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral indicated in her annual report to the Human
Rights Council, the indoctrination of children by
extremist groups is creating new challenges in terms
of their protection, psychosocial rehabilitation and
reintegration. The recruitment and use of children by
non-State armed groups is growing. Children are often
recruited by force or abducted, but some join non-State
armed groups because of economic, social or security
pressures, and must be offered genuine alternatives to
such groups. In our view, prevention is the only lasting
solution to the problem of children’s participation
in armed conflict. In that regard, it is essential that
States come up with prevention plans that cover every
aspect of the issue — a plan that effectively prevents
the recruitment and exploitation of children and that,
among other things, provides schooling in safety. A
recent study has shown that investing in prevention
can in some ways generate a good return on that
investment. The total cost of children’s association
with armed groups is estimated to be between $120 and
$144 million a year.
Belgium remains very concerned about the fact
that many perpetrators of violence against children do
so with impunity. The greatest challenge in that area
is unquestionably the increasing number of persistent
violators, who continue to deliberately ignore the
relevant Security Council resolutions. In that regard, we
would like to reiterate that the Council has no choice but
to increase the pressure on those who perpetrate serious
abuses against children, particularly those identified as
persistent violators, and to continue to consider ways to
apply targeted measures against such criminals. That is
quite simply a matter of accountability and of holding
those who commit grave violations against children
to account. We all know that combating impunity and
44/94

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Plasai (Thailand) (spoke in French): Thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate. As
this is the first time in March that Thailand takes the
floor in the Security Council, I would like to join other
speakers in congratulating France on its presidency of
the Council this month. I would also like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict for her briefing.
Thailand associates itself with the statements to be
delivered by the represntative of Viet Nam on behalf
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and by
the Ambassador of Austria on behalf of the Human
Security Network.
In order for them to become responsible and
productive citizens of the world, children must grow
up in an environment of peace, love and understanding,
not violence. Thailand reaffirms its commitment and
resolve in support of international efforts to assure such
an environment for every child. This year Thailand is
particularly concerned about the exacerbation of current
armed conflicts by the added elements of extremism and
terrorism, which have inflicted suffering on children
that will undoubtedly be repeated for many others
around the world if we do not act. The perpetrators of
such violent acts must be brought to justice, since they
not only violate international legal norms; they also cut
short the lives of our young people, who represent the
future itself.
We condemn any involvement, anywhere and by
anyone — including non-State armed groups — of
children in situations of violence and armed conflict.
The suffering of children, particularly girls, in these
situations is unacceptable to us. That is why we are
committed to efforts to stop violence against children
and to address violations of children’s rights in armed
conflict situations, including the killing, maiming and
15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

recruitment of and sexual violence against children,
as well as the abduction of and denial of humanitarian
access to children in armed conflict. In this regard, we
commend the success of the “Children, Not Soldiers”
campaign in preventing the recruitment of child
soldiers.
The timing of this debate is also ideal. This year
marks the landmark tenth anniversary of resolution
1612 (2005), which established the Security Council’s
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. In
this regard, I would like to commend Malaysia and
Luxembourg, the current and previous Chairs of the
Working Group, for the outstanding work accomplished
to date.
Thailand is convinced that ongoing armed conflicts
require coordinated international efforts to protect
children. Allow me to outline some of the elements that
we believe should be an integral part of our joint efforts.
First, human rights and international humanitarian
law must be fully respected. Secondly, Thailand
believes that child protection in all situations remains
the sovereign responsibility of every State in accordance
with its obligations under international law. The United
Nations must therefore work in close cooperation
with the Governments concerned on the basis of their
consent. In several armed conflicts in which non-State
actors commit crimes against children, the United
Nations must be fully aware of the sensitivities on
the ground and of the need to work closely with host
Governments to tackle the problem.
Thirdly, given the multitude of international
agencies involved with child protection, we need to
strengthen cooperation and coordination among them.
Thailand was pleased to co-chair, along with Austria,
work on the drafting of the United Nations Model
Strategies and Practical Measures on the Elimination
of Violence against Children in the Field of Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice (resolution 69/194),
which was submitted to the General Assembly last year.
Indeed, Thailand believes that there is a need to address
all aspects of the work of the United Nations regarding
the protection of children.
Fourthly, to remain useful and credible, the annual
report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict should be the outcome of constructive
consultations with the Member States concerned and
should be based on accurate, objective, reliable and
verifiable information. With the rise of extremism and

S/PV.7414

terrorism over the past year, it is more essential than
ever to have credible information to steer the Council’s
efforts towards putting an end to the suffering of
children in situations of armed conflict.
Lastly, as part of our comprehensive effort to
tackling the problems facing children in armed conflict,
we must not overlook the importance of addressing past
traumas. Thailand therefore urges that greater emphasis
be placed on reintegration efforts for affected children.
National long-term strategies must be formulated so as
to improve education and socioeconomic conditions,
as well as ensure the rule of law, which will make it
possible better to protect children from the threats and
dangers of armed conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his commitment
to the plight of children caught in conflict and our
briefers for their tireless efforts to protect the world’s
most vulnerable.
Australia reaffirms its commitment to the Paris
Principles and the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and its Optional Protocol on children in armed
conflict. We encourage all States that have not already
ratified or acceded to the Convention and Protocol to
do so expeditiously.
Despite the progress made in the 16 years since
the issue of children and armed conflict first appeared
on the Council’s agenda, armed conflict continues to
take a terrible toll on children around the globe. As the
conflict in Syria enters its fourth year, the Al-Assad
regime’s cruelty shows no signs of abating. A generation
of Syrian children faces deprivation, displacement,
violence, under-vaccination, malnutrition and disrupted
education. Schools are attacked, most often by Syrian
Government forces. Half of the refugees from Syria are
children.
We are alarmed by the threat posed to children
by extremist groups. Daesh continues its deplorable
campaign of violence, including crucifixions,
beheadings and mass executions. Children are not
immune, as victims, witnesses and — disturbingly — as
forced participants.
Girls are especially vulnerable. Daesh supports the
sexual abuse of girls who have not yet reached puberty

15-0836545/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

and operates brothels where non-Muslim Iraqi women
and girls are held as sex slaves for Daesh terrorist
fighters. Resolution 2178 (2014) requires all nations
to prevent the financing, travel and activities of these
terrorists. It must be implemented fully by all States.
Stronger and more effective measures must be taken to
protect children, and, importantly, to rehabilitate them.
Non-State armed groups engaged in peace
processes are more likely to engage on child protection.
In the Philippines, Australia has worked closely with
UNICEF and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front
(MILF) to establish community-based child-protection
networks, which have strengthened child-protection
systems in MILF command and conflict-affected areas.
It is crucial that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General continue her efforts to conclude
action plans with non-State armed groups, difficult
though that is. We urge Governments to facilitate and
support engagement by the Special Representative
to develop action plans and prevent the abuse and
exploitation of children.
Where parties to a conflict fail to adhere to their
obligations under international law, the Council should
use the tools at its disposal to ensure accountability,
including by providing political support for the work
of the International Criminal Court (ICC). ICC actions
can have an important deterrent effect on the use of
child soldiers by rebel groups. The vast majority of
groups listed in the annexes to the Secretary-General’s
reports have been abusing children for more than five
years. This impunity cannot persist. Sanctions should
be used to full effect against those perpetrating grave
violations against children. We welcome the fact that
five sanctions Committees are already focused on child
protection.
The world has expressed its outrage at Boko Haram’s
kidnapping of children and its targeting of schools. As
others have done, we encourage the Council to expand
its listing criteria to include abductions of children, and
request the Secretary-General to include in his annual
report those parties to a conflict that engage in these
abhorrent acts.
We expect that the high-level review of sanctions
will provide a strong blueprint to improve the
coordination and implementation of sanctions,
including the Council’s response to the abuse and
exploitation of children. We encourage all States to
redouble their efforts to protect children caught up in

46/94

25/03/2015

conflict. The Council must continue to seek practical
means to ensure the protection of children. We cannot
do enough to protect children. As others here have said
today, they are, after all, our future.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I thank the French
presidency for having convened this very timely meeting
to address the inhuman, brutal attacks committed
against children and their recruitment as soldiers by
non-State actors during armed conflicts as well as in
States with chronic instability and simmering tensions.
The international community has been shocked by
the sudden proliferation of the diverse non-State actors
that have emerged domestically within a country and
also those acting transnationally over 80 countries,
thereby internationalizing their threat. My delegation,
keeping in mind time constraints, therefore suggests
the following measures.
First, we must recognize the fact that non-State
actors are not monolithic. While some commit horrific
crimes and are often beyond negotiation, such groups
vary widely. To work with them, we need to understand
their degree of extremism, political and religious
motives, structures, tactics and amenability to dialogue.
Secondly, we endorse UNICEF’s “Children, Not
Soldiers” initiative and the signing of action plans for
the release of children — to be rigorously implemented
by the 59 non-State actors listed in the annex to the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/339).
Thirdly, we should encourage concerned Member
States, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and
human rights commmissions to facilitate contact
between the United Nations and non-State actors to
get them to agree to and sign action plans aimed at
ensuring broad and effective protection for children.
Such contacts should not prejudge the political or legal
status of those non-State actors. We therefore need child
protection criteria in the renewal or establishment of
the relevant sanctions committees, with specific childprotection expertise in the subsidiary organs and expert
groups of the Council. The Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict should be
made more effective through greater unity among its
members.
Fourthly, it is critical to have child protection
included more clearly in all mandates of United Nations

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

peacekeeping operations, special political missions
and peacebuilding missions, and to ensure that those
operations and missions are appropriately resourced
with personnel and funding. We strongly encourage
troop- and police-contributing countries to include
child protection in their predeployment training. We
recommend closer cooperation between the Secretariat
and the United Nations system and its partners so as to
ensure swift implementation, monitoring and reporting.
Fifthly, we should mobilize the machinery of
the NGO community, especially the International
Committee of the Red Cross, the Save the Children
Alliance and the Geneva Call, with its Deed of
Commitment, which non-State actors have signed with
a view to protecting children’s rights, since non-State
actors cannot be signatories to Conventions.
The donor community has to address the funding
gaps for implementing action plans, ensuring the
sustainable long-term reintegration needs of children
and child soldiers and guaranteering adequate
monitoring and reporting. Funds will also be required
to integrate former child soldiers into normal life by
providing them with education and by showing better
understanding so that they do not return to their
recruiters. Investing in development, providing better
living conditions and meeting socioeconomic needs are
ways to stabilize troubled societies and help them move
forward.
My country is seriously engaged in combating the
rise of non-State actors in many ways. Kazakhstan
ratified the Optional Protocol to the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child in July 2011,
and, accordingly, soon thereafter adopted its national
children’s rights act. Subsequently, it introduced legal
measures to prohibit the enlistment of persons under the
age of 18 years, or their use as mercenaries. The criminal
code of Kazakhstan provides for initiating proceedings
in such cases. The emphasis is also on interreligious
and inter-ethnic education aimed at forming a national
identity of shared human values of tolerance in a global
civilization, and thus preventing terrorism and religious
extremism. Kazakhstan is taking measures to protect
Afghan child refugees and afford them the help they
need with education and health care.
In conclusion, Kazakhstan joins the international
community in ensuring overall child security in times
of conflict.

S/PV.7414

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Albania.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania) (spoke in French): Albania
welcomes the opportunity to participate in this
important public debate on children and armed conflict.
I would like to thank you, Sir, for the very detailed
concept note (S/2015/168, annex) that was circulated in
advance of this debate.
Albania associates itself with the statement made
earlier by the observer of the European Union. However,
I will make a few comments in my national capacity.
We fully agree with your assessment, Sir, that the
year 2014 was, unfortunately, the bleakest year for
children, and that this trend is very sadly confirmed
for the current year as well. This was indicated recently
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict in her latest report
submitted to the Human Rights Council in Geneva
during the twenty-eighth session.
The conclusions of that report leave no room
for doubt. The year 2014, characterized by the
intensification and recurrence of conflicts, served to
highlight the significant vulnerability of children to
the devastating effects of war. In armed conflict zones,
children have been the victims of the worst violations.
They were kidnapped, executed or mutilated, sexually
abused, recruited and forced to commit atrocities,
sometimes even against other children. As the report
points out, the most tragic aspect is that what has been
seen, documented or verified, is only a small part of
violations against children.
(spoke in English)
We reiterate our deep concern regarding the
atrocities perpetrated by extremist non-State armed
groups, in particular against children belonging to
religious and ethnic minorities. An unprecedented
mixture of barbaric medieval behaviour with modernday propaganda by the Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant and its affiliates has revealed some of the most
unspeakable crimes and the most vicious acts and
behaviours, including, as reported, the beheading of
children and the filming of acts of rape against girls
in Iraq. Most worrying is the fact that terror groups
are now focusing their recruitment efforts on children,
posting videos of little boys firing weapons almost
as big as they are in order to breed the next terrorist
generation.

15-0836547/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

We welcome the efforts of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Children and Armed
Conflict, including her recent recommendations on
the four areas in which the work of the Human Rights
Council can improve the protection of children. As
a Human Rights Council member, Albania remains
committed to incorporating, as a matter of priority, the
violations and the specific needs of children affected by
armed conflict into the Council’s work and mechanisms.
We reiterate our support for the “Children, Not
Soldiers” campaign, jointly initiated with UNICEF,
which seeks to put an end to the recruitment and use
of children by national armed forces in conflict by
2016, and we appreciate the progress achieved during
the first year of the campaign. In that context, we
welcome the confirmation, on 1 December 2014, of the
decision by the International Criminal Court Appeals
Chamber against the first individual to be convicted
of committing war crimes consisting of enlisting and
conscripting children. It represents a milestone in
ensuring accountability and ending impunity.
We expect the Security Council to be at the
forefront in addressing violations against children
everywhere. Nothing, no rule, no procedural aspect, no
kind of interest, could explain an absence of swift and
resolute action by the Council in such situations. We
have said it before, and we reiterate it again: the use of
veto in such cases is simply the abuse of veto. Albania
reiterates its unwavering support for the French proposal
and the efforts of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group for a code of conduct to refrain
from the use of the veto in situations of genocide, war
crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing,
situations that always first and foremost affect the
children.
In conclusion, let me remind the Council that this
year we will celebrate the twenty-sixth anniversary
of the adoption of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, the first legally binding instrument to take
a holistic approach to human rights and to recognize
children as rights holders. The Convention is the most
ratified treaty in human history, but still, a lot more
needs to be done to keep children safe and removed
from war atrocities.
Given its importance in the protection of children
in armed conflict, Albania has acceded to the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict, and
we are committed to its full implementation. We call on
48/94

25/03/2015

countries that have already signed the Protocol to ratify
it, but also on all other countries to consider being part
of this important instrument for the rights of the child.
Finally, we think that the upcoming discussion
on the occasion of the tenth anniversary of resolution
1612 (2005), which established the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, under the Malaysian
presidency in June 2015 should serve as an opportunity
to build and sustain momentum towards the universal
ratification and acceptance of the Optional Protocol on
the involvement of children in armed conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland): Switzerland would
like to thank the French presidency for organizing this
open debate. My country particularly commends the
specific focus on child victims of armed groups.
Like States, armed groups, as parties to armed
conflicts, are required to respect international
humanitarian law. They are responsible for taking
the necessary measures to prevent the recruitment of
children and to ensure that children are adequately
protected. Such actors are often unaware of their
obligations, and direct or indirect contact with them is
therefore essential. In certain conditions and according
to specific criteria, Switzerland is convinced that
dialogue with armed groups is possible and can lead to
concrete results. My country appreciates the important
work being carried out by Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
encourages her efforts to raise the awareness of States
and armed groups with respect to their commitment to
the protection of children. Switzerland calls on Member
States and all other actors in a position to provide
access to United Nations personnel and ensure their
safety to undertake a dialogue on the establishment and
implementation of action plans, as well their subsequent
monitoring.
Switzerland supports the organization known as
Geneva Call, which aims to encourage armed groups to
respect their obligations. To that end, the organization
relies on dialogue, consciousness-raising and training.
Geneva Call has also adopted an innovative mechanism
known as the Deed of Commitment for the Protection
of Children from the Effects of Armed Conflicts, which
offers armed groups the possibility to commit to a
signed declaration to respect a specific set of standards.
Switzerland also supports the International Committee

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

for the Red Cross, the organization that also upholds
international humanitarian law and that plays an
active role in the protection of children, as for example
through its visits to detention centres with a particular
focus on children.
Switzerland is concerned by the indoctrination of
children as well as by the scale of the acts of violence and
the atrocities committed against them by armed groups
over the past months. In response to that development,
a good number of States have taken measures to
combat terrorism that seek at the same time to protect
children. However, some of those measures criminalize
all humanitarian action or any contact established to
humanitarian ends with armed groups considered
extremist. Children in areas controlled by such groups
therefore directly suffer the horrific consequences of
those measures, and children deemed to have presumed
or real links with armed groups are placed in detention.
Switzerland commends the work of the Global
Coalition to Protect Education from Attack and
welcomes the conclusion of the Lucens Guidelines.
The Guidelines provide a solid basis for the prevention
of the use of schools and universities by armed forces
and armed groups during armed conflicts. There is an
urgent need for us to mobilize in order to better enforce
international law and to put an end to serious violations
of the rights of children.
The Security Council must strengthen measures
regarding the protection of children as part of mission
mandates. It is also essential to train peacekeeping
staff in the issues related to the protection of children
and to write specific provisions into the operational
procedures adopted as well as into the rules of
engagement. Switzerland welcomes the programme of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
that provides appropriate training for soldiers prior to
their deployment. The programme should be compulsory
for all troop-contributing countries. Switzerland will
contribute funds to evaluate the impact of deploying
child protection advisors within the framework of
DPKO missions.
In conclusion, Switzerland appreciates the initiative
of the French presidency to summarize in a non-paper
the specific operational idees proposed by Member
States and welcomes the Security Council’s intention
to pursue this discussion in the context of the next
open debate on children and armed conflict in June.
Switzerland will submit its proposals in writing.

S/PV.7414

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mrs. Gatto (Italy) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the French presidency for
organizing this open debate with a focus on children
and armed conflict.
(spoke in English)
This is a very timely subject. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General, the briefers and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Zerrougui, for their contributions.
My country continues to strongly support the
“Children, Not Soldiers” campaign and the efforts of
the Special Representative’s Office to engage with
12 armed non-State actors.
Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union and wishes to make
the following remarks in its national capacity.
Armed conflicts have evolved in nature in recent
years. We are witnessing the significant involvement
of non-State armed actors along with the radicalization
of conflicts. Children are among those who suffer most
from the consequences of armed conflict. They are
recruited as soldiers, their right to education is often
denied and their lives are subject to a greater risk of
neglect, exploitation, trafficking, sexual violence and
harmful practices such as forced marriage. Girls and
boys are also increasingly the victims of abductions.
Substantial progress has been achieved. Yet as the
current news, even the most recent, reminds us, that
plague remains. We cannot let our guard down.
We therefore welcome France’s invitation to make
concrete suggestions to better prevent and respond to
that scourge, and would like to contribute with five
proposals.
First, accountability at the national and international
level would insure that perpetrators are brought to
justice. For that reason, as another representative said
earlier, the Security Council might consider expanding
resolution 1612 (2005) by recognizing abduction in
armed conflict as a listing criterion in the annexes to
the Secretary-General’s annual report. Abduction has
long been used as a tactic by non-State armed groups,
and is often the precursor to other grave violations. By
calling for the immediate and unconditional release
of children held captive by armed groups, we believe

15-0836549/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

that it is time for the Security Council to emphasize its
condemnation of that practice.
Secondly, with respect to peacekeeping mandates,
as a non-permanent member of the Security Council
during the 2007-2008 period, Italy strongly supported
the inclusion of specific provisions on the protection
of children in the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, which has today become a
standard practice. Mandates due for renewal could
be thoroughly evaluated with a view to considering
the degree of protection given to children and to
strengthening the mandate accordingly.
Thirdly, with regard to training, since its
inception, Italy has strongly supported the work of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to develop a
systematic training programme on child protection
for peacekeeping personnel. Targeted predeployment
training for United Nations personnel on children
in armed conflict could now be fully scaled up and
become a standard practice for the United Nations, in
coordination with regional organizations.
Fourthly, concerning access to humanitarian
relief, if an armed non-State actor proves willing to
engage constructively on that matter with the United
Nations, there should be no obstruction to such
engagement. United Nations peacekeeping mandates
could encompass that priority through stricter and more
consistent norms.
Lastly, with respect to the reintegration of children
into their communities, if children are not properly
cared for after their release, they may face the risk of
being re-recruited, or may be willing to join the armed
groups again. To that end, United Nations peacebuilding
mandates should aim at involving local communities
through joint outreach programmes and peer-to-peer
initiatives.
Ending abuses by persistent perpetrators does not
altogether end impunity. While Italy holds the position
of Vice-President of the Assembly of States Parties
to the Rome Statute, we believe that the International
Criminal Court has an essential role to play in holding
persistent perpetrators accountable for their crimes. In
that regard, we also welcome the recent sentencing of
rebel leader Thomas Lubanga Dyilo for war crimes,
including the conscription of children.
Let me conclude by underscoring that prevention
is crucial. It is not only a moral responsibility, but
also a strategic investment in our future. Italy backs
50/94

25/03/2015

development cooperation projects to support children
in humanitarian emergencies in many regions. From
that experience we have learned that preventing this
scourge is possible by empowering youth through
the rule of law and education and through economic
and civil reconstruction processes. Let us work on
developing comprehensive United Nations strategies in
this field as well.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Luxembourg.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank France for organizing this public debate on
the plight of children in armed conflict and all those
who have taken the floor and shed light on the situation,
in particular Mr. Junior Nzita, a former child soldier
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Luxembourg associates itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
As it has been recalled, in 2014 15 million children
were directly affected by conflicts, including in Syria,
Iraq, Palestine, the Central African Republic, South
Sudan and Ukraine, to cite only some examples. They
were subjected to irreparable violence and trauma,
which not only hurts each child on an individual basis,
but which undermines the strength of whole societies,
to quote the Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF.
The “Children, Not Soldiers” campaign, which
was launched one year ago by Special Representative
Leila Zerrougui in collaboration with UNICEF, plays
a key role in encouraging Governments to put an end
to the recruitment and use of children by armed forces
in conflict by 2016. I would like to pay tribute to the
progress that has been made because of the campaign,
which we will continue to support financially. But
Governments are not the only ones that recruit children
for combat. On the contrary, the vast majority of the
parties listed in the annexes to the Secretary-General’s
annual report (S/2014/339) are non-State actors.
Despite the undeniable progress that has been
made and the conclusion of action plans with armed
groups, for example in Nepal and Sri Lanka, the current
situation requires more determined action. The abuses
committed against civilians, and children in particular,
by Daesh in Iraq and Syria and by Boko Haram in
Nigeria have reached unprecedented levels of violence.
Given the modus operandi of these groups, in particular
with regard to the abduction of children, it is time to
take further action. In our view, the addition of a new
15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

S/PV.7414

trigger aimed at non-State armed groups guilty of child
abduction would be an appropriate response by the
international community.

Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use
during Armed Conflict. We take this opportunity to
encourage all Member States to do the same.

I would like to mention four other specific measures
aimed at better protecting children against violations
and abuses committed by non-State actors.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mali.

First, States should be encouraged to facilitate
the access of the United Nations to armed groups in
order to put an end to the violations perpetrated by such
groups, particularly by concluding action plans.
Secondly, armed groups should be informed of their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
the relevant information about their situation, including
the conclusions of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, should be brought to their attention.
Thirdly, we must ensure that the protection of
children is taken into account in peace negotiations. To
that end, mediators must be made aware of the issues
and must have clear guidelines. The release of children
involved with armed groups and their reintegration
must be included in all the relevant peace agreements.
Fourthly, the collection of information on armed
groups should be improved in order to design tailored
incentives that are adapted to the military structure,
size, mode of operation and other characteristics of the
armed groups.
Moreover, national armed forces and forces acting
under international mandates should be better equipped
in order to better incorporate the protection of children
in their fight against armed groups. Three measures
would be useful in the context of the expansion of
resolution 2143 (2014): first, the development of
standard procedures for the transfer of children
associated with armed groups to child protection
actors; secondly, ensuring that the rules of military
engagement incorporate provisions for the protection
of children, including children associated with armed
groups; and, thirdly, requiring specific operational
training on child protection in accordance with the
training materials developed by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.
I would like to conclude by recalling the particular
importance we attach to resolution 2143 (2014), adopted
by the Council a year ago. It is the imperative to prevent
the use of schools and hospitals for military purposes
and to prevent attacks against schools. In that respect,
Luxembourg fully supports the Lucens Guidelines for

Mr. Kassé (Mali) (spoke in French): Allow me,
Mr. President, to begin by expressing my country’s
satisfaction at seeing your great country, France,
preside over the work of the Security Council for the
month of March. At the same time, I commend the
initiative of convening this open debate on children and
armed conflict, including child victims of non-State
armed groups. In the same vein, I would also like to
congratulate the delegation of the People’s Republic of
China for its outstanding leadership of the Council’s
work over the past month. I congratulate the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing and take this opportunity to
reiterate my Government’s gratitude to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for her
constant commitment to protecting children’s rights
in countries in situations of armed conflict. Lastly, I
thank Ms. Julie Bodin and Mr. Junior Nzita for their
briefings.
It should be recalled that, on 20 November 1989
here in New York, Mali, co-presided over the special
session of the General Assembly at the end of which
the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Mali signed
the Convention on 26 January 1990 and deposited its
instrument of ratification on 20 September of the same
year. Since that time, all succeeding Governments have
implemented bold reforms, including concrete action to
protect and promote the rights of children throughout
the country, including in the northern regions of Mali.
Those actions, it must be recalled, were focused on
several areas, including education, health, the fight
against female genital mutilation, early marriage,
begging, trafficking and the exploitation of children.
While children of Mali have been the subject of all
those programmes and initiatives, their fate has reached
a dramatic turning point following the unleashing of
the rebellion and occupation of the northern parts of
our territory by terrorist armed groups. According to
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/267) on children
and armed conflict in Mali published in April 2014,
“armed groups operating in the north of the country,
including the Mouvement national pour la libération
de l’Azawad, Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb,

15-0836551/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

Ansar Dine and the Movement for Unity and Jihad
in West Africa, resorted to the most serious human
rights violations relating to the recruitment and the
large-scale use of children, mutilation, killings,
collective and individual rape of women and girls,
forced marriages, the deprivation of fundamental
freedoms, the destruction of schools and health
facilities, the refusal to allow the delivery of
humanitarian aid.”
Those archaic atrocities have resulted in the massive
displacement of women and children to neighbouring
States and within the country, jeopardizing the access
of thousands of children to education.
The children of Mali, like those elsewhere, are the
first victims of the criminal and asymmetrical actions
of non-State armed groups. In the light of that situation,
the Government of Mali has made a solemn commitment
here to act in a manner consistent with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the decisions
and recommendations of a number of subregional
and international entities, including the Economic
Community of West African States, the African
Union, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the
Non-Aligned Movement and the European Union.
In its quest for peace for the benefit of civilian
populations and future generations, the Government
of Mali has participated in the peace process in good
faith. That process began in Algiers on 16 July 2014,
and resulted in an agreement for peace and national
reconciliation in Mali on 1 March 2015. That document,
which was signed by the Government of Mali, the
movements of the platform, all members of the
international mediation team and France, is the result
of eight months of intense efforts by the international
community.
In a surprising turn of events, despite the
commitment made on 9 June 2014 in Algiers to
peacefully resolve the conflict in northern Mali
through a comprehensive and final agreement with
the Government; despite numerous calls for dialogue
launched by the Security Council through its relevant
resolutions and statements on the situation in Mali;
despite the working visit carried out by the international
mediation team on 17 March in Kidal, the Coordination
of Azawad Movements unfortunately decided to remain
on the sidelines of the Algiers process by refusing to
sign the agreement for peace and national reconciliation
in Mali. That refusal to sign the document, which was
submitted to the parties by the mediation team, is an
52/94

25/03/2015

invitation to armed terrorist groups and narco-jihadist
groups to continue to rage in northern Mаli and
throughout the Sahel region.
Following that refusal, which is also a gesture of
defiance to the international community, the delegation
of Mali calls on the mediation team to assume its
responsibility as guarantor of the peace process. Along
the same lines, we call on the members of the Security
Council to exert the necessary pressure to bring the
armed movements that have not yet done so to initial
and sign the agreement as soon as possible.
By initialing the draft agreement, the Government
of Mali has once again shown its good faith in the quest
for peace, adhering to the compromise proposed by the
mediation team, and this in strict compliance with the
founding principles of the Republic of Mali and the
ideals around which our nation was built. At this stage,
I would like to reaffirm that the Government of Mali
remains committed to the spirit and the letter of its
statement of 18 March 2015, a copy of which was sent
to the members of the Security Council.
We are all aware that the signing of the final
and comprehensive peace agreement in Mali will not
only mark an important step in the process to protect
child victims of armed conflict and to ensure their
social reintegration, but also to bring the perpetrators
of crimes committed against children before the
appropriate judicial authorities. Similarly, the signing
of the agreement will enable the Government of Mali to
continue, undisturbed, its efforts to promote and protect
the rights of children, who should have their rightful
place within the family, at school and playgrounds, and
not in an armed group or on a battlefield.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
commitment of the Government of Mali to scrupulously
comply with its international obligations, including
international legal instruments and the relevant Security
Council resolutions on the protection and development
of children. They represent the most vulnerable segment
of society, but also the hope and future of the country.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Marn (Slovenia): I would like to thank the
French presidency for organizing this timely debate.
I also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Children and Armed Conflict and other speakers for
their briefings.
15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

Slovenia aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union and that to be delivered
on behalf of the Human Security Network.
Slovenia joins others in condemning the grave
violations committed against children during armed
conflict by armed non-State actors, including heinous
acts by Daesh in Syria and Iraq, and by Boko Haram
in Nigeria and neighbouring States. Children should
not be recruited as soldiers, used as suicide bombers,
abducted, trafficked or sold for use in hostilities,
forcibly married or used as sex slaves. They should
not be deliberate targets of killing or maiming caused
by non-exploded landmines or remnants of war, rape
or other forms of sexual violence. All those acts
cause irreparable damage to the lives of the children
affected, as well as to their families, and have longterm consequences for the communities.
Slovenia believes that abductions are one of the
grave violations committed against children in armed
conflict, and recent cases of abduction are proof that
Council action is required. In that respect, we call on
the Council to set abductions as a trigger for the listing
of parties in the annexes of the Secretary-General’s
relevant annual reports.
Last year we witnessed an increased number of
attacks and the use of schools by armed non-state actors,
such as attacks by the Taliban in Afghanistan and
Pakistan and Boko Haram in Nigeria. In that regard, we
would like to recall resolution 2143 (2014) and to call
on all non-State armed groups to respect the civilian
character of schools in accordance with international
humanitarian law. We call on the Security Council and
its Working Group to use all the tools at their disposal
to address the impact of acts of armed non-State actors
on children in situations of armed conflict and to
increase pressure on persistent perpetrators to comply
with international standards.
To demonstrate that grave violations against children
in armed conflict are inadmissible, the perpetrators of
such crimes, including armed non-State actors, must be
held accountable through the national justice system
or, when applicable, through international justice
mechanisms such as the International Criminal Court
(ICC). The confirmation by the ICC Appeals Chamber
of the verdict and the sentence against Thomas Lubanga
in December 2014 was an important step in the fight
against impunity.

S/PV.7414

Armed non-State actors represent the vast majority
of parties listed in the annexes of the SecretaryGeneral’s latest annual report (S/2014/339) on children
and armed conflict, and most of them are persistent
perpetrators. We welcome the efforts by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict to negotiate and help implement
action plans with 12 such actors. At the same time,
we encourage the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative to develop strategies for outreach to
those parties, and urge all the countries concerned
to enable access to armed non-State actors. We also
see the merit in having non-State actors sign a deed
of commitment for the protection of children from the
effect of armed conflict, and commend the efforts of
those who have already done so.
Let me also use this opportunity to underline the
importance of rehabilitating children. Slovenia has
been supporting different initiatives in that respect.
Most recently, we supported a biannual regional
project to reduce the vulnerability of Syrian refugees,
in particular children and youth, to the negative
consequences of mines and other remnants of war.
That project, entitled “Tomorrow is Ours”, is carried
out by the International Trust Fund Enhancing Human
Security in Jordan and Lebanon. The project also offers
psychosocial support and education to Syrian children
in order to help them overcome their trauma, improve
their psychosocial well-being and develop more solid
foundations for the future.
In conclusion, let me stress that, since the
groundbreaking Machel report almost 20 years ago
(see A/51/306), the adoption of the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict 15 years ago
and the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005) 10 years
ago, the international community has made enormous
progress in lessening the impact of armed conflict on
children. We must persist in those efforts, as we also
face new challenges on the children in armed conflict
agenda.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French):
Allow me to thank the French presidency of the
Council for organizing this debate. I also welcome
the presence among us today of Ms. Leila Zerrougui,

15-0836553/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
the representatives of UNICEF and civil society.
(spoke in English)
Atrocities committed against children are an
affront to our common humanity. They deprive
children of a future, and they can have catastrophic
long-term consequences for both the victims and their
communities. Recent conflicts have seen unimaginable
outrages committed against children. We are appalled
by the mass abductions of children by non-State actors.
Of particular note are the abductions by Boko Haram of
276 schoolgirls in Nigeria in April 2014; the abduction
of 153 Kurdish boys from Ain al-Arab in Syria in May
2014 by the Islamic State in Iraq and Sham (ISIS); the
attack by the Taliban on a school in Peshawar during
which 132 children were killed in December 2014; and
the abduction of hundreds of Yezidi children by ISIS in
western Iraq in July 2014.

25/03/2015

reports of the indoctrination of children by non-State
actors are particularly troubling, and it is essential
that community-based programmes receive timely,
sustained and adequate resources and funding. The
international community must work together to ensure
the successful reintegration of these children.
Similarly, more must also be done to help girls
who have survived violence, including sexual violence.
We must help them recover and reintegrate into their
communities, so that their trauma is not compounded by
social stigma. In doing so, we must not unwittingly trap
survivors in the role of victims. Rather, we must help
them to play out their lives as active and empowered
members of their communities.
(spoke in French)

We call for the immediate release of all of those
abducted children without delay. We call once again on
the Security Council to make the abduction of children
a criteria for being listed in the annexex to all the
relevant reports of the Secretary-General.

When children suffer these unspeakable abuses, it
tears apart their families and communities. In addition
to the social stigma that can arise in cases of sexual
violence, children may also be forced to take part in
violence against their family members and neighbours.
This brings a new and horrifying level of complexity to
reintegration. If it takes a village to raise a child, it also
takes a village to recover from atrocity.

(spoke in French)

(spoke in English)

The protection of children from violence in all
forms and in all settings is crucial. Schools should be
a safe place where children can learn. Education is an
effective tool for reducing their vulnerability. We are
increasingly seeing schools used as shields and hiding
places for combatants, and thus children are forced into
the line of fire. Canada strongly condemns the unlawful
targeting of education facilities. We call on all parties to
armed conflict to refrain from using schools as bases,
barracks, weapons caches or detention centres.

We are increasingly seeing a trend of armed
non-State actors seeking to recruit children across
borders. Recalling resolution 2178 (2014), we call
upon Member States to cooperate to prevent the
radicalization, recruitment, equipping and cross-border
transit of children to join such groups.

We are also especially concerned with the safety
of girls in situations of armed conflict, where they
face particular risks and abuses. All too often they
become the victims of rape, sexual violence and sexual
exploitation. They are used as slaves, including sex
slaves, and face abuses such as child, early and forced
marriage. We therefore call for special and dedicated
attention to the protection of girls.
(spoke in English)
In seeking justice for abuses against children, we
must not lose sight of the victims themselves. Effective
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes for children are absolutely crucial. Recent
54/94

We call on those armed non-State actors listed in
the annex to the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on children in armed conflict (S/2014/339)
to adopt and implement action plans committing
themselves to end grave violations against children.
We commend the efforts undertaken by the office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to negotiate and help implement action plans with 12
armed non-State groups in recent years.
(spoke in French)
There is also a role for every State Member of the
United Nations to play. We encourage all Member States
to employ what influence is at their disposal, including
through dialogue, law enforcement and economic
means, to pressure non-State actors to immediately
cease grave violations against children in situations of
armed conflict.
15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

(spoke in English)
Canada is committed to ensuring that the rights of
children are protected. I can assure the Council that we
will continue to fight against the unspeakable atrocities
that threaten the safety, dignity and lives of girls and
boys in situations of armed conflict in places such as
Iraq, Syria and many others in corners of our world.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Austria.
Mr. Vollmer (Austria): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the members of the Human Security
Network, a cross-regional network composed of Chile,
Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway,
Panama, Slovenia, Switzerland, Thailand and my own
country, Austria, and South Africa as an observer. The
Human Security Network is an informal group of States
that advocates a people-centred, holistic approach to
human security, complementing the more traditional
understanding of national and international security.
Let me first of all thank today’s briefers for their
comprehensive statements. I would also like to thank
the French presidency for convening this open debate on
children and armed conflict, a topic that has long been
a priority for the Network. We welcome the particular
focus of the debate today, since the overwhelming
majority of parties listed in the Secretary-General’s
most recent annual report on children in armed conflict
(S/2014/339) are non-State armed groups.
In order to ensure that perpetrators, including
non-State armed groups, national armed forces and
peacekeepers who commit grave violations against
children, are brought to justice, we need to take
concrete measures. We call for more efforts to address
impunity and to investigate, prosecute and punish all
those who commit grave violations against children.
In particular, boys and girls continue to be affected by
rape and other forms of sexual violence during armed
conflict. National justice systems, subregional and
regional cooperation and the International Criminal
Court have an important role to play in this regard.
The Network stresses that the presence of local female
police officers and women peacekeepers can encourage
victims to come forward to report such crimes.
The signing of action plans must be facilitated, and
efforts towards their implementation must be made.
The number of action plans concluded with non-State
armed groups must increase further. For this purpose,
the United Nations and concerned Governments should

S/PV.7414

cooperate closely. Furthermore, child protection
provisions have to be integrated into peace talks and
agreements.
Every child should have access to education,
including in regions of armed conflict. In that context,
the Network reiterates the importance of resolution
2143 (2014). Recent events have shown the timeliness
of a focus on protecting schools against attacks and
avoiding their military use. The Network welcomes
the draft Lucens Guidelines for Protecting Schools
and Universities from Military Use during Armed
Conflict and efforts to disseminate and promote
their implementation. Furthermore, we take note
with interest of the ongoing consultations on the socalled Safe Schools Declaration to provide a broader
framework for the Guidelines.
The Human Security Network calls for the
inclusion of specific child protection provisions in
peacekeeping mission mandates. Moreover, soldiers,
police officers and civilians who participate in United
Nations and other international peacekeeping missions
should receive special training in child protection and
children’s rights. The Network encourages the United
Nations and its Member States to work together to build
this capacity further.
Monitoring on the ground and accurate and timely
reporting can be crucial to ensuring that perpetrators
are held accountable for violations committed against
children in armed conflict. Peacekeepers can make
an important contribution by effectively applying the
monitoring and reporting mechanisms established in
accordance with resolutions 1612 (2005), 1882 (2009)
and 1998 (2011), in situations where parties to conflict
have been listed in the annexes of the annual report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict.
The Network condemns the extremely worrying
mass abductions of children. Girls are particularly at
risk of abduction and recruitment by armed groups for
sexual purposes and forced marriages. Furthermore,
the Network strongly condemns the recruitment of
children by armed forces, supports the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of child soldiers and
children affected by war, and reiterates its commitment
to the United Nations “Children, Not Soldiers”
campaign, launched one year ago. Moreover, the
Network encourages States that have not yet done so to
ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict.

15-0836555/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

We further commend the work of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, chaired by
Malaysia. In the year of the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), we encourage the
Working Group to make full use of its tool box in
order to move the agenda forward in significant ways.
We would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Zerrougui, and all the other actors involved
for implementing the mandate for the protection of
children in armed conflict and ensuring an effective
and thorough monitoring and reporting mechanism.
Finally, the Human Security Network looks forward
to the second open debate dedicated to children and
armed conflict, in June.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): My delegation
warmly welcomes the focus of this debate on armed
non-State actors. We thank the briefers. We particularly
appreciate the comments made by those who have
suggested concrete measures to make progress on the
issue.
In that regard, I would like to add three points from
my delegation’s perspective. The first point concerns
abductions. Mass abductions of children are becoming
ever more frequent. We have seen horrific cases in
recent times, including by Boko Haram in Nigeria and
by Daesh in Syria and Iraq. We believe that the Security
Council should recognize abduction as grounds for
listing conflict parties in the annexes to the SecretaryGeneral’s reports on children and armed conflict. In
fact, we believe that such action is overdue.
Secondly, we support the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to negotiate
and help to implement action plans directly with
armed non-State actors. We believe that such direct
engagement is crucial. In this Chamber, we often call
on conflict parties to respect international human rights
law and on rebel groups not to use schools for military
activities. But we all know, of course, that they are not
listening to the webcast of this event or reading the press
release the day after. Without the direct engagement
with those actors, many of the efforts we undertake
will prove meaningless. We therefore urge concerned
Governments to fully support such engagement. We are
also very grateful for the direct engagement undertaken
by non-governmental organizations, which often

56/94

25/03/2015

have a different way of accessing those groups that is
extremely crucial, from our perspective.
My third point underlines the important role of
justice mechanisms in deterring violations against
children; there two aspects to this issue.
The first is that perpetrators must be made aware
that their actions are illegal. That does not always go
without saying, as seen in the case of the conscription
of child soldiers. In the example of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the International Center for
Transitional Justice documented the educational impact
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) trial against
Thomas Lubanga on other rebels in the field.
Secondly, perpetrators must be made aware
that they can be prosecuted. That requires either a
functioning national judicial system or the jurisdiction
of the International Criminal Court. Referral by the
Security Council may sometimes be necessary to
establish jurisdiction. Furthermore, third States could
and should exercise jurisdiction, either based on the
nationality of the perpetrator, which is becoming
increasingly relevant as ever greater numbers of
fighters are traveling to conflict zones, on the basis of
universal jurisdiction, which is well established with
respect to war crimes.
I would like to particularly emphasize the deterrent
effect of the International Criminal Court, which
is increasingly being documented. Liechtenstein
had the great pleasure of co-hosting a recent event
at the International Peace Institute, where a study
undertaken by Harvard and Texas A&M Universities
was presented. The study’s main result was that, under
certain conditions, the ICC can, indeed, prevent crimes
and have an impact on the people on the ground. It does
so through prosecutorial deterrence, by signaling to
perpetrators that they could be subject to indictment,
trial and jail sentences, as well as through social
deterrence.
There are indirect and extralegal consequences
to the activities of the ICC. It can lead to perpetrators
and potential perpetrators being shunned by their
communities, or being subjected to informal sanctions
and other measures. At our even, one example cited was
that, in the Central African Republic, rebel commanders
told Human Rights Watch researchers that they did
not want to end up before the ICC, and they offered to
demobilize child soldiers. And children were, in fact,
demobilized.

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

In sum, we believe that justice mechanisms can be
a great ally to the Security Council in its fight to protect
children in armed conflict. We call on the Security
Council to make better and more consistent use of that
important tool.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the Observer State
of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s debate on children
and armed conflict. I also thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui for her
briefing, and the others for their briefings, as well as
the United Nations agencies supporting Palestinian
children, including UNICEF and the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA).
As the Security Council considers the situation of
children in armed conflict around the world, we appeal
to the Council not to forget Palestinian children, who are
suffering extreme hardship, shocking acts of aggression,
oppression and gross human rights violations due to the
Israeli occupation and the persistence of that conflict
for nearly 70 years. Israel, the occupying Power, is
in continuous, grave breach of international law,
including, inter alia, the Fourth Geneva Convention,
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Charter
of the United Nations and Security Council resolutions.
It is without a doubt that Israel systematically fulfils
three of the six criteria used to assess grave violations
against children.

S/PV.7414

locations of hospitals, medical centres and schools,
including those where it was fully aware that families
had been sheltering. Yet the occupying Power attacked
and damaged 279 schools and 75 health centres and
hospitals, in addition to the thousands of civilian homes
it targeted and destroyed. Again, these attacks were not
just a one-time occurrence, as the occupying Power
has systematically destroyed Palestinian homes and
civilian properties in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, rendering thousands upon
thousands of families homeless, forcibly displacing
them and leaving children in a state of perpetual
insecurity and trauma.
Thirdly, Israel denies humanitarian access to the
entire occupied Palestinian people, endangering the
well-being and survival of Palestinian children. Since
2007, Israel has subjected the more than 1.8 million
civilians in Gaza to an illegal, immoral blockade. The
situation has left Gaza devastated and dependent on
aid and has completely debilitated its economy and
infrastructure, including water networks, with 90 per
cent of water being unfit for humans. At this rate,
without a lifting of the Israeli blockade or the delivery
of assistance at the scope and scale needed, Gaza’s
reconstruction will take over 100 years, a deplorable
situation inconsistent with international humanitarian
law. Children — 52 per cent of the population — are
suffering disproportionately.

First, Israeli occupying forces engage in a pattern
of killing and maiming children. The occupying
Power cynically claims that its military strikes are
“conducted in a precise and surgical manner”, yet in
last summer’s Israeli war on the Gaza Strip at least
540 Palestinian children were killed, constituting
20 per cent of the civilian casualties. Thousands more
children were injured and disabled. Those crimes
were not just a one-time occurrence. Israel’s previous
assaults on occupied Gaza caused a high proportion of
child casualties, in addition to the incessant attacks on
children in the occupied West Bank by the occupying
forces and extremist settlers, with almost 1,200 injured
in the year of 2014 alone.

Israeli policies, approved at the highest levels,
are not only gross attacks against children, but are
systematic violations of international law tantamount to
war crimes. Israel’s deliberate oppression of Palestinian
children has no limits; not a day goes by in which
children’s rights are not violated. In that regard, I must
also draw attention to the Israeli practice of detaining
Palestinian children, some as young as eight years old.
The Israeli military court is the world’s first and only
juvenile military court, and since 2000 an estimated
10,000 children have been detained and prosecuted
there. Their numbers are growing. Over the past three
years, child detentions have increased by 87 per cent.
In detention, children are blindfolded, strip-searched
and subjected to physical and verbal abuse and solitary
confinement that traumatizes them. They endure cruel,
inhumane and degrading treatment amounting to
torture.

Secondly, the occupying Power deliberately targets
schools and hospitals. During the war on Gaza, the
Israeli Government repeatedly received the precise

The occupying Power’s collective punishment
and abuse of Palestinian children are also a source
of ongoing trauma and suffering. In Gaza alone, six

15-0836557/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

months after Israel’s latest attack, Palestinian children
continue to suffer from hunger, fear, deprivation and
isolation. More than 400,000 children in Gaza are in
urgent need of psychosocial support. We commend
United Nations agencies, in particular UNICEF and
UNRWA, for their tireless efforts aimed at assisting
those children in need.
It is clear that the crimes committed by Israel, the
occupying Power, against children are a symptom of
a wider problem — a complete lack of accountability.
We have continued to repeat that the international
community’s unwillingness to enforce international
law when it comes to Israel only fuels its lawlessness
and the culture of impunity among the occupying
forces. In this regard, we call on the international
community, including the Security Council, to take
three immediate steps to end this cycle of impunity and
protect Palestinian children.
First, we call on the Secretary-General to add the
Israeli occupying forces to the United Nations global
list of parties that consistently commit grave violations
against children. We urge Member States to join us in
this call. The evidence is abundant. The criteria are to
be assessed objectively. Any such assessment will lead
to the conclusion that the Israeli occupying forces must
be listed. Failure to do so implies politicization of the
mechanism, which undermines its credibility, and if
credibility is undermined for one case, it is undermined
for all cases.
Secondly, the international community should
demand the immediate and permanent release of
all children from Israeli captivity. There can be no
justification for detention and abuse of children.
Finally, assistance must flow into Gaza, and
the international community should do whatever it
takes to ensure Israeli compliance with international
law, including by lifting its illegal blockade. This is
imperative for a real change in the tragic situation of
Palestinian children under Israeli occupation to come
to pass.
The plight of Palestinian children cannot be
divorced from the wider political context. Only an
independent State of Palestine where the Palestinian
people can live in freedom and dignity will bring
permanent relief and lasting peace and security to
our children. The Palestinian leadership remains
committed to the two-State solution. However, the
Israeli Prime Minister has clearly made his opposition

58/94

25/03/2015

known through words and actions. In that regard, it is
incumbent on the international community to apply the
pressure required to end Israel’s occupation that began
in 1967 and bring the Israeli side into compliance with
international law. In the meantime, the Palestinian
leadership will continue to pursue accountability for the
Palestinian people, including children, through every
available legitimate avenue, including the International
Criminal Court.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): I thank the French
presidency for organizing today’s debate and all
the briefers for their presentations earlier. I would
like to align myself with the statement made by the
representative of the European Union.
I would like to mention some numbers: 2 million,
6 million, 300 million, 1 billion. These are unbelievable
numbers. One may ask what connection these numbers
have with today’s debate. According to the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development, at least
2 million children have died in the past decade as a result
of wars. Many have been targeted as non-combatants or
killed in action as soldiers. Some 6 million have been
disabled or seriously injured, with many more suffering
from disease, malnutrition or sexual violence. The
European Commission’s Humanitarian Aid and Civil
Protection Department has stated that conflict-affected
areas are home to 1 billion children — 1 billion — of
whom 300 million are under the age of five.
In recent decades, the proportion of civilian
casualties in armed conflicts has increased dramatically
and is now estimated at more than 90 per cent. About
half of these victims are children. We join the Security
Council in its strong condemnation of ongoing violence
against civilian populations, notably women and
children. Since 2009, we have witnessed a deplorable
string of violence and abuse of children. The immediate
cessation of Boko Haram’s hostilities and abuses,
which are now shockingly spreading outside Nigeria
and brutally affecting neighbouring Chad, Cameroon
and Niger, is absolutely necessary, together with the
unconditional release of all abducted civilians and
children, including the 276 schoolgirls abducted in
Chibok, Borno State in April 2014.
We hear statements about children being killed,
maimed, abducted, sexually abused, recruited and used
by armed forces. Victims of such crimes lack adequate

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

assistance and, in most cases, the perpetrators remain
unpunished. Many red lines have been crossed. There
are no words to describe the suffering of these children.
In fact, no words are necessary; action must be taken.
In that regard, the role of the International Criminal
Court is indispensable, and the United Nations, and the
Security Council in particular, should further examine
ways to assist the Court in fulfilling its mandate.
Accountability is a crucial element, and we have to find
ways to better exploit mechanisms designed to enforce
it.
But there is one question that bothers me very
much. Why are young people affected by and attracted
to radicalism? We see many young people turning their
sympathies to radical movements regardless of their
social background. What are we doing wrong? Perhaps
a safe home, safety, education and prospects for living
in a stable society are the areas we should concentrate
on when speaking about a better future for children
who survive armed conflict.
With regard to safety and security, in the annual
report of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, special
emphasis is given to attacks on schools and hospitals.
Schools and hospitals should create safe heavens, and
not serve as targets.
Education is another key word. In the Millennium
Development Goals, the world community set a
deadline of 2015 for universal primary education and
for the elimination of gender disparities at all levels of
education. But we have to go much farther.
Let me conclude by expressing the hope that there
will be a light at the end of a tunnel. In March 2014, a joint
initiative “Children, Not Soldiers” was launched by the
Office of the Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict and UNICEF, with the aim of ending
and preventing the recruitment and use of children by
Government armed forces in conflicts by 2016. As the
Special Representative Leila Zerrougui has assessed,
in that campaign’s first year progress has been steady.
The campaign has received broad support and achieved
results that are making a difference in children’s lives.
Slovakia applauds and fully supports it.
However, the campaign’s first year has also shown
that more can be done. The international community is
obliged to assist the States affected to re-establish their
entire institutional system, but most importantly to
update and reform so that all citizens may feel secure,

S/PV.7414

free and with a promising future. Emphasis will have to
be put on complete reconstruction and transformation
of societies, including deep, conceptual and meaningful
reform of their armed forces, law enforcement bodies
and the entire security sector. Violence against any
child now will negatively and irreversibly affect at least
the next two generations. We should and must take
action to avoid this fat for our children, grandchildren
and great-grandchildren.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of the Phillippines.
Ms. Ponce (Philippines): The Philippines aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative
of Viet Nam on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations.
We thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to share
concrete proposals on how to prevent and respond
to violations committed by non-State armed groups
against children, in particular in relation to peace
processes.
As Council members may know, the Philippine
Government concluded peace negotiations with the
Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) and signed,
in March 2014, the Comprehensive Agreement on the
Bangsamoro. Subsequently, a Transition Commission,
composed of MILF and Government representatives and
led by MILF, was tasked to draft a basic Bangsamoro
law, intended to be the legal framework and governing
law of the new Bangsamoro entity and territory. This
draft law is now under consideration by our Congress
and Senate.
Recognizing that the welfare of children is integral
to any peace process, this basic law mandates the
Bangsamoro Government to uphold and protect the
fundamental rights of children and to establish special
development programmes and laws for the young people
of the Bangsamoro. It further provides that children,
especially orphans of tender age, shall be protected
from abuse, exploitation or discrimination.
In negotiating with MILF, our approach was always
based on trust, good faith and acknowledgement of
the existence of legitimate grievances. This approach
necessarily anchored a holistic approach that meant
pursuing not just a political settlement, but also a
comprehensive social welfare programme — the
Sajahatra Bangsamoro — covering health, education
and livelihood, and an economic development plan,
both to address the root causes of armed conflict. This

15-0836559/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

approach allowed us to build trust, which was essential
for MILF to conclude in 2009 an action plan with the
United Nations to eliminate the recruitment and use of
children, and to agree to its extension in April 2013.
The action plan continues to be actively implemented
by them, with UNICEF Philippines commending MILF
for its commitment to addressing this issue. Last
December, MILF military commanders and troops
underwent a series of orientation sessions on the
roles and responsibilities of MILF military leadership
and rank and file in preventing and addressing the
recruitment and use of children, the sanctions if they
did not comply, and the concept of child protection,
including the definition of a child under international
law, grave violations against children, as well as legal
frameworks on child protection. At the end of these
sessions, MILF front and base commanders publicly
commit to ensuring that no children are associated with
their respective commands, and that if there are cases,
these children will be separated from the command
structure. According to UNICEF, 4,151 Bangsamoro
Islamic Armed Forces elements from 26 base commands
and four fronts have received such training.
Our take-away points from our experience are
the following. Peace talks and negotiations must
incorporate the protection of children and provide a
framework for their future from the very start. Equally
important, there must be political will and trust on the
part of both the Government and the non-State armed
group to see the process through. Similarly, military
operations must complement the peace process by
ensuring that continuous human rights training,
particularly on child rights and protection, including
the non-use of education facilities, is incorporated into
their operational strategies and plans. This encourages
similar action on the part of committed non-State
armed groups.
Parallel to these is the need to strengthen and
clarify the national legal framework for the protection
of children. We already had a law — Republic Act
7610, also known as the Special Protection of Children
Against Child Abuse, Exploitation and Discrimination
Act — that declared children as “zones of peace” who
should not be recruited as members of the armed forces
or its civilian units, or be used as fighters, couriers or
spies. To ensure its clear implementation, our President
issued Executive Order 138 establishing a monitoring,
reporting and response system composed of civilian,
military and police agencies, which meets regularly

60/94

25/03/2015

to verify reports on children who are alleged to be
combatants or couriers, guides, spies, medics, cooks or
serving in any similar non-combatant capacity.
Subsequently, these agencies signed a memorandum
of agreement that provides for the development of
an inter-agency action and communication plan on
the prevention and response to grave child rights
violations; the integration of rights of children in
situations of armed conflict into peace negotiations
and other peacebuilding programmes and processes;
and the development of package services, including
education and health services, for children affected by
armed conflict situations. In addition, a bill providing
for the special protection of children in situations of
armed conflict and for penalties for violations thereof
is also pending before our Senate.
Regional and international partners also play an
effective role in monitoring compliance by non-State
armed groups of their obligations under peace processes
and action plans. Their very presence can build capacity
and trust, but it is important that they work in close
coordination and with the approval of the Government
so that specific and contextualized programmes,
including capacity- and confidence-building measures,
can be jointly identified and implemented.
The Security Council may also wish to consider
a stronger focus on the encouragement that delisting
can bring. On the other hand, we also know that not all
non-State armed groups share our values or are open to
action plans. We have seen the rise of extremist groups
that do not seek legitimation by the international order,
but rather seek to destroy it. In these cases, efforts must
focus on accountability and sanctions, including justice
mechanisms. To that end, we need strong domestic laws
that criminalize the recruitment and use of children for
armed conflict, as well as action by the International
Criminal Court.
Finally, documentation can be used not just as a
tool to publicize abuses by non-State armed groups, but
also to publicize the progress they make. Such positive
reinforcement raises the normative and political costs
for them. In this regard, it is important that information
provided by the website of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict
be current and up to date. We note, for instance, that
the information on the Philippines on the website is
still based on the 2013 report of the Secretary-General
to the Security Council (S/2013/419). It also does not

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

reflect the fact that MILF has signed an extension to
the 2009 action plan, as well as progress made by MILF
since 2013. Again, positive reinforcement would help in
this regard.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Burundi.
Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, and your country,
France, for organizing this important and timely open
debate on the subject of child victims of non-State
armed groups, under the agenda item of children and
armed conflict. I would also like to congratulate you
warmly on your outstanding leadership during France’s
presidency of the Security Council and for the major
role you played in preparing and implementing the
Council’s field trip to my country, Burundi. I will
not forget the substantive, animated and hotly argued
debate on the afternoon of 13 March that you moderated
during your meeting with political parties and civilsociety organizations in Bujumbura. Our democracy
emerged from it the wiser.
I would like to thank you for the concept note
(S/2015/168, annex) on the subject we are meeting on
today that you kindly submitted as material for our
discussion. It is concise and well written, researched
and directed. My sincere thanks also go to the
Secretary-General and the other briefers for joining us
this morning in this very interesting debate.
Every year, hundreds of thousands of children
worldwide are enrolled, most of them against their will,
in Government armed forces or non-State armed groups
in conflict. They are thereby exposed to violence both as
witnesses and as direct or indirect victims. The impact
on their mental health and physical well-being amounts
to a violation of their rights as children and their most
fundamental human rights, besides the serious threats it
poses to peace and development. Similarly, children are
being killed, maimed and, depending on the situation,
sexually abused, abducted and separated from their
families by non-State armed groups every day. This
deplorable trend has become a new tactic used without
compunction by such armed groups. It is also a way of
instilling fear and terror in innocent people, controlling
them and forcing them to leave their family homes and
become refugees in their own country.
We cannot repeat too often that children are more
vulnerable to recruitment and exploitation by armed
groups, at a time when conflicts all over the world are

S/PV.7414

becoming more brutal, intense and frequent. While it
may be true that Governments around the world have
made progress in recognizing that children have no
place in their own armies, the recruitment and use of
child soldiers continue to be a huge problem, especially
among non-State armed groups, and constitute a
serious violation of international humanitarian law
and international standards of human rights. Injured,
maimed and traumatized by a war that is not of their
choosing, children are left seriously handicapped,
marginalized and rejected when they are victims of
rape or forced marriage. Deprived of their basic rights,
they no longer have access to education, playgrounds,
health care or psychological supervision, and they
suffer from the absence of affection and other traumas
resulting from their time in enforced conscription under
unscrupulous non-State armed groups.
The ехрerieпce of combat can have devastating
long-term physical and psychological effects on
children, including the loss of limbs, possible exposure
to HIV, emotional problems and reprisals or rejection
by the families and communities to which these young
people wish to return. Such consequences are not only
a major problem for communities affected by war but
also undermine the international community’s efforts to
restore peace and promote lasting community recovery
after a conflict.
We believe that all children held by armed groups
should be released without delay. We cannot wait for
peace to return to help children trapped in the turmoil
of war. Even a minute longer in the clutches of such
groups is an eternity for those children. We must point
out that accepting the use of child soldiers in conflict
amounts to accepting the destruction of our own future,
and we must fight to save it, one child at a time. We must
bring them all back, one by one. We firmly believe that
investing in ways to keep children away from the front
lines, particularly through education and support for a
country’s economy, is absolutely crucial to their future
and that of their communities.
We should recall that schools and students
continue to be the targets of deliberate attacks. School
facilities are regularly looted or diverted from their
primary function in order to be used for military or
paramilitary purposes. Such acts deprive children, and
the communities whose future and hope they represent,
of a fundamental right, the right to an education. The
ignorance that is the result of a lack of education

15-0836561/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

encourages intolerance and perpetuates a cycle of
poverty, thus helping to fuel extreme violence.
We would particularly like to highlight the situation
of girls directly or indirectly associated with non-State
armed groups. Girls are even more vulnerable than
their brothers to such groups and are often specifically
targeted by them. They therefore naturally need special
attention and protection. They are at greater risk of rape
or sexual violence, sexual exploitation and even more
devastating abuses such as sexual slavery and forced or
early. Such tragedies tend to get the entire international
community worked up, which is what makes this debate
so relevant, but the persistence of the phenomenon has
raised questions about the ability of the international
community and especially the United Nations to put an
end to it. That is why we need to take urgent action to
give our children hope. These are our proposals. I do
not claim to be reinventing the wheel; some of these
measures already exist, but strengthening them could
make a difference to our protection of our children.
The first is that we must ensure that the inclusion
of specific provisions for protecting children in the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
special political missions and peacebuilding missions
becomes a reality. Such measures are effective and
successful, especially if child protection advisers
are integrated systematically into such operations.
However, that must be fully aligned with the childprotection policy of the relevant department. Secondly,
when it comes to the injustices that children suffer in
the context of armed conflict, especially in relation
to education, investing in basic social services,
particularly by building schools, health centres and
specialist training centres, is an excellent pre-emptive
way of protecting children from involvement or
exploitation in armed conflict. Thirdly, negotiation
and mediation processes should include strengthened
provisions for securing child soldiers’ release from the
clutches of non-State armed groups, with a particular
focus on freeing girls who are directly or indirectly
associated with armed groups and providing them with
support after their release.
Fourthly, I should stress the vital importance of
the regional dimension. Local, regional, subregional
and continental stakeholders are well placed to play
a key гole in exerting greater pressure on non-State
armed groups in order to put an end to our children’s ill
treatment. Cooperation must be strengthened between
the United Nations and regional and subregional

62/94

25/03/2015

organizations that are very close to the areas affected.
Building local, regional and continental capacities is
also necessary in that regard. This is also true of the
process of release and of efforts undertaken at the level
of the countries concerned and by the international
community to rehabilitate or reintegrate children
within their communities of origin.
Fifthly and lastly, we would recall that the protection
and assistance provided to children in situations of
conflict remain inadequate and poorly distributed.
Young people are bearing the consequences of war
because Governments have not allocated sufficient
importance to their needs or their rights; thus the
resources allocated to the settlement of humanitarian
crises vary considerably from one country to another.
Participants in this meeting may have noted that a child
living in Sierra Leone, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo or the Central African Republic does not receive
the same kind of assistance as a child living in Kosovo
or Ukraine. This situation must be rectified.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like to begin by greeting everyone here and
thanking France for the initiative of convening this
debate and for the concept note (S/2015/168, annex) that
was circulated to guide our discussions. I wish also to
convey my congratulations to the delegation of Malaysia
and Ambassador Hussein Haniff for their leadership of
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
I also welcome the Secretary-General’s briefing; the
presence and briefing of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Leila Zerrougui; and
the Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF, who was
very eloquent this morning. We also note the presence
of high representatives of UNICEF. I am also grateful
for the presence of and the experience shared with us
by Ms. Bodin and for the commitment of Mr. Nzita to
continuing to deepen awareness-raising activities in a
global community that is very often violent.
We stress the progress made in the area of
prevention and in the promotion of the rights of children
through the coordinated actions of the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
and the efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, with the cooperation of UNICEF
and other United Nations system entities. We firmly
support the need to agree on the implementation of
measures to bring additional pressure to bear on State
15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

and non-State actors that continually violate the rights
of children.
In that context, Argentina reiterates the need for
greater coordination and consistency between the
system for protecting children in armed conflict and
the various sanctions regimes, so as to make it possible
for us to impose sanctions on those responsible for the
most serious violations against children in situations of
armed conflict, as well as among the various agencies
in the United Nations system and the international
organizations working on the ground in implementing
plans to protect the rights of children.
As we have heard everyone say throughout this
debate, this year will mark the anniversary of resolution
1612 (2005), whose adoption was firmly supported by
Argentina, which at the time was a non-permanent
member of the Security Council. What does this tenth
anniversary mean? It means that we have to rethink and
re-evaluate the progress made as well as the challenges
ahead. Argentina therefore firmly supports the efforts
of the Security Council to prevent grave violations of
the rights of children in situations of armed conflict.
This commitment has been evident since Argentina
became one of the first countries to ratify the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict.
It also actively promoted the adoption of each of the
resolutions adopted by this body.
But it also seems to me that we have to see where
we are individually as States in terms of preventing
the violation of the rights of children and adolescents.
In our country, we were not born wise and so we have
learned and continue to learn about democracy; we are
a party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
to its Optional protocol on the involvement of children
in armed conflict. Furthermore, our democracy has
enabled us to make enlistment in my country’s military
voluntary, at a minimum age of 18.
The worst forms of child labour are unfathomable
to my country; what could be the best forms of child
labour? We say no to child labour. This is not to give
ourselves as an example but to say that whenever there
is a situation of armed conflict, be it State or non-State
violence, the basis of democracy must consist of the
rights recognized by that society and that the authorities
abide by and honour.
Protecting children as a human rights focus must
continue to be one of our priorities. It is for this reason

S/PV.7414

that we must take it into account, as we see it being
done in the mandates of peacekeeping operations and
special political missions. It is essential, but we also
have to do more than just include defenders of the rights
of children and adolescents in the various missions;
rather, we also have to ensure that we make this a
cross-cutting issue in all military, civilian and police
components of the forces and actors that take part in
peacekeeping missions or special political missions.
Ms. Zerrougui and UNICEF could be additionally
supported if we all fully immersed ourselves in the
issue of the rights of children and what this means in
terms of all those who are involved in peacekeeping on
the ground. It is for that reason that it is also important
to underscore the importance of the preventive
measures that can be adopted by each State, including
the establishment and implementation of a legal
framework that effectively ensures that children are
not and cannot be recruited as soldiers. Therefore,
proper birth registrations are very valuable. It may be
that some children have been unable to access certain
programmes because their age was not recognized, and
therefore they have been used as child soldiers.
It is also critical that within the framework of
reparation and reintegration programmes, children
who have been victims in armed conflict situations
be recognized as rights holders and not just as being
in need of guardianship, which could deprive them of
liberty. They must be recognized as rights holders, not
just wards.
Therefore we must avoid any guardianship-focused
intervention efforts in the area of the reintegration of
children as well as any efforts that might victimize
them further. We also stress the need to involve
various actors in order to advocate for an end to be
put to the involvement of children in armed groups
or forces, including human rights activists, teachers,
representatives of civil society, family members, health
practitioners and religious and community leaders.
We must also combat impunity. In that regard,
we rely on the International Criminal Court, which
in March 2012, as the Ambassador and Permanent
Representative of France stated this morning, handed
down the first decision in which it found Thomas
Lubanga Dyilo guilty of war crimes and of recruiting
children under 15 years of age to engage in conflict
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Argentina,
along with the rest of the international community, is
clearly aware of the devastating effects on children,

15-0836563/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

adolescents and society when children are victims of
armed conflicts. In some countries in armed conflict,
we continue to see children being treated not as victims
but as victimizers. That must end. We must help to put
an end to that.
Let me close with this comment. This morning, as I
was listening intently to the debate, I thought of Lewis
Carroll’s Through the Looking-Glass. Alice dares to
ask the Queen, “What sort of things do you remember
best?” The Queen responds naturally, “Oh, things that
happened the week after next”. The Queen responded
naturally. Why am I saying this? Time is always too
short for us to prevent; however, there is always time to
find military solutions to conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the French presidency for its initiative to
organize this very important open debate on children
and armed conflict, with particular emphasis on child
victims of non-State armed groups.
(spoke in English)
As we are about to celebrate the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), which
established the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, it is deeply shocking that we continue to
witness the increasing recruitment and use of children
in armed conflict, in violation of international human
rights and humanitarian law. While we speak today in
the Security Council, thousands of children are trapped
in armed conflicts all over the world. The deliberate
targeting of schools by non-State armed groups, the
military use of schools and children being used to carry
explosive devices are just some of the most dramatic
and horrifying cases. In that regard, we welcome
the Lucens Guidelines for Protecting Schools and
Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict,
which provide concrete and relevant guidance for State
and non-State armed groups alike in order to minimize
the impact of the military use of schools during armed
conflict and reduce their vulnerability to attacks. We
must follow all cases in conflicts, especially in the
Security Council, to prevent unlawful attacks or the
threat of attacks against schools, students and teachers,
and to refrain from actions that impede children’s right
of access to education.

64/94

25/03/2015

We have noted some encouraging results since
the launch in the past year of the United Nations
global “Children, Not Soldiers” campaign to end the
recruitment and use of children in national security
forces by the end of 2016. However, despite increasing
international efforts to prevent the recruitment of
children as combatants, non-State armed groups still
constitute the largest majority of perpetrators. Children
with low levels of education are often the easiest targets
of armed groups. Strengthening educational systems in
areas of armed conflict should be one of our utmost
priorities.
Girls in particular are under the constant threat of
sexual violence and other forms of abuse in conflict
situations. They are often deprived of education rights,
raped and forced into marriage. Recent barbaric attacks
committed by Boko Haram and Daesh, including the
kidnapping and selling of girls to terrorist fighters,
challenge us all and call for greater coordinated efforts
on the part of the international community. We should
continue to give specific attention to the protection
of girls as they are at greater risk of sexual violence,
sexual exploitation and abuses. Long-standing peace
will never be achieved unless we give children the
means, skills and education to rebuild a society and
institutions torn apart by armed conflict.
Peacekeeping missions have an important role to
play in the protection of children in situations of armed
conflict. It is therefore essential that peacekeeping
missions receive the necessary training and requisite
resources to effectively perform that critical task. In the
context of peacekeeping processes, we strongly believe
that specific provisions on the protection of children
in armed conflict should be included in all peace
negotiations and/or peace agreements. Indeed, for
example, the agreements on peace and reconciliation in
Mali, signed in Algiers at the beginning of this month,
contain specific provisions related to the protection of
children from armed conflict and the engagement of
communities to support the return and maintenance of
children, especially girls, in schools. Such provisions
should inspire all ongoing peace processes.
Finally, the increased number and scope of
conflicts heighten the importance of cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and the
regional organizations, especially the African Union.
In advocating for the promotion of children and
civilians, we commend the tremendous work done by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and her team, who deserve greater
and broader support, both politically and in terms of
providing her Office with the appropriate means and
resources.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the Permanent
Observer Mission of the Holy See to the United Nations.
Archbishop Auza (Holy See): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming
the presidency of the Council for this month and for
convening this open debate on children and armed
conflict.
Today’s debate comes at a time when the evils of
using children as soldiers in armed conflicts are not only
morally condemned by international consensus, but are
also being more vigorously challenged on the ground by
various actors around the globe. The increasing use by
terrorist groups and other non-State actors of children
in armed conflicts demonstrates the urgent need for a
new international consensus to confront the crime and
to renew the will of the international community to
address this scourge.
The year 2014 marked the worst year in the
modern era of children being used as soldiers in armed
conflicts. In Syria and Iraq alone, we saw more than
10,000 children forced and coerced into becoming child
soldiers. While the world searches for solutions, we
must take the first step and uniformly affirm that the
recruitment and use of children in armed conflicts are
not only a grave violation of international humanitarian
and human rights law, but also an abominable evil to
be condemned. That affirmation must not be made
by Governments alone, but by all social, political and
religious leaders.
The rising influence of non-State actors in regions
across the globe has presented the Council and the
global community with a growing challenge that
requires new tools and new efforts to confront. It is for
that reason that the founders of the United Nations gave
to the Council the responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. That primordial
mission does not and must not allow the international
community to turn its back on conflicts in the name of
national political interests or geopolitical disagreements
with other countries. The responsibility is entrusted
to the Council by all Members of the United Nations,
so that the foundational notion of governance may be
preserved and the responsibility to protect upheld.

S/PV.7414

That responsibility not only requires national
Governments to protect their citizens, but also urges
the international community to intervene when national
Governments are unable or unwilling to protect their
citizens. In the case of non-State actors forcibly
recruiting and using child soldiers around the world or
committing brutal violence against religious and ethnic
minorities, when a State is unwilling or unable to
confront such atrocities, it is the responsibility of this
body to provide the military means necessary to protect
citizens from such inhumane aggressors when all other
tools and means are exhausted.
However, solutions to the problem of children
in armed conflict cannot be limited to the use of
force alone. Rather, the first step requires a renewed
commitment to addressing the humanitarian, social,
political and economic situations that drive conflicts
in which child soldiers are used. In that regard, faithbased communities have played, and continue to play,
a vital role in serving the communities impacted,
reintegrating former child soldiers and providing a
means for dialogue. Faith-based communities also have
a responsibility to ensure that those organizations that
seek to justify the use of child soldiers in the pursuit of
ideological goals driven by distorted understandings of
faith and reason are rightly condemned and denounced.
While the international community plays an
important role in supporting States in their primary
responsibility to protect their citizens, it must also
be sure to interact with the local community so that
solutions to child soldiers and conflicts can also emerge
organically and local ownership be fostered. A solution
to the plight of child soldiers also requires sensitivity
to finding ways to reintegrate the children back into
their own communities. While we witness barbaric
acts beyond anyone’s imagination also committed by
child soldiers, we must remember that these children
are exploited and have been manipulated into what
they have become. Therefore, while their reintegration
into society requires that we recognize that they have
committed atrocities, we must at the same time build
pathways for counselling and reconciliation with a
view to fully accomplishing that reintegration.
The international community already has many
of the tools necessary to confront the use of child
soldiers. However, it lacks the political will to take the
steps needed to address the challenge. As children are
abducted from their schools to be enslaved, as children
are forced to become suicide bombers and as children

15-0836565/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

are drugged and tortured into becoming child soldiers,
what will it take before we no longer avert our eyes?
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Allow me, at the outset,
to thank the French presidency for holding the open
debate on children and armed conflict with a particular
focus on children as victims of armed non-State groups.
It is our obligation to continuously raise our voices
against the immense suffering inflicted on children
in conflict-prone environments. This holds especially
true since child abuse is an ever more prevalent feature
of conflicts across the world, despite all preventive
and awareness-raising efforts invested by the States
Members of the United Nations and the coordinated
actions of international organizations.
We very much appreciate the briefings today’s by
speakers who shared their valuable views on this issue
from various perspectives, and have thereby provided
us with additional ideas for action.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the observer of the European Union,
and fully supports the proposals made therein. We
wish to especially emphasize our support for the
recommendation with regard to further strengthening
the role of the International Criminal Court in ensuring
accountability for crimes committed by non-State
armed groups against children.
Furthermore, Croatia supports all six recommendations
for ending and preventing violations of children’s
rights by non-State armed groups, put forward by
the Watchlist on Children and Armed Conflict to the
Security Council and Member States.
This year we celebrate the tenth anniversary of
the resolution 1612 (2005), through which the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict was established.
For more than 20 years, the Security Council has been
making serious efforts aimed at preventing and ending
the recruitment and abuse of children by non-State
armed groups. Yet it is evident that the gap between the
commitments and actual practice is still too wide.
In that context, allow me to highlight our strong
support to the ongoing campaign “Children, Not
Soldiers”, jointly launched by UNICEF and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and aimed at preventing the
recruitment and use of children by national security

66/94

25/03/2015

forces. The campaign has substantively contributed
to the signing of national action plans with the United
Nations and has had a serious impact on improving the
situation on the ground in the countries concerned. Such
efforts also need to be fully extended to the activities
of non-State armed groups, since they accounte for 51
out of the 59 listed parties in the last year’s report of
the Secretary-General (S/2014/339). In doing so, we are
hopeful that we will witness more examples of success,
such as the recent release of several hundred child
soldiers in South Sudan.
We are witnessing horrific violence committed
by extremist non-State armed groups. The news about
abductions and brutal sexual violence committed
against children, as well as their active engagement in
armed conflicts, are almost becoming commonplace.
The abductions of schoolchildren by Boko Haram and
other extremist groups represent not only an abhorrent
crime, but are used systematically as a tool of war and
a strategy for spreading fear. Croatia believes that such
mistreatment of children has to be addressed decisively,
and supports the inclusion of abduction among the
listing criteria in our efforts to ensure that perpetrators
are held accountable.
However, prevention alone is often not enough. We
therefore need to invest more efforts into the successful
reintegration of children who have been exposed to
armed conflict. Developing a United Nations-assisted
action plan on this matter for the most affected States
would be highly welcome, as well as enhanced regional
cooperation in this particular domain. Our involvement
also needs to have a special focus throughout on the
protection of girls, who are particularly vulnerable in
armed conflicts as potential victims of rape, sexual
violence, sexual exploitation and early and forced
marriage.
In that context, I would also like to refer to the
Paris Commitments and Paris Principles on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups,
which Croatia has adopted, as a useful tool for
responding to the needs of children affected by the
armed conflict. Thos instruments recognize that in
situations of armed conflict, States and armed groups
are the actors with the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians. We believe that it is absolutely
crucial to pay continued attention to the specific needs
of children during and after armed conflict as part of
every effective Government policy.

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

I would like to conclude by emphasizing that
Croatia welcomes the intention of the French presidency
to further build on this debate by outlining key
recommendations, and intends to contribute concrete
proposals towards fulfilling our joint responsibility
to ensure childhoods free from fear and violence for
children all across the globe.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Mr. Laram (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting. This is an important opportunity to
make heard the voice of all children affected by armed
conflict. In that regard, I also commend you, Sir, for
providing the concept note (S/2015/168, annex). I would
be remiss if I failed to express thanks to the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative on Children
and Armed Conflict, as well as the Deputy Executive
Director of UNICEF, the child-care consultant from
Save the Children, as well as Mr. Junior Nzita, who
shared his painful experience with us.
This year we are observing the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1612 (2005), which established the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, and the first
anniversary of the campaign “Children, Not Soldiers.”
Undoubtedly, the terrible cycle of violence affecting
children in armed conflict, in which children fall victim
to all forms of violence, particularly sexual violence,
generates challenges requiring accelerated action and
intensified cooperation on the part of Member States in
order to hold all perpetrators of those grave violations
accountable. For the most part, the perpetrators of those
horrendous forms of aggression, which rise to the level
of war crimes and grave violations of international
humanitarian law, enjoy impunity in the absence of any
accountability.
We therefore welcome the Guidance Note on
Security Council Resolution 1998 (2011), issued
by the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict,
concerning attacks on schools and hospitals. This
issue is also addressed in resolution 2143 (2014), in
which the Council demanded strengthened and more
systematic monitoring and reporting of such attacks.
The systematic targeting of schools, which should serve
exclusively as safe educational institutions, exposes
children to danger and deprives them of their basic
right to education. In that connection, we renew our call

S/PV.7414

for effective measures to be taken, in accordance with
international humanitarian law and relevant Security
Council resolutions, to put an immediate stop to such
violations that deprive children of their right to the
education. Obstacles that prevent children from going
to school and deprive them of their legitimate right to
education instil a culture of fear and despair rather than
foster a culture of life and hope.
It is clear that education provides the skills and
knowledge necessary to the growth of children and the
building of society, while protecting them from violence
and extremism. In that regard, we would highlight
Qatar’s Education Above All initiative, comprising
programmes providing educational opportunities
to societies affected by conflict and poverty. These
programmes include the Educate a Child initiative,
which is being implemented in conjunction with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and seeks to provide high-quality, basic
education to children throughout the world, especially
those affected by conflict. We also pay tribute to the
Global Coalition to Protect Education from Attack,
which seeks to prevent schools and universities from
being used by military forces during armed conflict.
The report of the Secretary-General on the grave
violations committed against children in armed conflict
(S/2014/339) sheds light on the role played by the parties
to conflict and underscores their responsibility to protect
children in accordance with the Geneva Conventions
of 1949. According to the report of the SecretaryGeneral, children in the occupied Arab territories and
in Syria bear the brunt of the suffering resulting from
grave violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. Their suffering will
continue, with further losses among the victims, unless
the international community takes effective steps to put
an end to the violations. Perhaps today’s meeting will
serve as an additional incentive to intensify efforts in
that regard. We are faced with a test of our ability to
respect and implement the international instruments
adopted by the international community, if we are truly
to protect international peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mr. Mendonça e Moura (Portugal): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate on children in armed conflict, with a particular
emphasis on child victims of armed non-State actors,
and thank today’s briefers for their presentations.

15-0836567/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

Portugal aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union, but let me underline
some aspects of particular significance to my country.
The harmful and widespread impact of armed
conflict on children and its long-term consequences
for durable peace, security and development are
undeniable. Children, because of their vulnerability,
not only suffer directly the consequences of armed
conflict and of the collapse of the social fabric, but
are deliberately targeted and subjected to forced
recruitment, sexual violence, displacement, killing,
maiming and abduction, among other appalling
brutalities. The situation has been exacerbated by the
actions of extremist non-State armed groups, as recent
events that have shocked the world’s conscience have
proved, such as the abduction of more than 200 school
girls by Boko Haram, the deliberate attacks perpetrated
against a school in Peshawar, Pakistan, or the barbaric
acts committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and other extremist groups.
Protecting children from the ravages of war is a
moral imperative and an issue of international peace
and security. Since 1996, when Mrs. Graça Machel
presented her study (A/51/306) on the impact of armed
conflict on children, much has been done, and for
several years the Council has developed a normative
framework for the protection of children in situations
of armed conflict and for the promotion and protection
of human rights and international humanitarian law.
However, despite the significant progress achieved and
the establishment of a strong normative framework
through the adoption of several resolutions, enormous
challenges remain, due in particular to the changing
nature of conflict.
Portugal believes that the Council must continue to
seek the best way to promote the protection of children
affected by armed conflict and to better respond to the
magnitude and extent of the challenges posed by the
tremendous brutality of the acts of violence committed
by non-State armed groups. In that regard, action plans
are an outstanding tool to engage with armed forces
and non-State armed groups, and can play a positive
role in ending violations against children. We welcome
the ongoing coordination efforts of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, UNICEF and the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
but believe that further efforts are necessary to engage
with non-State armed groups, and to that end the

68/94

25/03/2015

cooperation of concerned Governments is crucial. I
wish to make a few points.
First, we believe that the Council should consider
expanding the list of triggers for listing perpetrators
in the Secretary-General’s annual report, to include
abduction. Abduction has become a warfare tactic used
by extremist non-State actors to terrorize and control
specific ethnic or religious communities and it is a first
sign of alert for further human rights abuses. Children
are being abducted to serve as combatants or to be
used as bombers, sexual slaves and other unspeakable
abuses.
Secondly, we must address the issue of impunity.
Most of the persistent perpetrators listed in the annual
report of the Secretary-General are non-State armed
groups. Portugal believes that the International Criminal
Court continues to play a fundamental deterrent role,
complementary to the roles of tribunals at the national
and international levels, by holding perpetrators
accountable and by investigating and prosecuting those
responsible for committing atrocities against children.
On peacekeeping operations, Portugal strongly
supports the inclusion of child protection advisers
in mandates, as well as mandatory training on the
protection of children, to ensure that the situation of
children affected by armed conflict is adequately
addressed in peace missions by promoting advocacy,
mainstreaming, training, monitoring and reporting. We
must ensure adequate predeployment training in child
protection for peacekeepers and effective screening
of peacekeepers to ensure that individuals who have
committed grave violations against children do not
serve with the United Nations.
Lastly, we remain severely concerned with the
ongoing pattern of attacks on schools and with their
use for military purposes. Schools and education
facilities are being systematically used as barracks,
firing positions, detention centres and torture chambers
both by regular armed forces and by armed non-State
opposition groups, endangering children and rendering
them vulnerable to attack. Portugal endorses the Lucens
Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities
from Military Use during Armed Conflict as concrete
guidelines to protect educational infrastructures from
use by armed groups for military purposes and to
minimize the negative impact that armed conflict has
on education.

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), which established
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
and the first anniversary of the “Children, Not
Soldiers” campaign, launched last year by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, whom I wish to congratulate, and
UNICEF, which Portugal fully supports.
It is time to end the suffering of child victims of
armed conflict and violence. Children should attend
school, play and be able to enjoy their childhood without
suffering from the effects of war or armed conflict. It is
our collective duty to do our outmost to further improve
their lives by intensifying the use of the instruments at
the disposal of the Security Council.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Tin (Myanmar): At the outset, my delegation
wishes to thank the French presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this open debate focusing on
child victims of non-State armed groups. I would also
like to thank Secretary-General Mr. Ban Ki-moon and
his Special Representative, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and
all the other briefers for their insightful briefings.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of Viet Nam on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
The world today is confronting the complexities of
new challenges. The nature of conflicts and threats are
changing. We are now witnessing a growing magnitude
of new threats rooted in non-State armed groups.
The impacts on innocent children of the brutalities
committed by violent non-State actors are also quite
alarming. Therefore, the choice of today’s theme is very
timely and relevant.
Ten years after the adoption of resolution 1612
(2005), significant progress has been made in seeking
cooperation and compliance by national security
forces, as almost all of them already have their own
action plan to address this issue. Yet, it is discouraging
to learn that 2014 was marked by a multiplication of
conflicts, making children even more vulnerable.
Sharing this valid concern, Myanmar has lent its full
support to the “Children, Not Soldiers” campaign,
which was launched a year ago. Myanmar fully shares
the common objective of the campaign to see national
security forces delisted by 2016.

S/PV.7414

In my own country, Myanmar, we have started
serious efforts with the Government army, or Tatmadaw,
to accelerate the implementation of its action plan in
close cooperation with the United Nations country
task force on monitoring and reporting since 2012.
Myanmar’s armed forces have implemented virtually
all steps outlined in the action plan. Those include
the issuance of military directives prohibiting the
recruitment of minors under 18, the criminalization
of such recruitments, taking action against offenders,
the setting up of complaint mechanisms, the launching
of a nationwide awareness campaign, providing
human rights training for military personnel and the
granting of access to monitor the Government military
facilities, as well as some border guard forces. Every
complaint is thoroughly investigated and all underage
recruits identified were discharged and reintegrated.
The Government’s efforts for rehabilitation and
reintegration need to be given enhanced support to
prevent them from falling victim again.
Myanmar has recently completed a review with
the United Nations team of the action plan and agreed
on the workplan and the remaining steps to move
forward. With the support of the United Nations, we
hope that the Government army will be able to meet
the target set by the campaign. The successful delisting
of the Government armed forces will have a positive
influence on the remaining parties of non-State armed
groups to follow suit.
As non-State actors constitute a large majority
among the parties listed in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2014/339), the Council must continue to
focus more on the behaviour of non-State actors. But
there are a number of constraints and challenges in
doing so. While nation States could be controlled by
the applicable international human rights instruments,
non-State actors cannot. There are also concerns over
the sensitive question of legitimacy that could arise
from the United Nations dealing directly with non-State
actors. Interaction between the United Nations and
non-State armed groups should be conducted through
consultations with concerned Governments, who bear
the primary responsibility to protect their own civilians,
including children. At the same time, the Governments
concerned find themselves in the difficult position of
being expected to influence non-State actors or allow
the United Nations team access to areas controlled by
non-State actors due to security problems.

15-0836569/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

The best way to end conflict-related violations
against children is none other than putting an end
to armed conflicts. Therefore, the Government is
accelerating its peace process with all non-State
ethnic armed groups in Myanmar to end the sixdecade-long conflict. The seventh round of peace
talks held in Yangon last week has made substantive
progress on remaining contentious issues, auguring
well for reaching the nationwide ceasefire agreement
and political dialogue. This is likely to present better
opportunities for encouraging non-State parties to
include political commitments for the protection
children and for addressing the issue of underage
recruits. With greater peace and stability in the country,
we believe that the conflict-related violence against
children will eventually come to an end.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Myanmar’s
continued commitment to working closely with the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, UNICEF
and Council member States to enhance its efforts in
protecting children affected by armed conflicts.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Winid (Poland): I would like to thank the
French presidency for convening today’s open debate.
Let me commend also Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and Ms. Yoka Brandt, Deputy
Executive Director of UNICEF, for their tireless
work. I would also like to thank the other briefers
today, especially Mr. Junior Nzita for his very moving
testimony and his activities in the field.
We reiterate our strong support for the United
Nations “Children, Not Soldiers” campaign. We also
welcome the fact that the United Nations Security
Council systematically holds debates on this issue.
While Poland aligns itself with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union, I would like to
make additional remarks in our national capacity.
The preamble of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child expresses our desire to raise children in “a
family environment, in an atmosphere of happiness,
love and understanding”. The international community
should undertake every possible effort to eradicate
the root causes and consequences of the engagement
of children in armed conflict. Abductions, killings in
attacks against schools, military use of schools, the
70/94

25/03/2015

recruitment of children as soldiers, sexual assaults — all
of these violent and cruel crimes, often committed
against children by non-State armed groups, have to
be addressed and punished. All those responsible for
violations and abuses of children’s rights in armed
conflict should be held accountable, including by
referring the most severe cases of such violations and
abuses to the International Criminal Court.
The United Nations is guided by Security Council
resolution 1612 (2005), but it is also important that
other United Nations partners, including regional
organizations, implement it in their field activities. In
that regard, I would like to draw the Council’s attention
to the document adopted this past Monday, 23 March,
by the NATO North Atlantic Council, entitled “The
Protection of Children in Armed Conflict: Progress
Achieved and the Way Forward”. The recommendations
contained in that document highlight the need to include
resolution 1612 (2005) in the process of planning and
conducting NATO missions.
In Poland’s opinion, child protection should also be
addressed in all peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts
in which we are involved. In November 2014, the United
Nations celebrated the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child — a universal
treaty initiated in 1989 by my country. On that occasion,
Poland’s First Lady, Mrs. Anna Komorowska, visited
the United Nations and appealed for decisive steps of
international community to protect children. As she
pointed out:
“Our concern for children should be a priority
on both the national and international levels. The
adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child was one of the main Polish achievements in
the field of international human rights promotion.
The United Nations could now consider the
establishment of international ombudsman on the
rights of the child. His/her mission would be to
investigate atrocities committed against children,
as well as participate in procedures before
international organs like the International Criminal
Court.”
Finally, let me also reiterate that all countries should
sign, ratify and effectively implement the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict, with
a view to preserving the dignity of children.

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mminele (South Africa): I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council this month, and for
convening this important debate. Furthermore, I would
like to extend our appreciation to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and the rest of the briefers for their
insightful information.
South Africa attaches high importance to the
protection of children in armed conflict. My delegation
recognizes that the protection of civilians, including
women and children in conflict situations is, by its
very nature, the primary responsibility of individual
Member States. My delegation reiterates our support for
resolution 1612 (2005) on children and armed conflict
on this significant tenth anniversary of the mandate.
The Secretary-General’s “Children, Not Soldiers”
campaign, launched on 6 March 2014 by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and UNICEF, presented another
opportunity to pay particular attention to this challenge.
Additionally, on 7 March 2014, a historical
landmark was documented when the Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2143 (2014). That
resolution expresses deep concern about the military
use of schools by armed forces and non-State armed
groups. It also condemns “all violations of applicable
international law on recruitment and use and abuse of
children by parties to armed conflict”. In that regard,
my delegation condemns such attacks and recruitment
of children and calls upon all concerned parties to
protect children, as well as their schools.
South Africa believes that all children deserve
protection, not exploitation. They belong in school, not
armies and fighting groups. Children should be armed
with pens and textbooks, not guns. That campaign
complements other United Nations efforts, such as the
Global Education First Initiative, to secure children’s
rights and provide dignity, opportunity and a better
life. We support the Secretary-General’s call on
“all concerned Governments, regional and
non-governmental organizations to work with the
United Nations to intensify efforts to meet our goal
of zero use of children by any Government forces
by 2016”.
One of the African Union’s aspirations for agenda
2063 is that by 2020 all guns will be silent and Africa

S/PV.7414

will be a peaceful and secure continent with harmony
among communities of nations. As conflicts are
increasingly being experienced within States and
involve non-State groups such as terrorist or rebel
groups, such groups are less likely to be concerned
with or to abide by humanitarian laws that provide for
the protection of children. Much more must be done by
the international community with regard to addressing
violence against children.
Furthermore, mechanisms to promote and defend
children’s collective security need to be highlighted.
That includes the use of child soldiers in conflict.
Despite that noble call, children continue to be
kidnapped and forcibly conscripted or recruited into
service throughout the world as sex slaves, helpers,
guards and armed fighters. In that process children’s
rights are being violated with impunity. Many die.
Others are displaced from their communities and homes,
and allowed to suffer untold emotional, developmental,
physical, psychological, mental and spiritual harm, as
seen in the indoctrination of children into extremist
non-State armed groups.
In addition, armed conflict destroys State
structures that provide social services. The lack of those
services further prevents children from accessing basic
services such as education, health, water, sanitation and
nutritious food, thereby deepening poverty. These are
factors of key importance for national and international
peace and security that demand immediate as well
as long-term collective attention by the international
community.
The importance of children having access to basic
services during conflict as well as post-conflict periods
cannot be stressed enough. My delegation strongly
rejects the mass atrocities committed by extremist
groups such as Boko Haram, which also have a direct
impact on children. South Africa wishes to amplify
the international community’s call with regard to the
“Bring Back Our Girls” campaign. It is disturbing to
note that, on 14 April, it will be exactly one year since
that horrendous incident occurred.
South Africa will continue to support actions aimed
at preventing child recruitment, and ensure that child
soldiers are reintegrated back into their community
during the demobilization and reintegration phases.
Moreover, South Africa supports actions aimed at child
protection in the training of peacekeepers. Protection of
civilians, in particular women and children, must also

15-0836571/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

take into account the interlinkage between security and
development.
In conclusion, I would like to highlight the
preamble of the Charter of the United Nations, which
commences by identifying the objective “to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war”. That
speaks directly to our children and the next generation.
We must remember that promise of a more peaceful and
safer world to our children.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Okamura (Japan) (spoke in French): Allow
me, first of all, to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, and the other speakers for their briefings. The
problems of children today will become the problems of
adults in 10 years. Not only do armed conflicts deprive
children of an opportunity to grow in a balanced
manner, with access to education, but they also create a
new generation of adults who will have known nothing
but war and who will not know how to live in a world
without conflict. It is therefore our duty to seriously
engage with the issue of children and armed conflict to
prevent future wars.
The issue has become even more pressing with the
staggering rise of armed groups such as Boko Haram
and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). In
that respect, I would like to congratulate France for
having organized this timely and relevant debate on the
child victims of non-State armed groups.
We believe that the Paris Principles and Guidelines
on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed
Groups, adopted in 2007, should be considered an
important tool for Member States and international
organizations.
Japan welcomes the fact that the “Children, Not
Soldiers” campaign, which was launched on 6 March
2014 by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, and UNICEF, has achieved clear results in
one year. Chad has been removed the list of problem
countries, leaving only seven countries on that list. In
Myanmar, approximately 400 child soldiers have been
released, and Yemen has signed an action plan.
However, that progress is far from sufficient.
It should be noted that, under the strategy to end
the recruitment and use of children by national
security forces, which was drawn up by the Special

72/94

25/03/2015

Representative of the Secretary-General and UNICEF,
a total of $32.8 million over two years will be required
for the implementation of the action plan to bring the
number of child soldiers in the armed forces of the
countries concerned to zero by the end of 2016.
In that regard, Japan supports several projects in the
Middle East and Africa, in partnership with UNICEF,
to promote the rehabilitation and reintegration of child
soldiers. That helps to prevent those children from once
again becoming combatants as a result of economic
difficulties, inter alia. Japan has thus funded $80 million
worth of various projects for the rehabilitation of child
soldiers over the past six years.
Today, we are paying special attention to an
important question: how can we apply the knowledge
acquired through that campaign to non-State armed
groups? Indeed, of the 59 groups listed in the annexes to
the 2014 report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/339),
51 are non-State actors. It would, of course, be difficult
to immediately conclude plans of action between the
United Nations and non-State armed groups. However,
I believe it is possible to advance step by step in that
direction. For example, the United Nations could try
to convince non-State actors with which it is already
in contact to negotiate peace agreements, among other
things, that would provide that they renounce the
practice of recruiting children into their ranks. It could
also mediate between the non-State opposing forces
to arrange for a simultaneous release of their child
soldiers.
As mentioned in the concept note (S/2015/168,
annex) prepared for this debate, non-State armed
extremist groups increasingly employ child abduction
as a strategy. We are deeply concerned by the massive
abductions of children by groups such as Boko Haram
and ISIL. The abduction of children is the first act of
violence against them. It can open the door to forced
recruitment and other barbaric acts, such as sexual
violence and murder. Japan therefore believes that there
will be a real gap in our commitments to deal with the
problem of children associated with armed groups,
if abduction is excluded from the list of triggers.
Abductions are part of the criteria that should be listed
in the annex to the relevant reports of the SecretaryGeneral, and we believe that we must take steps to fill
that gap.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): The Kingdom
of the Netherlands aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the observer of the European Union.
First, let me thank France for organizing this
important debate and in particular for extending an
invitation to Member States to make concrete proposals
for a non-paper. We have included some practical
suggestions in my statement. I would also like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Leila
Zerrougui for the important role she plays in promoting
and protecting the rights of children affected by armed
conflict.
(spoke in French)
I was personally touched by the story told by my
neighbour, Mr. Junior Nzita. It truly touched my heart,
and I thank him.
(spoke in English)
The protection of children in armed conflict should
be a major concern for all of us. The fate of children is
closely linked to peace, justice and development, the
three priorities of the Kingdom of the Netherlands here
at the United Nations. Today allow me to make three
specific points: prevention, the vulnerability of girls
and accountability.
My first point is on prevention and mediation.
We need an integrated approach for the prevention
of the abuse of children’s rights by non-State armed
groups before, during and after conflict. We need to
invest more capacity and resources in mediation by the
United Nations, and the relevant programme run by
the Department of Political Affairs, which we support,
should be strengthened. The mandates of United
Nations missions should be well coordinated to address
the protection of children coherently. UNICEF has the
mandate to address the rights of children with both
State and non-State actors. We urge States to cooperate
closely with UNICEF to more effectively address those
violations. In that context, a UNICEF symposium on
the effects of conflict on the mental health of children
will take place in The Hague from 26 to 28 May 2015.
Furthermore, the Kingdom of the Netherlands would
like to express its continued support for the concept
of the responsibility to protect. National Governments
and the international community share a responsibility
to enable children to grow up in a safe and peaceful
environment.

S/PV.7414

My second point is on the particular risks for girls.
They demand specific attention from the Council. Girls
are especially vulnerable targets of sexual violence.
The acts of some extremist groups, such as Boko
Haram and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, are
atrocious and abhorrent. Those groups seem to take
pride in the trafficking of young girls, forcing them to
marry and exploiting them as sex slaves. Because of
the vulnerability of girls, the Netherlands has deployed
several experts on sexual and gender-based violence
in United Nations peacekeeping missions around the
world, and we intend to step up our efforts in that area.
My third point is on sanctions and accountability.
We need a stronger focus on child protection in the
Council’s sanctions committees. That could be realized
by enhancing cooperation between the sanctions
committees on the one hand and the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict on
the other. Furthermore, the Council could request input
from the Special Rapporteur on issues such as the sale
of children, child prostitution and child pornography.
Ensuring accountability for the crimes committed
against children should be a key priority for the
Security Council. Documentation can be an important
step to that end. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
supports organizations that document war crimes. Last
February, we organized an expert conference in The
Hague on documenting war crimes in Syria. Ensuring
accountability for the atrocious crimes in Syria, also
crimes against children, is a historic responsibility for
the Council.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands believes that
the Security Council should play a more active role in
the documentation and monitoring of crimes against
children in armed conflict. We believe that the Council
should therefore expand the listing criteria under
resolution 1612 (2005) to include abductions of children,
and it could do so in a non-paper. The problem of the
abduction of children by extremist groups is increasing
and needs to be addressed.
In conclusion, all children deserve protection
against all forms of violence. Sexual abduction,
abuse, mutilation and the killing of children during
armed conflict simply has to stop. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands, as a partner for peace, justice and
development, will do its utmost to achieve those goals.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Evans.

15-0836573/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

Mr. Evans: Thank you, Mr. President, for giving
me the opportunity to take the floor on behalf of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
NATO recognizes that protecting children from
the effects of armed conflict is a moral imperative. The
nature of contemporary warfare has created significant
threats against children, who have been used and abused
by unscrupulous armed forces and armed groups.
They are frequently the victims of indiscriminate
attacks, and they are subjected to sexual violence. In
my statement, I will describe the substantial measures
that NATO, supported by its operational partners, has
taken to implement resolution 1612 (2005) and related
resolutions.
The protection of children in NATO-led operations
and missions was addressed by NATO at our 2012
Summit in Chicago. At that meeting, NATO’s Heads of
State and Government tasked NATO with developing
practical, field-oriented measures to address violations
against children. Following that Summit, the North
Atlantic Council approved NATO military guidelines
on children and armed conflict. Those guidelines
seek to integrate resolution 1612 (2005) into NATO’s
operational and exercise activities and to educate and
train our troops on the obligations stipulated in the
relevant resolutions.
Another important step was the launch, in 2013, of
an online course developed jointly by NATO and the
United Nations. The course aims to raise awareness
among NATO-led forces before deployment, as
mentioned in resolution 2143 (2014), adopted a year ago.
But we did not stop there. At the NATO Summit
in Wales in September last year, NATO’s Heads of
State and Government expressed their deep concern
about the damaging effects of armed conflicts on
children and reaffirmed their commitment to the
further implementation of resolution 1612 (2005). They
decided that we should assess how to ensure that NATO
was sufficiently prepared whenever and wherever the
issue of children and armed conflict is likely to be
encountered. We are doing so in close cooperation with
the United Nations.
We are basing that work on our experience in
leading the International Security Assistance Force
in Afghanistan (ISAF). That mission came to an end
last December and has provided many lessons for
future operations. The ISAF experience has laid the

74/94

25/03/2015

groundwork for our efforts in relation to the protection
of children.
We are continuing this important work in our current
mission in Afghanistan, Resolute Support. That mission
aims to train, advise and assist the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces and Afghanistan’s security
institutions with a view to ensuring their durability and
ability to sustain themselves. The protection of children
is an important theme in that assistance programme.
For the first time, the position of child protection
adviser has been included in a NATO-led mission.
Such an adviser will focus on further implementing
resolution 1612 (2005), with the aim of ingraining
the ethos of child protection into the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces. We are assisting the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in
its efforts to help Afghanistan to take the steps required
to justified Afghanistan’s removal from the list annexed
to the Secretary-General’s annual report on children
and armed conflict (S/2014/339).
Building on the task set by the Wales Summit, the
North Atlantic Council just this week issued a policy
paper entitled “The Protection of Children in Armed
Conflict — The Way Forward”, which seeks to enhance
the effectiveness of the NATO military guidelines on
children and armed conflict in all future NATO-led
missions and operations. The paper provides NATO’s
military authorities with additional guidance on the
further integration of resolution 1612 (2005) and
related resolutions into the Alliance’s military doctrine,
education, training and exercises. That will ensure that
the imperative to protect children affected by armed
conflict is included in the planning and preparation
stages of all NATO-led missions.
That guidance will result in more robust reporting
during operations. A robust reporting procedure will
help provide timely and reliable information on the
violation of children’s rights, particularly the six
practices identified by the Secretary-General as grave
violations. In short, our commanders and deployed
personnel have better, more precise guidance on how
to proceed whenever and wherever they encounter such
violations.
In developing that guidance and in integrating
resolution 1612 (2005) into NATO’s military doctrine,
NATO has regularly consulted the Secretary-General’s
Special Adviser on Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Zerrougui, and her excellent staff. I would like to

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

take this opportunity to thank her, on NATO’s behalf,
for her leadership and her support.
Every day, we see horrifying reports in the news
about atrocities committed against children, such as
mass kidnappings, sexual violence and the forcing
of child soldiers to commit unspeakable acts. But I
believe it is possible through the concerted efforts of
all international actors to help make such barbarity
a thing of the past. It goes without saying that there
remains a long way to go. But let me assure the Security
Council that NATO and our partner nations place the
highest importance on fulfilling our responsibilities
under resolution 1612 (2005) and related resolutions.
We will continue to work conscientiously and seriously
to ensure that we meet the goal set out by our leaders at
the Wales Summit. Through our continued engagement
on this issue, I am confident that NATO can make a
lasting contribution to the wider international effort to
help protect children affected by armed conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I thank the
the French presidency for organizing today’s debate.
On the tenth anniversary of resolution 1612 (2005),
this debate offers a valuable and timely opportunity
to strengthen our determination to end the recruitment
and use of children in armed conflicts and to prevent
the victimization of children in armed conflict. My
delegation appreciates the two-step initiative by the
two presidencies, France this month and Malaysia in
June, which allows for in-depth discussions on this
critical issue.
The number of child victims in conflict situations
never ceases to increase, in particular owing to the
ruthless violence by non-State armed groups. Under
those circumstances, the protection of children in
armed conflict demands our common and urgent
efforts. In that regard, it is encouraging that most
countries concerned by the “Children, Not Soldiers”
campaign have shown their commitment to ensuring
that Government forces are free of children. Through
that campaign, States Members of the United Nations
can clearly demonstrate their resolve to protect children
and take the moral high ground vis-à-vis non-State
armed groups. To make our resolve more effective
and binding, more Member States need to join child
protection-related legal and guidance frameworks,
including the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child as well as the various principles

S/PV.7414

and guidelines on children associated with armed forces
or armed groups. Such a drive will consolidate not only
our political commitment, but it will also uphold the
rule of law.
We are deeply concerned about the increasing
inhumane atrocities victimizing children, especially
by extremist non-State armed groups, such as the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Boko Haram.
Abductions, maiming, sexual violence, attacks on
schools and the use of children as suicide bombers
are all unacceptable. We believe that none of us have
wavered in fighting against such war crimes and
crimes against humanity. In that regard, we support the
inclusion of abduction by armed groups as one of the
violations that could trigger a listing in the annexes to
the Secretary-General’s report.
Changes on the ground, however, can come about
only with concrete actions. The more we act with
sincerety and resolution, the sooner this tragedy will
end. Impunity will not end when perpetrators go
unpunished. Appropriate punishment for perpetrators
serves as an effective way to prevent violations and
abuses against children. In that context, the International
Criminal Court’s verdict on the Thomas Lubanga Dyilo
case in December is a wake-up call to perpetrators who
are committing violations against children. We also
believe that targeted sanctions by the Security Council
can act as an effective deterrent, raising awareness
about the consequences. We hope that the Council will
consider a resolution that includes serious violations
against children as a designated criterion for sanctions.
Lastly, we would like to recall that the best way
to protect children in devastating conflicts is to end
the conflicts themselves. That is why national and
regional leaders in conflict-ridden areas are strongly
urged to redouble their efforts for a peaceful solution.
In addressing how to properly protect a child victim,
we should not ignore the psychological effects conflicts
have on the victims. Children and youths are especially
vulnerable to politically distorted and misleading
propaganda. Community leaders therefore need to
do their utmost to warmly embrace and reintegrate
child victims into their communities. As a member
of the Peacebuilding Commission, which addresses a
wide range of post-conflict peacebuilding issues, the
Republic of Korea will pay particular attention to the
matter.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.

15-0836575/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): During the four years of the Syrian crisis,
terrorist organizations have striven to destroy the
innocence of children and to create fertile ground
for that tactic and for hatred. They have done that by
educating terrorists — if I can put it that way — in
training camps in Syria and neighbouring countries.
Various groups are involved in this, and they have
become more deadly than in the past. Their recruitment
targets children as young as the age of four years.
Given the silence of some and the complicity of others,
terrorism has been given license to spread across the
globe, covering all four corners of the world.
We note that my country’s delegation has on many
occasions here in the Council Chamber vainly sought
to draw the international community’s attention to the
phenomenon of the recruitment of Syrian children in
those areas controlled by armed terrorist groups such as
Daesh, the Islamic Front, the Army of Islam and other
armed groups. Criminal brigades have been created
and annointed with names such as Ashbal Al-Zarqawi.
These young groups of children are part of the Al Nusra
Front, and maybe the Council is unaware of what that
group consists of. These brigades use children aged
from 5 to 15 years; for them, childhood ends very
early. They become adolescents who are trained to
participate in fighting. Brainwashing takes place in the
training camps, which prepares them to defend fatwas.
They grow into ignorent, bearded criminals who know
nothing of civilization and the tenets of the Islamic
religion.
In the regions where they are present, these armed
terrorist groups are depriving children education. Their
education has been replaced by terrorist indoctrination.
Similarly, those very groups have decreed that there is
to be no education in certain areas of Syria until the
State schoolbooks are modified in line with the groups’
religious rulings. As documented in a January 2015
UNICEF report, the education of more than 670,000
potential Syrian schoolchildren in major cities has been
disrupted. Furthermore, after being pillaged, schools
and hospitals have become barracks and execution
centres. Terrorist attacks perpetrated by armed
terrorist groups and by moderate opposition groups
have increased in number and have targeted hospitals,
infrastructures and schools, resulting in many victims,
particularly among children. In 2015 alone, 85 children
have been killed and 224 wounded. Those terrorist
crimes have been the subject of many letters sent by the
Syrian Government to the Secretary-General and to the
76/94

25/03/2015

President of the Security Council. The latest two are
identical letters dated from 23 March 2015.
Since the outset of the crisis, the Syrian Government,
in line with its constitutional responsibilities to protect
its own citizens, as is the case with all Member States,
has taken measures to protect children, including some
legal measures that prevent the recruitment of children
into combat of any form. Furthermore, the Syrian
Government adopted a decree to that effect on 6 May
2013. As an example, the Ministry for Social Affairs
and Labour has identified a number of safe areas for
children who have been liberated following their
abduction and training by terrorist and Takfiri groups
of all sorts. Those children with legal difficulties
are sent to correctional facilities. Their cases are
comprehensively evaluated by specialists, including
in terms of their psychosocial state, so as to identify
appropriate programmes and assistance to be provided
to these children.
Despite tireless efforts made by the Syrian
Government to protect children from destructive
Takfiri and Wahhabi ideology, we all know that we
must uproot that phenomenon in order to deal with the
problem. What we now need to do is to put an end to
the policies of the Governments that support terrorism
with financial resources, weapons and training. We
must take steps against those countries to implement
the Council’s resolutions against terrorism, including
resolution 2199 (2015). And the Government of Syria
must be given assistance to rehabilitate and reintegrate
children into their communities. Otherwise, war
materiel will continue to flood into Syria and there
will be further bloodshed. The crisis will continue,
producing future generations willing to kill or trained
to kill under orders.
In conclusion, the recruitment of children by
non-State armed groups is an international issue that
requires radical solutions. It is vital, therefore, to
uproot organized terrorism, which prevails in a number
of countries, such as in my own country, Syria, and
in Iraq, Nigeria, the Central African Republic, Mali,
Colombia and others. The legitimate Governments of
those countries, just as in my own country, are trying
to uproot such terrorism, day after day. We must
therefore all concentrate on this issue in an honest way
instead of politicizing the debate and coming up with
concept papers. We must also distinguish between the
rights of legitimate Governments to combat terrorists
who recruit children on the one hand, and the issue of

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

children who are victims of non-State armed terrorist
groups, on the other.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
flow to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to congratulate you, Sir, for
having organized this debate, which reflects the
commitment of France and the effort it continues to
devote to this topic.
I would like to thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for her
briefing. I also thank Ms. Yoka Brandt and Ms. Julie
Bodin, of UNICEF and Save the Children, respectively,
for their presentations. Lastly, I would like to thank
Mr. Junior Nzita for his testimony.
Today, too many children around the world are still
victims of emergency situations that seem to know no
end. We are faced with ever-more complex conflicts,
unprecedented forms of violence and challenges posed
by terrorists, such as violent extremist groups. Such
armed groups continue to count a large number of
children among their ranks.
The increase in acts of extreme violence perpetrated
by groups with extremist ideologies, such as Boko
Haram and Daesh, have shocked the global conscience.
The exacerbation of tension and proliferation of
conflicts herald enormous challenges for the entire
international community, but it is on children that
their impact is most tragic and unacceptable. They are
tragic as children are those exposed most directly to
violence by conflicts and their collateral damage, and
their basic rights are violated. This is unacceptable
because children are at times exploited, brainwashed
or indoctrinated against their will by the parties to a
conflict, and used as child soldiers on the battlefield,
in clear violation of international law. Acts such as the
abduction by Boko Haram of hundreds of girls and boys
from their schools, and the targeting of children by
Daesh, among others, unfortunately show that violence
against children knows no boundaries, and elicit in us a
sense of outrage and consternation.
The Kingdom of Morocco condemns all forms of
violence against children, their abduction by State or
non-State armed groups, their use as human shields
around arms stockpiles or barracks, or their abduction
as hostages or recruitment in refugee camps. Morocco
also condemns attacks against schools and hospitals
and their for military or tactical ends. While today’s

S/PV.7414

debate will have a positive effect in remobilizing the
stakeholders among the international community, we
must, unfortunately, note that the efforts made to date
to end the involvement or use of children in armed
conflicts have been insufficient. Indeed, the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict, the
various resolutions of the Security Council, and the
Paris Principles and guidelines on children associated
with armed forces or armed groups have fallen short
in achieving their noble objectives. My delegation
therefore believes that the efforts of the international
community to deal effectively with this problem would
benefit from a multidimensional approach, as follows.
It must be comprehensive, based on a thorough
understanding of the underlying and structural causes
of these conflicts, such as poverty, discrimination,
social exclusion, and economic and social inequalities.
It must be strategic, so as not only to deal with conflicts
under way, but also to focus on prevention, including
by sowing the seeds of democracy and human rights,
strengthening good governance and promoting
sustainable development. It must be crosscutting,
engaging
and
empowering
all
stakeholders,
including public institutions, civil society, the media,
non-governmental organizations and human rights
organizations. It must be modular so as to take into
account the diverse and changing nature of armed
conflict, as well as the specifics of each conflict, and
it must be pragmatic, combining both incentives and
coercive measures, in particularly when it comes to
accountability and the fight against impunity. It must
be integral, providing for reparations for the violations
committed and for the reintegration of child soldiers
into society in the context of appropriate reconciliation
processes.
As Ms. Zerrougui highlighted this morning, the
continued and increased recruitment of children into
armed conflicts, including by armed jihadist such as the
Islamic State, and the abduction of hundreds of girls by
the terrorist group Boko Haram, demands action from
us all and calls for coordination of the efforts of the
international community. Coordinating these efforts
among the various stakeholders of the United Nations
system will guarantee efficiency and success.
However, the primary responsibility lies with the
parties to the conflict, who must comply with their
international obligations under relevant Security
Council resolutions and international conventions. At

15-0836577/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

the same time, national child protection strategies remain
essential for building the capacity of Governments
and for material, financial and human resources to
ensure their sustainability. This is why a prompt and
generous response is so important to the call in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/339) on donors to
meet the funding requirements for the implementation
of national plans of action and programmes.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
flow to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): Today’s debate is timely, as
the severe effects of conflicts on children continue
to constitute a significant challenge. The attention
devoted to the issue by the Security Council,
exemplified by the adoption of important resolutions
and the increased momentum achieved by the tireless
efforts of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Zerrougui, has led to significant progress.
In fact, this month marked the first anniversary
of the groundbreaking “Children, Not Soldiers”
campaign, which deserves our unyielding support. The
developments in the legal and normative framework on
children and armed conflict are positive, yet significant
shortcomings remain.
Unfortunately, with the changing nature of
conflicts, mass abductions, torture and sexual violence
against children, attacks on schools and hospitals,
limited access to even the most basic humanitarian
needs, and large-scale displacement have become
realities of war. Furthermore, the several conflicts
we face today, in diverse geographies, have revealed
the increasing involvement of non-State armed
groups in violating even the basic rights of children.
The appalling atrocities committed by terrorist
organizations, such as Daesh and Boko Haram, must be
underlined in this regard. Furthermore, many terrorist
organizations, including the Kurdish Workers Party/
Kongra-Gel, Al-Qaida and Daesh recruit children. It is
essential to redouble efforts to counter the spread of
extremist ideologies and prevent the recruitment tactics
of terrorist organizations such as Daesh, including in
source countries.
Last month’s report of the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry (A/HRC/28/69)
highlighted the deterioration of children’s rights in
Syria. In fact, as the crisis enters its fifth year, the
generation of young Syrians is still in danger of being
lost to a cycle of violence. The basic rights of millions
of Syrian children, such as their rights to life, security,
78/94

25/03/2015

health and education, are being undermined everyday
by various actors. Nearly four million Syrians have
fled their country. Despite all challenges, Turkey has
pursued an open door policy for these people without
any discrimination of religion or ethnic origin. More
than 250,000 Syrians are being accommodated in 25
temporary protection centres in Turkey. To date, more
than 47,000 babies have been born in these centres. In
addition, more than 1.5 million Syrians living outside
of these centres are also under our protection regime
and benefit from free medical services.
One cannot overemphasize the fact that children
are among the most vulnerable groups in this crisis
situation. I would like to underscore how urgent it is
that we meet the growing needs of Syrian children,
especially in the areas of education and health care.
There are almost 550,000 Syrian children of school age
in Turkey. Around 70,000 students are being educated
in 963 classrooms in the temporary shelter centres.
Outside the centres there are almost 480,000 children
in need of education. Education is thus a vital part of
our regional refugee and resilience plan, and emphasis
must be placed on creating more classrooms and
education opportunities for these children. We expect
the international community to provide technical
support and proper funding for implementing the “No
Lost Generation” initiative of the United Nations.
Demonstrating united, robust political determination
and concerted action is our most crucial tool for
addressing the issue of children and armed conflict.
We must support United Nations efforts to provide
children with essential assistance and the monitoring
and reporting functions that facilitate better planning,
protection and response. Furthermore, the growth in
the number and scope of conflicts around the world
renders cooperation and coordination between United
Nations, countries and regional organizations more
important than ever. We must also ensure that in areas
of conflict, children’s full access to humanitarian care
and to justice is a priority.
As we try to identify the range of actions and
tools that we can use to stop non-State armed groups
recruiting and using children, we should also bear in
mind that signing agreements with non-State armed
groups can easily lead to exploitation of the issue
and encourage such groups to use the agreements as
propaganda for their claims to legitimacy. We therefore
believe strongly that international organizations and
non-governmental organizations should refrain from

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

drawing up any kind of document, including so-called
deeds of commitment, with terrorist organizations. In
fact, concrete steps aimed at strengthening the legal
framework for preventing terrorist organizations’
recruiting activities and punishing them for such
activities should be at the top of our agenda.
In conclusion, I would like to express our readiness
to give our full support to international and regional
efforts related to the protection of children.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the observer of the African Union.
Mr. António (African Union): On behalf of the
African Union Commission and myself, I would like
to congratulate you warmly, Mr. President, on your
country’s presidency of the Security Council this
month. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and Ms. Leila Zerrougui, his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, the Executive Director
of UNICEF and the representatives of civil society
from Save the Children and Paix pour l’enfance,
the latter represented by my dear brother and cousin
Nzita. I should not pass up this opportunity to express
my appreciation and gratitude for their worthy efforts
and commitment to the comprehensive and lasting
protection for our future nation builders.
The choice of “Child victims of non-State armed
groups” as the theme for our debate today is both timely
and relevant. Coming as it does after the ceremony on
12 February marking the International Day against the
Use of Child Soldiers, today’s meeting highlights how
essential it is we give this issue a special place on our
political agenda and study it thoroughly in order to
identify the challenges involved and the responsibilities
that must be met at the international level.
The fact is that this dangerous phenomenon,
which is partly the result of post-Cold War intra-State
conflicts, often brings with it abuses and violations
of human rights, and particularly those of women and
children, the most vulnerable groups. In Africa more
than anywhere else, this conflict dynamic continues
to produce tragic situations, with disastrous effects
on children’s development and survival. They have
become a breeding ground providing fighters for the
terrorist groups operating on the continent that are
major exploiters of child soldiers, such as Boko Haram,
Al-Qaida, the Mouvement pour l’unicité et le jihad en
Afrique de l’Ouest and Al-Shabaab, and for malicious
groups in other regions, such as the Lord’s Resistance

S/PV.7414

Army. Forced conscription, abduction, rape and other
forms of sexual violence, killing, maiming and the
creation of refugees are the main direct consequences
of the barbaric acts that such groups commit against our
children. The effects on children’s physical and mental
health, education and general welfare are extremely
dangerous.
The African Union (AU), whose diplomatic,
judicial and political commitment to children is
eloquently expressed in its actions, has continued its
efforts to resolve conflicts and ensure the protection
of human rights, particularly of children. The legal
arsenal we have developed for that purpose includes
the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights and
its Protocol on the Rights of Women in Africa, and the
African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child.
Taken together, those instruments add up to a chain of
standards, some of them highly innovative, that exceed
international requirements and place children at the
centre of the challenges and imperatives of peace,
development and progress.
Furthermore, the African Union’s critical role
in maintaining peace and security and promoting
transparent governance at every level has made a
significant contribution to the protection of civilians,
including children. The peace operations deployed
by the AU in response to situations of conflict on the
continent, particularly in Burundi, the Darfur region
of the Sudan, Mali, the Central African Republic and
Somalia, have played a key role in that regard. Here, I
cannot fail to stress the importance of the agreement
signed on 17 September 2013 between the Peace and
Security Department of the Commission of the African
Union and the United Nations Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. The agreement enables us to back
the ongoing efforts designed to put the protection of
children at the centre of every issue related to peace
and security in Africa. We welcome the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union in
this area, including the support from UNICEF.
The concept note that frames today’s debate
(S/2015/168, annex) makes eloquent mention of the
effect that precarious economic situations have on the
recruitment of children into armed groups. Unaware of
the possible dangers, our children are sometimes forced
to go to enter the ranks of armed groups simply in order
to feed or clothe themselves. That is why it is vital that
we support Africa’s efforts to bring about a positive

15-0836579/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

and inclusive socioeconomic transformation benefiting
every sector of the population, including children.
For their part, Africa’s leaders are more determined
than ever to work to build a more just and prosperous
future. The adoption of Agenda 2063 at the twentyfourth Summit of the Heads of State and Government of
the African Union in Addis Ababa on 30 and 31 January
is in fact an expression of their willingness to inject
the necessary momentum with the goal of achieving a
strong, united, prosperous and peaceful Africa.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Dotta (Uruguay) (spoke in French): Uruguay
would like to thank France for organizing today’s
debate during its presidency of the Security Council.
(spoke in Spanish)
We would also like to thank France for enabling
the presence at this meeting of the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, as well as the Executive Director of UNICEF,
which testified to the importance of today’s debate. We
should all take note of how meaningful that is to all of
us.
Likewise, Uruguay wishes Malaysia success in its
work in this very important Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. Although this debate has sought
to place special focus on children who are victims of
non-State armed groups, my delegation believes that all
children affected by conflict are in the same situation
and require equal protection.
Uruguay commends the invaluable work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and we reiterate our support for
her mandate. We wish to highlight the work done in
coordination with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations aimed at incorporating measures to address
the situation of children in countries where there are
peacekeeping operations.
Uruguay welcomes the tenth anniversary of the
creation of a mechanism to systematically monitor
and report on the six grave violations of the rights of
children in situations of armed conflict: the killing and
maiming of children, the recruitment or use of child
soldiers, sexual violence against children, attacks
against schools and hospitals, denial of humanitarian
access to children, and child abduction.

80/94

25/03/2015

Uruguay also commends the work of UNICEF, in
coordination with Ms. Zerrougui, which is indispensable
to put an end to recruitment by States or security forces
or armed groups. We are concerned at the situation that
is being experienced now and has been for a period
of time by the children in the Syrian Arab Republic,
where 14 million children are affected. Two million live
in areas without humanitarian access, 2.6 million live
in areas without access to education, and 2 million live
in refugees camps in Lebanon, Turkey and Jordan. Of
course, the interrelated crisis with Iraq also means that
8.2 million children live in areas far from their homes,
in areas controlled by armed groups of various origins.
With so many children in danger, the future of
humanity is also in danger. The Security Council
and the United Nations as a whole face a choice
between civilization and barbarism. We have always
been committed to defending the rights of children
in situations of armed conflict, as can be seen in the
annual submission and negotiation of resolutions on the
rights of children, both in the General Assembly and in
Human Rights Council.
Uruguay also shares the Secretary-General’s
concern and his commitment to eradicating violence
against children and echoes his call for countries that
have not yet done so to sign or ratify the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocols.
Although this debate has sought to focus on children
that are victims of non-State armed groups, which is
very important, we do not wish to overlook the fact that
despite the fact that such groups are aberrant, terrible
and unacceptable, most of the children recruited are
recruited by their own States; this is unacceptable to
the international community and to this Organization.
This issue is on the General Assembly’s agenda. My
country plays an active role in that respect, and we hope
to see a similar attitude on the part of other States.
However, it is nonetheless true that thanks to the
work of the Council over the past almost 20 years,
we have seen thousands of children released from
conditions that violate the dignity of the human being.
My country deems it fundamental that we respect the
rights enshrined in various international instruments,
especially article 28 of the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, which obliges States to respect children’s
right to education.
In the resolution on the rights of the child adopted
last year in the General Assembly, it was decided that

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

the issue of the right to education would be focused on
in the operative part of the resolution to be adopted this
year. Uruguay hopes that — and we will work towards
this — States that have the capacity to defend this right
will reaffirm it in the resolution that will be adopted
during this seventieth anniversary of the Organization.
It is also important to continue working with the
International Criminal Court and for the Security
Council to refer cases to it, which would give more
value to the work of that body, and extend this logic to
other international tribunals that are responsible for the
protecting of children under their jurisdiction.
Finally, we deem critical the issue of the effective
reintegration of children associated with armed groups
and believe that demobilization and reintegration
programmes are necessary for the truly successful,
effective and sustainable reintegration of children into
their societies.
As long as the rights of children are disregarded
and violated, and as long as children continue to be used
for reprehensible purposes such as war, the scourge of
which this Organization was created to eliminate, it
will not be possible to maintain international peace and
security or for civilization to make progress.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mrs. Nguyen Phuong Nga (Viet Nam) (spoke in
French): Allow me at the outset to thank France for
having convened this open debate on the situation of
children in situations of armed conflict.
(spoke in English)
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the 10 States
members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), namely, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia,
Indonesia, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore,
Thailand and Viet Nam.
Mr. President, while commending your initiative
to convene this open debate, we would like to thank
Luxembourg for its successful chairmanship of the
Council’s Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict over the past two years and congratulate our
fellow ASEAN member Malaysia on its assumption
of the chairmanship of that body. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing. We
are grateful to the Special Representative for Children

S/PV.7414

and Armed Conflict and to the other briefers for their
insights.
ASEAN welcomes the progress made in the
implementation of all Security Council resolutions on
children and armed conflict since the adoption of the
first resolution, resolution 1261 (1999), to date.
We applaud the Member States concerned for
their efforts in implementing their respective Councilmandated action plans and welcome the integration of
the protection of children in armed conflict in their
national policies. We appreciate the work done by
United Nations bodies and the concerned agencies in
armed conflict, particularly in monitoring and reporting
on grave violations against children, incorporating
child-protection policies in peacekeeping operations,
and promoting the implementation of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes.
We welcome the progress made by the “Children,
Not Soldiers” campaign, which was launched last year
with the aim of ending and preventing the recruitment
and use of children by national security forces by 2016.
ASEAN, however, remains deeply concerned about
the fact that a growing number of children continue
to be affected by grave violations in armed conflicts,
including killing and sexual violence. We particularly
condemn the increasing number of cases of abduction
of children and attacks targeting schools and hospitals.
It is all the more alarming as we are witnessing the rise
of complex and well-organized non-State armed groups
that have total disregard for international law, especially
in certain regions in the Middle East and Africa.
We urge States, United Nations entities with
their respective mandates, the relevant international
and regional organizations and other stakeholders to
redouble their efforts to address, with added vigour,
these new challenges posed by violent non-State armed
groups.
In this connection, ASEAN wishes to emphasize
the following points.
First, States bear the primary responsibility
and authority to protect their civilians, including
children, in armed conflict. Interactions between the
United Nations and non-State armed groups should be
conducted in line with this principle.
Secondly, non-State armed groups, as their nature,
form and motives vary widely, requires different

15-0836581/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

measures of engagement and should be undertaken
within a broader strategy of conflict prevention and
response. That strategy should, inter alia, address
the root causes of armed conflicts and cover social,
economic and development issues during and after
armed conflicts.
Thirdly, child protection concerns should be
consistently reflected in peace processes and peace
agreements, and children’s particular needs must be
included in post-conflict planning.
ASEAN always attaches great importance to
the protection of children, especially those affected
by armed conflicts, and has been working closely to
prevent violations of children’s rights in the region. All
ASEAN member States are parties to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child, and have been implementing
their obligations and commitments in a serious manner
at the national level. Those national efforts are closely
coupled with regional cooperation efforts.
In 2013, ASEAN leaders reiterated their collective
political will by adopting the ASEAN Declaration
on the Elimination of Violence against Women and
Children in ASEAN. ASEAN also strives to make
sure that our commitment is materialized. In 2011,
the ASEAN Commission for the Protection and
Promotion of the Rights of Women and Children was
established, and is now actively implementing its
2012-2016 work plan, which includes detailed actions
to support the implementation of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child. ASEAN is working closely
with international partners as part of those efforts.
We appreciate the continued close engagement by the
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General on
child-protection related issues, under their respective
mandates, with ASEAN member States over the years,
as manifested most recently by the visit of the Special
Representative for Violence against Children and to the
region and her substantive discussion with the ASEAN
Commission in February.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate ASEAN’s
continued commitment to working with Council
members and the international community to protect
and promote the best interests of children affected by
armed conflicts. We stand ready to work closely with
other States and partners in the preparations for a
productive review of progress in this area, and earnestly
look forward to the next Council debate on this topic in
June under the presidency of Malaysia.

82/94

25/03/2015

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Kadurugamuwa (Sri Lanka): Sri Lanka wishes
to congratulate you, Mr. President, for convening this
important debate on children and armed conflict, with
particular emphasis on children who are victims of
non-State armed groups.
As a country that has experienced the agony of
children being forcibly recruited by non-State actors
in the past, we would like to highlight the relevance
of today’s debate coinciding with the tenth anniversary
of resolution 1612 (2005), which established a Working
Group focused on children and armed conflict, as well
as the tenth anniversary of the Paris Commitments and
the Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated
With Armed Forces or Armed Groups, which were
adopted in 2007.
During the almost three decades’-long conflict that
Sri Lanka experienced, one of the most complex and
painful issues to address was the horror of terrorist
groups recruiting both girls and boys as combatants
and suicide cadres. With the conclusion of conflict, in
May 2009, a total of 594 child combatants aged between
12 and18 years of age surrendered. The Government of
Sri Lanka did not criminally prosecute those children,
but considered them as victims of the conflict. The
Government took a series of measures to rehabilitate
and reintegrate those former child combatants by
providing education, recreational facilities and
vocational training, as well as psychological support to
help them deal with their past.
Those positive developments led the United Nation
to de-list Sri Lanka from annex II to the report of
the Secretary-General on child combatants in 2012.
Today Sri Lanka is proud to state that all former child
combatants have been rehabilitated and re-integrated
into society. They have become productive and
responsible citizens of Sri Lanka. Some have even sat
for competitive exams and entered university.
Sri Lanka believes that the use of children in armed
conflict in any capacity, as combatants or otherwise,
is a clear violation of international humanitarian and
human rights law. Sri Lanka also believes that there
are three effective methods to reduce the recruitment
of child combatants by non-State actors. The first is to
put political and economic pressure on the offending
parties while strengthening law and order; the second
is to mobilize resources for rehabilitation programmes;

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

and the third is to address the socioeconomic, political
and ideological dynamics that non-State actors can use
to lure children by to their so-called causes.
The Government of Sri Lanka is appreciative of
United Nations agencies, such as UNICEF, and our
bilateral partners for helping us in our endeavors to
combat the menace of children being recruited into
armed conflict, and thereafter in the task of ensuring
their rehabilitation and reintegration into society. In
conclusion, Sri Lanka is happy to share our experience
of rehabilitation and reintegration of child combatants
with parties that wish to learn from our story.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Yaremenko (Ukraine): Ukraine alignes itself
with the statement delivered earlier this morning by the
observer of the European Union. I would like to make a
statement in my national capacity.
Ukraine welcomes this open debate of the Security
Council on the issue of children and armed conflict.
These are not just trivial words for my country. The
Council is well aware that Ukraine has suffered from
Russian aggression for more than a year already.
Unfortunately, we must admit that children are among
those who suffer the most from the conflict.
In that regard, I wish to reiterate Ukraine’s strong
commitment to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child — a fundamental international instrument in the
area of the protection of children. The Convention and
its Optional Protocols are at the core of the international
system for enhancing and promoting children’s right to
survive, live and grow in a healthy environment, with
adequate access to education, health, nutrition, safety
and security.
The Russian Federation’s actions constitute a
blatant violation of international law, including that
Convention. We urge Russia to cease its subversive
activity, which is causing immense suffering to the
population, mostly women and children, in the areas
of eastern Ukraine controlled by illegal armed groups.
Time and again, we have reiterated our appeal to the
United Nations and tho the Council to undertake an
adequate assessment and to take necessary measures
in response to the Russian Federation’s actions in
temporarily occupied Crimea and in the east of Ukraine.
In that light, I would like to recall the numerous
cases of abductions of children by the Russia-sponsored

S/PV.7414

terrorist groups in eastern Ukraine, including from
orphanages and medical facilities. Orphans are being
illegally moved outside the country, and children are
being killed and wounded as a result of the activities
of the Russia-backed illegal armed groups in the east
of Ukraine.
We all remember the shocking images following
the mass shelling by pro-Russian terrorists of
residential areas in Mariupol in January. As a result
dozens of people were killed and more than 100 were
wounded. Unfortunately, children were also among
the victims: two of them were killed, dozens were
wounded and orphaned and four schools and three
kindergartens were damaged as a result of that blatant
terrorist attack. According to the latest data from
UNICEF, at least 64 children have been killed and 170
wounded in eastern Ukraine since the beginning of
the conflict masterminded by Russia. The number of
internally displaced persons in Ukraine increased to
more than 1 million in the past month, with more than
60 per cent of them being women and children. The
Government of Ukraine is doing everything possible
to ensure the evacuation of children from areas in the
regions of Donetsk and Luhansk where they are at risk
of militants’ shelling and other outrages. Legislation
is being drafted on strengthening social protection for
children and families with children displaced from
affected regions.
Ukraine reiterates its strong commitment to the
promotion and protection of the rights of the child at
the national and international levels. We reaffirm our
support for, and appreciate the work being carried out
by UNICEF, the Committee on the Rights of the Child
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui.
We would like to stress the vital importance of the
“Children, Not Soldiers” campaign, aimed at ending
and preventing the recruitment and use of children by
national security forces by 2016. Ukraine fully supports
the campaign. In that regard, we deem it necessary to
further build on resolution 1612 (2005), and request the
Secretary-General to include those parties to armed
conflict that engage in abductions of children in the
annexes to his reports on children and armed conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cambodia.
Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): First of all, allow me to
express my congratulations to you, Mr. President,

15-0836583/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

on assuming the presidency of the Council for this
month, and to thank you for organizing this important
debate. I would also like to express my gratitude to the
Secretary-General for briefing the Security Council
on this important issue, which can serve to make our
discussion more comprehensive.
Cambodia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam on
behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN).
Further to the points made in the ASEAN
statement, I wish to state that Cambodia, as a postconflict country, is determined to protect children and
their rights in situations of armed conflicts. As a State
party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and a
signatory to its Optional Protocol on the involvement of
children in armed conflict, in 1992, Cambodia believes
that the United Nations should continue to work more
to protect children in armed conflicts.
My delegation condemns all forms of violence
perpetrated by the terrorist organizations, particularly
violence against children. As the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
rests with the United Nations, we, as the international
community, must fight this evil scourge resolutely.
Furthermore, we must strengthen the existent legal
instruments for the protection of children in armed
conflicts. To that end, the Secretary-General’s report
and other relevant recommendatory documents should
be based on clear, accurate and verifiable data.
As we debate here today, thousands of children
are serving as soldiers in armed conflicts throughout
the world. Some of those children were conscripted,
and some were abducted and forced into combat. Yet
others joined armed groups of their own volition, out of
desperation, having been instilled with the erroneous
ideology of non-State armed groups. Therefore, whether
they partake in the violence and combat, or refuse to
do so, children end up being trapped and victimized.
To prevent the victimization of children, we must
address the deep-rooted causes of conflict. Conflict
prevention is the prerequisite for sustainable peace
and respect for human rights. Poverty, discrimination,
lack of education, social exclusion and inequality only
perpetuate the cycle of violence.
The ongoing intergovernmental negotiation on
the post-2015 sustainable development agenda is an
opportunity to address these issues. It can also inform

84/94

25/03/2015

the means of implementation on issues relating to the
protection of children in armed conflicts. The post2015 sustainable development agenda should continue
to emphasize inclusive, equitable development and
economic growth, aimed at effectively addressing
inequalities and the factors underpinning them. In that
way, it will contribute to creating a more inclusive,
secure and peaceful world.
As stated here today, education should be viewed as
a long-term investment. With knowledge, children can
stay away from being recruited as combatants. Girls
and boys embody the meaning of children. Since we
are giving importance to gender equality, girls should
also enjoy equal opportunities and equal access to
education. Therefore, Cambodia is fully supportive of
the “Let Girls Learn” initiative, as it has been envisaged
and made well-known to the people of Cambodia by
the First Lady of the United States, Michelle Obama,
during her recent three-day official cultural visit to
Siem Reap province from 20 to 22 March.
Ending grave violations against children in
armed conflict requires joint global action. The Royal
Government of Cambodia is committed to working
with our global partners, with Member States and
with United Nations agencies in our effort to end the
victimization of children by non-State armed groups.
My delegation appreciates the dedicated work of the
Council to advance the issue of the plight of children
and to protect children’s rights in situations of armed
conflict. The tireless efforts of the Council will
further advance our cause and help ensure that future
generations of children live in freedom and in peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your presidency of the Council for this month and,
through you, I would like to congratulate the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Zerrougui, for her briefing
to the Council on the subject under discussion. The
delegation of the Sudan would like to express its
appreciation to the French presidency for organizing
this open debate on children in armed conflict, with a
focus on the victims of rebel movements. The Council
has done well by tackling this important issue.
When we participated in the launch of the
“Children, Not Soldiers” campaign last year we stated

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

that it should include rebel movements, and not confine
itself to Government forces and the situations covered
by the annexes to the annual report of the SecretaryGeneral. It is well-known that the extent of aggression
perpetrated against children and violations of the rights
of children by my country’s rebel movements in Darfur,
Blue Nile and South Kordofan states are taken up in
the report. The extent of the violations in my country
are incalculable; in fact, that has been mentioned. One
such incident involved the abduction of 1,900 children
by the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North in
South Kordofan last year. Such violations by the rebel
movements are continuing.
The Council is well aware of what is going on,
including the attempts to occupy the capital of the
Sudan, Khartoum, in 2008. We greatly appreciated the
Council’s actions on several occasions in dealing with
this matter, particularly on the first anniversary of the
campaign to end the recruitment of children. We hope
that they will be followed by steps and measures that
will force the rebel movements to halt the violations,
lay down their arms and have recourse to negotiations
instead of armed conflict. We would like to commend
the contents of section 4 of the presidency’s concept
note (S/2015/168, annex). The issues of protecting
children and their rights are among our Government’s
priorities. A case in point is the long list of efforts and
accomplishments undertaken by the Government.
First of all, at the level of international commitments,
our Government has ratified the Convention on the
Rights of the Child along with its two protocols
concerning the protection of children in armed
conflict and from commercial sexual exploitation. The
Government of the Sudan also ratified two relevant
conventions of the International Labour Organization:
the Minimum Age Convention, 1973 (No. 138), and
the Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention, 1999
(No. 182). The Government of the Sudan declared its
support for the campaign organized by the Office of
the Under-Secretary-General on Children and Armed
Conflict in partnership with UNICEF in early 2014. We
also participated in the launch of that campaign here in
New York.
Secondly, at the level of national legislation, the laws
regulating the Sudanese armed forces and the police
categorically prohibit the recruitment of children below
the age of 18. Our Government established correctional
justice for minors in 2010 when it enacted the law to
protect children and set up prosecutorial offices to

S/PV.7414

deliver justice to minors. At the level of child protection
machinery, our Government has established units in
the armed forces to protect children, as well as at the
Ministry of the Interior. The Government established
the National Council for Childhood, appointing a
special prosecutor to investigate the crimes of Darfur
and other allegations since the emergence of the conflict
since 2003. It also established a fact-finding committee
to investigate the abduction and recruitment of children
in South Kordofan and Blue Nile states. In July, the
Government launched the tenth comprehensive national
plan on promoting the rights of children in the Sudan.
At the level of outreach to international bodies
dealing with children, we are in constant contact,
through our Permanent Mission to the United Nations,
with the Office of the Under-Secretary-General and
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Children and Armed Conflict, as well as with UNICEF.
In that connection, I would like to refer to the meeting
of our Minister for Social Affairs with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, addressing all
concerns relating to children. In that regard, I recall
the statement made by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Zerrougui, on the efforts
currently under way in the Sudan in cooperation with
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) aimed at preventing the rebel
movements from recruiting children.
The Government of the Sudan is continuing its
efforts to promote the status of children. To that end,
the National Council on Child Care established a task
force to investigate the situation of children. As part
of its primary mandate, the task force is charged with
addressing the situation of children in emergencies,
in cooperation with UNICEF and UNAMID. At the
same time, the National Council on Child Care held a
workshop on internal cultures and their impact on the
situation of children. Work is under way, in cooperation
with the various agencies dealing with children, to
finalize an action plan on children in areas of conflict.
In light of the policies to which we have just referred,
as well as the steps and measures taken with regard to
children, we request that our name be removed from
the list included in the annex to the Secretary-General’s
annual report.
If the issues of children are to be addressed in a
comprehensive and integrated manner, we would like
the following points to be taken into account. First, the
Governments of States experiencing conflicts should

15-0836585/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

be assisted to end such conflicts by convincing or
forcing armed rebel factions to lay down their arms and
pursue negotiated solutions. Secondly, the root causes
that lead to the recruitment of children or their truancy
from school, including poverty, climate change, and
the unfair, unilateral economic sanctions imposed
on some States, along with other factors that lead to
conflict, must be addressed. Further steps include
relieving the debt burdens of developing countries,
extending technological assistance and capacitybuilding to affected countries, support for education
and reconstruction efforts, as well as utilizing the
massive experience of the United Nations.
It is not enough for rebel movements to sign
plans to end child recruitment; that will not end the
violence that they perpetrate. Such measures must be
accompanied by condemnation of the conduct of the
rebel movements, and they must be forced to lay down
their arms and participate in negotiations. Governments
must be involved in any movement relating to the issue
of children in conflict, and they must be able to work
with such organizations in transparency and with full
respect for national sovereignty.
In conclusion, we reiterate our commitment to
continuing to cooperate with international bodies
dealing with children and call for correct and verifiable
information in the Secretary-General’s reports, which
must be devoid of controversial phrases such as
those referring to military uniforms as well as other
ambiguous references. In many cases, a military
uniform is no longer the preserve of Government forces.
We also demand that information and allegations be
shared with Governments before they are incorporated
into the Secretary-General’s reports to the Security
Council.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I would like to thank
France for its able leadership of the Council this month
and for convening this important debate. I would
also like to thank the briefers for their informative
statements.
On 16 December 2014, in a most inhuman and
barbaric act, the enemies of Afghanistan massacred
more than 120 people, all civilians, the majority of whom
were children playing volleyball. Incidents like that are
vivid examples of the profound impact that conflict
has on the lives of children and the shadow that it casts

86/94

25/03/2015

over their daily lives. Violence cuts their childhood
short and leaves them without their families and loved
ones. Children are regularly the subjects of heinous
acts of senseless terror carried out against mosques,
markets, schools, homes and critical infrastructure in
Afghanistan.
The continuing violent campaign against the
Afghan people has had a profound and tragic effect
on the lives of civilians. In 2014, over 10,000 civilians
were killed or injured, with a sharp increase in child
casualties by 48 per cent. Conflict in Afghanistan has
engendered a situation in which young boys and girls
are extremely vulnerable to exploitation by extremist
groups. The Taliban and other extremist groups use
children as soldiers, spies and human shields. They use
them to plant improvised explosive devices and roadside
bombs, and they continue to cast a heinous gloom over
their lives. Terrorist and extremist groups, including
those that claim affiliation to the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, regularly target children to carry out
their evil agendas.
In flagrant violation of international law and
the basic tenets of Islam, extremist groups continue
to brutally attack schools, their staff and students,
particularly women and girls. In 2014, as a result of their
brutal campaign, 157 schools were destroyed, blown up
and set on fire and 537 schools were closed as a result
of threats by the Taliban and other extremist groups.
Regrettably, those threats, coupled by poverty and
unemployment, hinder children’s access to education
and make them more vulnerable to exploitation by
extremists.
The impact of conflict on children extends beyond
the risk of death or injury. Children whose families have
been killed or incapacitated are often left as the sole
breadwinners in the family. Therefore, in an attempt
to provide for their own and their family’s livelihoods,
children often try to join the national and local police
or the army, even through falsification of their age and
identification so that they can serve.
Understanding these awful circumstances, my
Government has taken major steps towards delivering
on its commitments. Today, President Ghani, in his
address to the United States Congress in Washington,
D.C., once again reiterated the full commitment of the
Afghan Government to protecting children, who are the
future of our country. In a milestone step, in November
2014 the Government of Afghanistan enacted a
law prohibiting underage recruitment in security
15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

institutions, which was approved by the Afghan
Parliament in February. The endorsement of a road
map in August 2014 to accelerate the implementation
of the action plan to end child recruitment into the
security forces is a testament of our unwavering
commitment in this regard. The culmination of these
bold steps was the rejection, in 2014, of several hundred
underage applicants who attempted to enlist in security
institutions.
We have also put in place a series of measures to raise
public awareness, including through the establishment
of dozens of community-based school protection
councils in provinces and through convening various
seminars and workshops to train religious scholars,
teachers, elders and students on the rights of children
with the support of the international community. We
are grateful for the technical and financial assistance
of the United Nations, in particular UNICEF and the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, in
this regard.
As our National Security Forces have assumed
full responsibility for providing security throughout
the country since the beginning of this year, the
Government of Afghanistan is strongly committed to
making every effort to ensure its forces’ compatibility
with international standards of which the prevention of
underage recruitment is core. Therefore, bringing the
underage recruitment in all security institutions to an
absolute end is a top priority for the Government of
Afghanistan. To this end, I would like to echo the call
of my Government on the United Nations to consider
the withdrawal of Afghan national and local police
from the Secretary-General’s black list.
Taking into account the enormous progress made
in alleviating the impact of conflict on children in
Afghanistan and the tremendous challenges ahead of
us, the continued support of our international partners,
their technical expertise and funding, in addition
to their advocacy, are of paramount importance to
our efforts. We thank our international friends and
partners, particularly Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and her Office, for their support
in this regard.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Montenegro.
Mr. Šćepanović (Montenegro): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s debate on children

S/PV.7414

and armed conflict, and commend France’s strong
support and commitment to this issue. We also thank
today’s briefers for their inspiring presentations.
Montenegro aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I would like, however, to highlight some points of
particular importance to my country.
We are witnessing the dramatic consequences of
the violence affecting millions of children due to the
evolving character of contemporary conflicts. We are
at risk of losing entire generations in Syria, the Central
African Republic, Iraq and South Sudan. Girls and
boys are recruited by armed forces and armed groups,
become the victims of indiscriminate attacks, or are
subject to violent abuse. The Security Council has
made significant progress in advancing the children
and armed conflict agenda, but there is still a lot of
work ahead of us in protecting the rights of children
in situations of armed conflict and ensuring that
perpetrators of grave violations against children are
held to account.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), which established
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
It is also the first anniversary of the “Children, Not
Soldiers” campaign that was launched to end the
recruitment and use of children by Government armed
forces by 2016. The momentum and progress generated
by the campaign are encouraging, but the remaining
challenges are enormous to reach our objective. We must
work together and share our expertise and resources so
we can end child recruitment in the next two years.
It is also essential that the Council’s Working
Group continue to make the best use of its tools in order
to provide appropriate responses to all types of grave
violations, including those committed by non-State
actors. In this regard, we would like to stress that
Member States need to allow United Nations personnel
access to areas controlled by armed non-State actors
for the purpose of ending violations and concluding and
implementing action plans.
We have seen an increasing trend of attacks on
schools and the use of schools for military purposes,
which we find alarming. Therefore, we welcome
resolution 2143 (2014), highlighting the concern over the
military use of schools. These attacks deprive children
of their right to education and result in unspeakable

15-0836587/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

suffering for them. We use this opportunity to call on
parties to armed conflict to refrain from these actions.
With respect to United Nations peacekeeping
and political missions and the indispensable role they
play, Montenegro would like to advocate for a strong
child protection component to be incorporated in
mission mandates. This would require peacekeepers,
military and security personnel to receive specialized
pre-deployment child protection training.
There is a need for more action in order to fight
impunity for crimes committed against children.
Therefore, the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
national judicial authorities have an important role in
responding to violations as they occur. It is also vital
that the Security Council, to the extent possible, use
the option to refer situations to the ICC and that the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
further consider modalities to increase the pressure on
persistent perpetrators of human rights violations and
put an end to impunity.
Montenegro remains committed to contributing
to our common and noble objective and providing the
children of the world with a safer future.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Ms. Mammadova (Azerbaijan): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this debate
on children and armed conflict. Let me also thank
all today’s briefers for their insightful and moving
statements, and commend Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ms. Leila Zerrougui’s determined
efforts to protect the rights of children trapped in
conflicts.
As the briefers have noted, there has been some
progress in the protection efforts in various hot spots.
This includes the strengthened support to relative
normative frameworks in the crises-affected countries;
better integration of child protection in key mandated
areas of peacekeeping operations; and global advocacy
campaigning, such as that of “Children, Not Soldiers”,
just to name a few.
Despite that progress, important though it is,
non-combatants, particularly children, continue to be
exposed to great risk. Much needs to be done. I shall
briefly outline a few key concerns. Once conflict
begins, children are among the first to suffer from
its effects and consequences. As long as a conflict

88/94

25/03/2015

continues, indiscriminate and deliberate attacks, losses
and atrocities are inevitable. The Council should focus
on the prevention, resolution, and most importantly,
address the root causes of conflict.
All parties to a conflict should implement their
commitments under international humanitarian
law and cease violence against civilians, especially
children. Ceasefire agreements can be an important
practical step toward curbing violence; however, it is
only a temporary measure and does not guarantee the
safety and security of civilians. Twenty years after the
signing of the ceasefire agreement between Azerbaijan
and Armenia, that agreement is violated regularly. Our
children have been targets of both indiscriminate and
deliberate attacks.
As a result of sniper fire alone, Fariz Badalov,
a nine-year-old boy, was killed in Agdam. Aygun
Shahmaliyeva, a 13-year-old girl, was killed in
the Alibayli village of the Tovuz region bordering
Armenia, when a bomb implanted in a toy exploded.
In August 2014, five-year-old Mujan Ariba, 17-year-old
Farid Mammadov, 14-year-old Sahans Malov, 15-yearold Shahlalah Tariba, 10-year-old Aushkara Basov were
seriously wounded by Armenian snipers. The list is not
exhaustive; it merely illustrates recent examples.
Combating impunity is important, not only for the
purposes of prosecuting such crimes and bringing those
responsible to justice, but also for ensuring sustainable
peace, truce and reconciliation. We join the call for
efforts to be stepped up at all levels to reduce the grave
impact of conflicts on children, and to uphold justice
by bringing to account those who perpetrate crimes
against children, including non-State actors and those
who fuel them, both ideologically and financially.
Education and outreach campaigns can be effective
tools for protecting children from violence and abuse,
both during intensive and passive phases of armed
conflict. The promotion of hatred in speech, ideas of
ethnic incompatibility and racial superiority perpetuate
the vicious cycle of violence. Those who promote such
intolerance also entrap their population in poverty and
underdevelopment.
Particular consideration should be given to
internally displaced children in terms of ensuring the
inalienable right of return, and to the implication of
illegal policies and practices in situations of foreign
occupation, for the protection of children’s rights. In
addition, determining the fate of children taken hostage
and reported missing in situations of armed conflict,
15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

S/PV.7414

as well as searching for them and reuniting them with
their families are other aspects of the problem that
require urgent action.

by conflict have virtually no access to education, which
makes them even more vulnerable to recruitment into
armed groups.

Azerbaijan is ready to support efforts aimed at
safeguarding the rights of children. We will continue
to work with the international community to achieve
that objective.

Mindful of this tragic situation experienced
by children, my Government, with the support of
international partners, including the United Nations, is
committed to combating violations of children’s rights.
Its initial efforts consisted in putting an end to that
problem within our army. To that end, my Government
has launched several initiatives. Strongly determined
to eradicate the problem, it has made the necessary
political commitment, leading to the appointment
by the President of the Republic, Joseph Kabila, of a
Personal Representative in charge of the fight against
sexual violence and child recruitment.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Mrs. Malenga (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) (spoke in French): I would first like to express
my deep satisfaction at seeing you, Sir, preside over the
Security Council during the month of March, and to
tell you how pleased we are to see France lead today’s
Council deliberations. I would also like to thank you
for holding this debate on children and armed conflict,
thereby affording my country, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the opportunity to speak on an issue that
continues to be one of our priorities. I would also like
to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and other
speakers for their respective statements. Finally, my
thanks go to Mr. Junior Nzita for his testimony.
Allow me to note here that the repeated outbreaks
of war experienced by my country are at the origin of
various forms of atrocities experienced by children
in the eastern parts of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo still occupied by armed groups. Indeed,
Congolese children who have been or continue to be
detained by armed groups have lived through and
continue to experience psychologically traumatic
events. They are helpless eyewitnesses of horrible
scenes of violence during which their family members
and friends are killed before their eyes.
Thousands of child victims of violent attacks by
armed groups have suffered massive moral damage
and material damage. Many are used as combatants,
messengers, sex slaves, spies, traffickers or transporters
of munitions. Some are also used to crush stones in
quarries in order to make gravel. Once the stones are
crushed, the coltan is used in electronic devices. The
high level of radioactivity of those substances explains
the frequency of the sometimes fatal respiratory
problems suffered by a large number of Congolese
children who crush and transport coltan. Those who
survive remain traumatized by the acts of vandalism
and barbarity perpetrated against them by armed groups
to which they fell victim. Moreover, children displaced

The efforts of my Government to end this issue
continue. In that regard, my country has supported
the United Nation global “Children, Not Soldiers”
campaign, which the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and
UNICEF organized in 2014 with a view to eradicating
the recruitment and use of children in conflict by
Government security forces by the end of 2016.
My Government is also committed to the fight to
eradicate the negative forces and armed groups that,
to a certain degree, constitute the root causes of the
issue. Furthermore, my Government also places special
emphasis on the fight against impunity for serious
crimes committed against children, and has established
new courts for children in 10 provinces in the country.
In the same effort to strengthen the protection of
children, the Government has decided to make the
six grave violations of the rights of children in armed
conflict a criterion for disqualification for membership
in our armed forces. Those strong initiatives to support
children’s rights have had significant results, including
the arrest and conviction of high-ranking officers in
our armed forces and the national police.
In conclusion, my Government is determined
to pursue its efforts to implement its action plan to
eradicate the recruitment and use of children in armed
forces and groups, as well as other grave violations of
children’s rights. In that regard, my country would like
to thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, for her dedication to the cause of children. My
country also welcomes the excellent cooperation it has
developed with the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in

15-0836589/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

Conflict, the Task Force on Children and Armed
Conflict, the MONUSCO team for child protection and
UNICEF. My country expresses its deep gratitude to all
these partners.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Benin.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): I would
like to first of all congratulate France for taking the
initiative to organize this meeting on the plight of
children in armed conflict, a theme specifically centred
on child victims of non-State armed groups. I welcome
the remarks of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, which
highlight the nature and the extent of the phenomenon,
the efforts by the United Nations and its future work
on the issue. I pay tribute to Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, and Ms. Yoka
Brandt, Deputy Director General of UNICEF, whose
remarks commanded our full attention. I welcome the
representatives of civil society organizations, including
Ms. Julie Bodin, and the highly moving testimony by
Mr. Junior Nzita.
Benin aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the African Union.
The United Nations and the international community
are moving towards the celebration, in July 2015, of
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1612 (2005), through which the Security Council
established a monitoring and reporting mechanism and
a Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
We will mark, in March, the first anniversary of the
“Children, Not Soldiers” campaign. We will assess the
level of commitment of the various stakeholders and the
progress made and explore new avenues for work that is
as efficient as possible.
Benin, which in 2005 introduced and participated
in the negotiations on resolution 1612 (2005), is
delighted to have been able to promote a mechanism that
continues to prove its effectiveness. We hope that this
trend will continue and be strengthened so as to enable
us to achieve the lofty goals that our Organization
has set, namely eradicating the phenomenon of child
soldiers. Significant progress has been made since then.
However, 10 years after the resolution’s adoption, the
phenomenon of child soldiers unfortunately persists.
I salute the commitment of people of good will who
have worked to strengthen the mechanism, to expand

90/94

25/03/2015

its jurisdiction and to support the work of the Council’s
Working Group.
The nature of armed conflict and the tactics used
by combatants have changed dramatically. I would note
in particular the lack of clearly defined battlefields,
the increased diversity of parties to the conflict, and
the fact that places such as schools and hospitals,
which traditionally were shelters, are now deliberately
targeted. Children and students are kidnapped, enlisted
and indoctrinated. For example, there is extremist sect
Boko Haram’s standard procedure of using children
as suicide bombs to carry out terrorist attacks. That
extremist sect massacres children on a daily basis by
destroying schools, health centres and entire villages
and carries out massive abductions of girls in order to
force them into marriage, slavery or to carry explosives.
My country believes that, in order for the fight
against the recruitment and use of children in
armed conflict to be effective, it must incorporate
both universal adherence to relevant international
instruments and scrupulous respect for them, as stated
so clearly in the Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups,
which Benin fully supports.
States should also place particular emphasis on
strengthening national mechanisms for resilience and
the protection of children and should raise further
awareness about the harmful effects of the practice.
It is important to firmly combat extremist movements
such as Boko Haram. Military action must continue
to go hand in hand with diplomatic efforts to secure
the release, recovery and rehabilitation of children
affected by armed conflict. The United Nations must
continue to explore the most appropriate channels to
make contact with non-State armed groups so as to lead
them to commit to sparing children from recruitment
and violent action. In this regard, we strongly support
the ongoing work by the United Nations and civil
society to increase the number of non-State groups and
Governments concerned that are signing agreements
and action plans to put an end violence against children
and negotiate the release of those already enlisted.
We must work to find suitable formulas and
mechanisms for the sustainable reintegration of
demobilized children. To that end, it is important
that the United Nations ensure that peace agreements
contain firm commitments to children in the context
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

programmes so as to ensure that they are integrated
into normal working life in a rewarding manner and
able to obtain the resources necessary to sustain their
existence and achieve their full development.
The recognition of the recruitment and use of
children in conflict as a crime against humanity opens
the way for prosecution. We must work to strengthen
legal action, through advanced legal cooperation aimed
at depriving criminals any sanctuary and bringing them
before international criminal courts. The International
Criminal Court should be encouraged to seize itself
of such cases and prosecute the perpetrators of such
crimes. In this respect, it is important to welcome the
judgement of the International Criminal Court against
Thomas Lubanga for conscripting, enlisting and using
child soldiers. That judgement is, without a doubt,
a very strong message that shows the determination
of the international community to put an end to this
shameful practice.
On 3 August 1990, the Government of Benin
ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
which was adopted in New York on 20 November 1989,
and later ratified its 2000 Optional Protocol on the sale
of children, child prostitution and child pornography.
Benin has also has a legal code for children that
protects them against any practice that could endanger
their physical and moral integrity, including their
involvement in armed conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Gabon.
Mrs. Onanga (Gabon) (spoke in French): I must
congratulate you, Mr. President, on two counts: first,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council; and secondly for your initiative in holding
this debate. I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-oon, for
his determination to make this cause a major focus of
his work. I would like to also thank Ms. Zerrougui for
her determination to advance our work to ensure that
children are not soldiers. I would also like to pay tribute
to UNICEF, whose contribution we welcome. Finally,
I commend Ms. Julie Bodin and Mr. Junior Nzita for
their respective statements.
Gabon strongly condemns all forms of violence
against children committed by parties to armed
conflict in violation of international law, including
the recruitment, employment, murder, mutilation,
abduction, sexual violence, attacks against schools
and hospitals and the denial of humanitarian access

S/PV.7414

to children. It is undisputable that the suffering of
children at the hands of non-State armed groups,
particularly extremist groups, shocks and casts doubt
on the humanity of their tormentors. Multiple violations
against girls, in particular, are a true abomination.
Already traumatized by war as a vulnerable
population, children are more directly involved in
armed violence as actors who are obviously being
manipulated. The real perpetrators of these crimes
doubly hurt their victims; they rob children not only
of their innocence, but also what is most dear to them,
namely, their dream of a world where they could
flourish in peace, security and respect for their dignity.
No cause, however important it may be, can justify the
abduction of children torn from the affection of their
families, as is the case in the sisterly republic of Nigeria,
where the Boko Haram terrorist network kidnaps, uses
and murders children.
The international community has a duty to act
quickly and vigorously to safeguard the future of
our children, first of all preventively, particularly
through education, in order to fight poverty, which is
a possible factor in the incitement of young people to
voluntarily join armed groups. Other factors include
discrimination, the affirmation of an ethnic, tribal or
religious identity or the attractiveness of the idea of the
heroic death of a martyr.
In addition, Gabon has readily responded to
the Council’s call for support for the Principles and
Guidelines on Children associated with Armed Forces
or Armed Groups, known as the Paris Principles; we
fully support them and pay particular attention to
ensuring respect for all international instruments aimed
at the protection of children.
My country also welcomes the 17 September 2013
agreement signed by the Peace and Security Department
of the African Union Commission and the Office of
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict in close collaboration with UNICEF, which is
of paramount importance to better protecting African
children affected by conflict and to strengthening
protection mechanisms, while the African Union
plays an increasingly expansive role in mediation and
peacekeeping operations on the continent.
Finally, it is important to strengthen effective
measures to protect children that are adapted to the
circumstances in which they live. Where large parts
of a country’s territory are beyond the control of the

15-0836591/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

State, the message of the international community
should be clear — the responsibility of non-State
armed group remains fully binding, and no impunity
should be tolerated including through sanctions
arrangements. Measures to extend State authority are
also essential, including through mechanisms for the
monitoring and communication of information in cases
of grave violations against children in armed conflict,
pursuant to resolution 1612 (2005), and for registering
perpetrators of violations of children’s rights in the
lists annexed to the report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict — the so-called lists of
shame — in accordance with resolutions 1882 (2009)
and 1998 (2011).
The prosecution of perpetrators before national and
international courts, such as the International Criminal
Court and the Special Courts, as well as the care of
demobilized child soldiers, are also part of our effort to
fight against violence and rejection of which children
are victims. Furthermore, a good education, fair justice
and a decent job will in the end allow young people to
rebuild themselves, dream of a better future and break
the cycle of violence.
My delegation expresses the hope that today’s
effort at mobilizing will be the expression of the
reassertion of an additional push for solidarity from the
international community on behalf of children, many
of them girls, who have unfortunately been forced to
endure the torments of armed conflicts which they do
not understand.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Russian Federation has requested the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The statement made by the representative
of Ukraine has shown once again that his delegation
is trying to exploit any opportunity it can to repeat
its baseless insinuations against Russia. His remarks
are particularly cynical when they are made in the
context of a debate on the situation of children and
the provision of assistance to them. According to the
Ukrainian delegation’s immoral logic, assistance
for children — whose suffering is caused by the
Kyiv authorities’ broad-based operations against
the population of the eastern regions — is totally
unacceptable.
I will not comment on all that was said by the
representative of Ukraine — let that lie with his

92/94

25/03/2015

conscience — but our position has been made clear on
many occasions. Nevertheless, I would like to point out
the following. The adoption of a number of measures for
implementing the Minsk Agreements allowed for the
de-escalation of the armed conflict in eastern Ukraine.
We sincerely hope that there will no more child victims
or any others as a result of the conflict. For this to be the
case, it will be necessary for the February agreement to
be fully complied with.
It is clear, however, that, more than a month after
the Agreement was signed, the Kyiv authorities still
have not implemented any serious measures to stabilize
the situation of people affected by the conflict in eastern
Ukraine, including children. The Donetsk and Luhansk
regions remain blockaded. How are we to interpret the
fact that pensions remain unpaid, no attempt to restart
the banking system or reopen socioeconomic and
social communications links has been made, and food,
medical and other supplies remain undelivered?
It has been noted that, after the start of military
action, children were no longer receiving vaccinations.
Worse, the restrictions that the Kyiv authorities have
imposed on the movement of people and goods in
regions that they do not control create obstacles to
the delivery of assistance to the population of these
regions, including children. According to the human
rights monitors and representatives of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
working in these areas, it is crucial that these and
other problems be addressed immediately. It is clear
that many children, including disabled children, need
immediate medical attention. I call on the Ukrainian
delegation to address these problems.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Israel to make a further statement.
Ms. Shilo (Israel): I feel compelled to briefly rebut
the accusations against Israel that have been made in
the course of today’s discussions.
It was surprising to hear the Palestinian representative
talk about Gaza without once mentioning Hamas. The
facts could not be clearer. Hamas has fired tens of
thousands of rockets into Israel. Children in southern
Israel continue to live under the constant threat of
rocket attacks. Instead of playing outside, as all children
should do, they practice running to shelters in less than
15 seconds to save themselves. In Gaza, Hamas uses
schools and hospitals to store rockets and then fires
those same rockets at our schools for the purpose of

15-08365

25/03/2015

Children and armed conflict

S/PV.7414

killing and maiming our children. By using Gaza’s
children as human shields, Hamas intentionally puts
them in the front line.

forces, Ukrainian administrative buildings, ships of
the Ukrainian fleet and Ukrainian infrastructure were
seized by armed militias.

On the other hand, Israel does its utmost to
minimize and protect not only our own children but
Palestinian children as well. Ignoring these crimes does
not favour the Palestinian children. Yet, again in this
Council, we have seen time and time again that blaming
Israel is easier than taking meaningful steps to improve
the situation on the ground.

I believe that after such a permanent change in
the position of the Russian Federation, comments on
its statements are hardly necessary. What I would like
to re-emphasize is that, if what happened a year ago
had not happened, we would not be discussing the
problems of children in specific areas of the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions.

Finally, if the Palestinian Authority is so eager
to find a peaceful solution, based on the two-State
principle, why did it form a unity Government with
Hamas, an internationally recognized terrorist
organization that voted for the destruction of the
State of Israel? The levelling of accusations against
Israel will not solve fundamental issues in the Middle
East and will not bring us closer to resolving the core
challenges facing our region. In fact, it only drags us
further away from achieving the peaceful future that
our children deserve.

The President (spoke in French): The observer of
the Observer State of Palestine has asked for the floor
to make a further statement. I now call on her.

The President (spoke in French): The representative
of Ukraine has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I now call on him.
Mr. Yaremenko (Ukraine): I would like to reply
to the comments by my Russian colleague, and will do
so in Russian in order to deliver my statement clearly.
(spoke in Russian)
In the information war that has been launched by
the Russian Federation against Ukraine, my country,
has been using the only “weapon” available to it, and
we are using for defensive purposes. We are simply
telling the truth. There is one concept in international
relations that seems to me to be a key one, and that is
trust. It is extremely difficult to build trust, but it is
also extremely easy to destroy it. I would like to recall
to all those here that not so long ago, Russia produced
a documentary film, Crimea, Road to the Motherland,
and the President of Russia, Mr. Putin, explained in
detail the special operation by means of which Russia
was going to annex a part of Ukrainian territory. I am
referring to the autonomous territory of Crimea.
If I am not mistaken, this is the fourth Russian
version issued by the head of the Russian State about the
events that took place a year ago. I would like to recall
that there were no Russian military forces in Crimea
at the time of the events. The bases housing Ukrainian

Ms. Mansour (Palestine): I believe that Palestine’s
statement today sufficiently refuted what was said
today by the representatives of Israel and that it
conveyed the stark, disturbing and bitter reality of life
for Palestinian children and their families under Israeli
occupation. The perpetration of those brutal and illegal
acts by the occupying Power is well documented, not
just by the children and people of Palestine, who have
had to endure the misery of living under the occupation
every day for nearly 50 years, but also by the various
organs, agencies and committees of the United Nations
system monitoring the situation in the occupied State
of Palestine, as well as by countless human-rights
organizations around the world, including several
Israeli organizations.
Israel makes absurd and unacceptable assertions
and claims that the Palestinian people incite their
children or send their children out to be in harm’s
way. That is typical behaviour from an occupying
Power whose policy is to dehumanize the Palestinian
people — implying that they do not love their children
in the way that other people love their children. That is
typical racist behaviour from a belligerent occupier. It
is instead Israel that is harming our children in every
respect. If they are not killing or causing injury to
them, they are arresting them, demolishing their homes
and denying them their right to education, health, food,
clean water and development. They are putting them in
harm’s way by using them as human shields, which has
been documented by Defence for Children International
Palestine.
That was the case this past summer during Israel’s
aggression against the Gaza Strip. A story emerged of
a 16 year-old boy, Ahmad Abu Raida, who was used
as a human shield by Israeli occupying forces. For five

15-0836593/94

S/PV.7414

Children and armed conflict

days, Israeli occupying forces forced him — at gunpoint — to repeatedly act as a human shield for them
in Gaza. That was in addition to his being unjustifiably
subjected to detention, interrogation, beatings, torture
and deprivation of food, water and sleep. There are
many other stories like that one.
We continue to condemn the killing and violence
against all children — Palestinian and Israeli — and
we call on the Israeli side to do the same. When all is
said and done, the only way to give both Palestinian
and Israeli children the security and lives they both
deserve is for Israel to end its occupation and to cease
all of its violations against the Palestinian people. It is
when both peoples live in freedom and security in their
own States that we will be on the road of real peace
and stability. We are still committed to the two-State
solution. The other side’s commitment is in question.

94/94

25/03/2015

We owe it to both Palestinian and Israeli children and
the generations to come.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Zagaynov (spoke in Russian): Given that it is
quite late, I will be very brief.
I would like to thank the representative of Ukraine
for his lecture on current international relations, but
he need not worry — we understand English as well. I
would also like to point out that what he said has no link
whatsoever with the topic of today’s discussion.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 7.30 p.m.

15-08365
