S/2005/323

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 May 2005
Original: English

Letter dated 10 May 2005 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
The United Nations Tajikistan Office of Peacebuilding (UNTOP) was
established to assist the post-conflict stabilization in Tajikistan, at the request of the
Government. Following the withdrawal of the United Nations Mission of Observers
in Tajikistan in 2000, UNTOP provides the political framework and leadership for
peacebuilding activities of the United Nations system in Tajikistan. Together with
the United Nations country team and in cooperation with the Tajik authorities at all
levels, political parties, civil society and donor countries, the Office works towards
establishing the necessary conditions and self-sustaining national mechanisms that
make the peace process irreversible. In this respect, UNTOP facilitates the
continuation of national dialogue and reconciliation, actively assists in
strengthening democratic institutions and conflict prevention mechanisms, promotes
the rule of law and contributes to building national capacity in the area of human
rights.
During the past five years of peacebuilding, Tajik society has come along way
in healing the wounds of civil war. However, much remains to be done in
strengthening national unity and consolidating peace. To this end, in 2004, UNTOP,
in cooperation with the central and local authorities, organized eight political
discussion club sessions in all regions of the country. More than 1,000 government
officials, political party activists and representatives of civil society participated in
the sessions, which fostered new forms of social partnership between the
Government and civil society, with the effect of making local government more
transparent and accountable to citizens. The sessions enabled political parties to
present their platforms during the pre-electoral period and brought about the
adoption of amendments to Tajik electoral law that are more in accord with
international standards. UNTOP continued to play a unique role of quiet facilitation,
particularly on the most delicate and contentious of issues.
At the recommendation of a United Nations Electoral Needs Assessment
Mission, UNTOP developed and supervised the implementation of a technical
assistance project for the parliamentary elections of February 2005. More than
13,000 poll workers and 300 district election commissioners were trained in
electoral procedures across all 41 districts of Tajikistan, while more than 250 local
media representatives were briefed on electoral procedures and relevant laws. The
project was the most substantial input to strengthening the national electoral
administration since the country attained independence in 1991.

05-34929 (E) 190505

*0534929*

S/2005/323

With a view to building national capacity in conflict prevention, UNTOP
organized the training of 20 Tajik instructors who, in turn, prepared more than 220
local government officials, political party activists, media representatives and
community leaders in the effective application of conflict prevention and resolution
mechanisms.
To strengthen respect for the rule of law, the Office facilitated the reform and
transition of national law enforcement agencies to peacetime policing. UNTOP’s
civilian police and human rights advisers organized training for staff of the Ministry
of the Interior in human rights standards, forensic techniques and modern practices
in law enforcement, arranging under one project the preparation of 40 instructors
from the Ministry of the Interior, who trained 1,080 staff of the Ministry throughout
the country. The Office also provided technical assistance and study courses for staff
of the Ministry in police academies of Eastern European countries.
In the field of human rights, UNTOP assisted in building national capacities in
treaty reporting and implementation, legal protection for citizens and human rights
awareness. The Office facilitated the preparation of national reports on the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination; the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women; the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment; and both International Covenants on Human Rights. The preparation of
the reports fostered dialogue and cooperation between the Government, nongovernmental organizations and civil society.
UNTOP supported the Government in implementing treaty obligations through
the reform of national legislation and, in cooperation with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, strengthening human rights
standards and adherence to them in the judiciary and the civil service. In addition to
coordinating human rights activities among local and international actors in
Tajikistan, the Office closely monitored human rights developments in the country
and advised the authorities on politically sensitive cases.
In view of the important and very positive role being played by UNTOP, as
well as the country’s continuing need for support in its post-conflict peacebuilding
efforts, and in response to the request of the Government of Tajikistan, it is my
intention to continue the activities of UNTOP for a further period of one year, until
1 June 2006.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2
