General Assembly-Twenty-first Se111ion

72

the phosphate industry to the Nauruan pe~ple and take
immediate steps, irrespective of the cost mv<;>lv~d, towards restoring the island of Nauru for habita bon by
the N auruan people as a sovereign nation.
1500th plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.

2227 (XXI). Question of Papua and the Trust
Territory of New Guinea
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Trusteeship
Council covering the period from 1 July 1965 to 26
July 1%6,19
Having considered the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situa~ion with regard ~o. the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Grantmg of
lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples ~elating to the Territory of Papua and the Trust Terntory
of N ew Guinea, 20
Recalling the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV)
of 14 December 1960,
Recalling further its resolution 2112 (XX) of 21
December 1%5,
N oting with grave concern the discriminatory practices in the Territories,
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Papua and New Guinea to self-determination and independence in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) ;
2. Deplores the failure of the administering Power
to implement General Assembly resolution 2112 (XX);
3. Calls upon the administering Power to implement
fully resolution 1514 (XV) and to inform the Trusteeship• Council at its thirty-fourth session and the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples of
the action taken in this regard ;
4. Calls upon the administering Power to implement the following measures :
(a) Removal of all discriminatory electoral qualifications;
( b) Abolition of all discriminatory practices in the
economic, social, health and educational fields ;

(e) Holding of elections on the basis of universal
adult suffrage with a view to transferring power to the
people of the Territories;
( d) Fixing oí an early date for independence;

5. Further calls upan the administering Power to
refrain from utilizing the Territories for military activities incompatible with the Charter of the United
Nations;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to the administering Power.

1500th plenary meeting,
20 Deceinber 1966.
Twenty-first Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/6304).
Twenty-first Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda
itero 23 (A/6300/Rev.1), chapter XIX.

2228 (XXI). Question of French Somaliland
The General Assembly,
Having cansidered the question of French Somaliland (Djibouti),
Recalling' its resolution 1514 oí 14 Decemher 1960
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
H aving cansidered the chapter oí the report oí the
Special Committee on the Situa_tion with regard _to the
Implementation oí the Declaration on the Grantmg oí
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to French Somaliland (Djib01=1ti), 21
Nating the decision taken by the Assembly oí Heads
of State and Govemment of the Organization of African Unity at its third ordinary session, held at Addis
Ababa from 5 to 9 November 1966,
Having nated the recent political developments in
the Territory and the subsequent announcement ~ade
by the administering Power that a referendum wtll be
held in the Territory before July 1967 to enahle the
people to decide their political future,
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people oí
French Somaliland (Djibouti) to self-determination
and independence in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Calls upan the administering Power to ensure
that the right of self-determination shall be freely expressed and exercised by the indigenous inhabitants oí
the Territory on the basis of universal adult suffrage
and with full respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms;
3. Urges the administering Power to create a proper
political climate for a referendum to be conducted on
an entirely free and democratic basis;
4. Requests the administering Power, in consultation
with the Secretary-General, to make appropriate arrangements for a United Nations presence before, and
supervision during, the holding of the referendum;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
text of the present resolution to the administering
Power and to report on its implementation to the Special Committee on the Sitttation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
6. Decides to retain the question of French Somaliland (Djibouti) on its agenda.
1500th plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.
2229 (XXI). Question of Ifni and Spanish Sabara
The General Assembly,
Having e.xamined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territories of Ifni and Spanish Sahara, 22
H aving taken note of the oral and written statements
of the petitioners from Spanish Sabara,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Imlependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,

19 Jbid.,

20 /bid.,

21 Jbid., chapter XII.
22 Jbid., chapter X.
