‘12
SECOND
Held

DEUXlEME

MEETING

at Church House,
on Friday,

Westminster,
London,
25 January 1946, at 3 p.m.

President: Mr. N. J. 0. MAXIN

SEANCE

‘Tenue d Church House, Westminster, Lo’ndresz
Ze vendredi 25 janvier 1946, 2 15 heures.
Prksident:

(Australia).

M. N. J. 0. MAKIN

(Australie)

9

Present: The representatives of the following
Brazil,
China, Egypt,
countries : Australia,
France, Mexico, Netherlands, Poland, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom,
United States of America.

P&vats: Les representants des pays suivants :
Australie,
BrCsil, Chine,
Egypt%
France,
Mexique, Pays-Bas, Pologne, Union des lRCP:bliques socialistes sovietiques, Royaume-Ur&
Etats-Unis d’AmCrique.

8.

8.

Adoption

of directive
to the Military
to meet at a given
and date’

Adoption
d’instructions
relatives
a?
lieu et B la date auxquels
le Cmife
d’dtat-major
devra se r6unirl

Staff Committee

place

The PRESIDENT:
We will proceed with the
consideration of item 8 of the agenda.’ Has any
member of the Council a resolution to propose
regarding item 8, the directive to the Military
Staff Committee? Then I take it there is no objection to the adoption of item 8 of the agenda.
Mr. STETTINIUS (United States of America) :
I move the adoption of the draft directive calling
on the Military
Staff Committee
to meet in
London prior to 1 February.
The PRESIDENT: You have heard the recommendation made by the representative of the
United States of America. Are there any observations that any member would wish to make?
Mr, BEVIN (United
resolution.

Kingdom)

: I second the

T&J-

Le

PRESIDENT

(traduit

id*

de Z’anglais) : Nous

allons passer B l’examen du point 8 de l’ordre du
* *. L’un des membres du Conseil a-t-i1 des
prpositions a faire sur ce point 8, concernant les
instructions au ComitC d’Ctat-major?
I1 n’y a
done aucune objection a l’adoption du point 8.
M. STETTINIUS (Eta%Unis d’AmCrique:l (&aduit de Z’anglais) : Je propose d’adopter le projet
d’instructions suivant lequel le Cornit
d’&atmajor se reunira a Londres avant le ler fevrier.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de Z’anglais) : Qut=Iqu’un a-t-il des observations B presenter sur Ia
proposition que vient de faire le representant:
des Etats-Unis?
M. BEVIN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit
glais) : J’appuie cette proposition.

de Z’an-

The PRESIDENT: I take it that the resolution
is acceptable to the Council?

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de Z’anglais) : Le
Conseil est-il pr&t a accepter cette proposition:?

Mr. VYSHINSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian) : I wish
to inform the Security Council that the Soviet
Government has appointed the following three
persons as its representatives on the Military Staff
Committee : Lieutenant-General
Vasiliev, ViceAdmiral Bogdenko, and Major-General
of Aviation Sharapov,

M. VYCHINSKY (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques)
(traduit du russe) : Jc
voudrais porter ii la connaissance du Conseil cle
sbcurite que le Gouvernement
sovittique
a
design& pour le rep&enter
au ComitC d’etatmajor : le lieutenant-gCnCral
Vassiliev, le viceamiral Bogdenko et le major-general
d’aviation
Charapov.

According to my information, they should arrive in London by about 1 February, I would
therefore ask for the first meeting to be called
immediately after the lst, on 2 or 3 February,
if they do not arrive in London before 1 Febru.. ary. If on the other hand they arrive by the lst,
there would be no objection on our part to a
meeting on that date.

11 m’a CtC communique que ces reprtsentant+c3
pourront
&tre a Londres aux environs du
ler fivrier. C’est pourquoi je vous demandera&
de prevoir que la premiere seance se tienne aussit8t aprb le ler fevrier, par exemple le 2 ou le 3 ;
ceci Cvidemment au cas ou ils ne seraient pas arriVCSa Londres d’ici le ler fevrier. Si, par centre,
nos representants arrivaient avant cette date, nous
ne verrions, pour notre part, aucune objection g
ce que la reunion ait lieu le ler fevrier.

The PRESIDENT:
Has any other member of
the Council any observations to make in regard
to the item that is the subject of consideration?
You have heard the submission by the representative of the United States of America. Does
the Council agree now to vote upon the matter?

Le PRSSDENT (traduit de Z’anglais) : D’au&CS
membres du Conseil ont-ils des observations &
faire sur la question que nous examinons? Vous
avez entendu la proposition du repr&entant des
Etats-Unis d’Am&ique.
Le Conseil est-il :pr$t $
voter maintenant sur ce point?

Mr. BEYIN (United Kingdom) : I should like
to ask whether it is not possible to get them here

M. BEVIN (Royaume-Uni)
glais) : Je voudrais demander

‘See Oficial
Records
of the Security
Council,
First
Year, First Series, Supplement No. 1; Annex 1, a, section 3.
‘For the agenda for the first meetings, see pages 1
and 2.

Premibe
Ann&e, Premi&re SCrie, SupplCment No 11
Annexe la, section 3.
* Ordre du jour des premibes slances, voir pages 1
et 2.

‘Voir

Procks-vsrbaux

oficiels

du

(traduit

de Z’an-

s’il ne serait pas
Conseil

de s,[curitd

.

Z1

,

13
by 1 February; or, if they have got to conside]
organizational
problems arising under this par
of the Charter, I wonder whether they would bc
able to do it and report before the conference
finishes. I should hope that the Union of Sovie
Socialist Republics would get its representative:
here by 1 February.

possible que les officiers soviCtiques arrivent ici
pour le ler fevrier; ou, si le Comid doit Ctudier
les probEmes d’organisation
PO& par cette partie de la Charte, aura-t-i1 assez de temps pour le
faire et pour pr&enter son rapport avant la fin
de la session? Pour ma part, je souhaite que les
reprCsentants de I’Union
des R6publiques socialistes sovittiques puissent arriver ici avant le
1er ftvrier.

The PRESIDENT:
I would point out to the
representative of the United Kingdom that there
is no conference actually; this Council is in per
manent session.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l’anglais) : Je ferai
observer au reprhsentant du Royaume-Uni
qu’il
n’y a pas de fin de session; le Conseil de stcuritt
siege de faGon permanente.

Mr. Wellington
Koo (China) : The Chinese
Government
has appointed
General
Shang
Chen, Chief of Staff to the Generalissimo,
ELI
its representative on the Military
Staff Committee. He will be accompanied by military, naval
and air advisers. They left on 23 January, and
there is every reason to expect that they will
arrive before 1 February.
As regards the date, therefore, we are quite
ready to accept 1 February; but, in view of the
possibility that the USSR representatives
may
arrive just on that day, I wondered whether or
not we could amend the proposa1 of the United
States representative
by making it “not later
than 2 February”.
That, perhaps, would meet
the possibility that the Soviet representatives may
arrive too late for a meeting on 1 February, a
possibility which, of course, ‘may not materialize.
We should then be able to meet on 1 February
if they had arrived, and, if not, on 2 February.

M. Wellington
Koo (Chine)
(traduit de
1’anglais) : Le Gouvernement
chinois a d&ignt,
pour le rep&enter
a ce ComitC d’Ctat-major, le
gCn&al Shang Chen, chef d’etat-major g&rCral,
qui sera accompagnt
de conseillers militaires,
navals et de l’air. Cette dtlc5gation a quitttc la
Chine le 23 janvier et dcvrait normalement arri‘ver avant le ler fCvrier.
.
La date du ler fCvrier nous convient done
parfaitement;
mais comme”i1 est possible que les
reprtsentants sovietiques arrivent juste ce jour&,
je me demandais si nous ne pourrions pas modifier
la proposition
du reprtsentant
des Etats-Unis
d’AmCrique dans les termes suivants: “pas plus
tard que le 2 fevrier”. Cela nom permettrait de
tenir compte d’un retard possible de la delCgation sovietique pour une rCunion le ler; au cas
oii ils arriveraient a temps, la rtunion pourrait
avoir Iieu le ler; sinon, le 2.

Mr. PAUL-B• NCOUR (France)
(&n&&d
from Prencb) : The French delegation very willingly accepts the suggested date of 1 February.
We shall submit the names of our military
experts later.

M. PAUL-B• NCOUR (France) : La diltgation
fransaise accepte tres volontiers la date indiquCe
du ler fgvrier. Nous communiquerons
ult&ieurement le nom de nos experts militaires.

Mr. STETTINIU~
(United States of America) :
If it so happens that the military representatives
of the USSR do not arrive by 1 February, of
course they may ask for an adjournment
of a
day, but I think it would be best that we agree
that our target date be 1 February.

M. STETTINIUS
(Etats-Unis
d’Amtrique)
(traduit de Panglais) : Si les dClCguCsmilitaires de
1’Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques ne
sont pas arrivts le ler fCvrier, ils pourront &videmment demander de retarder la r6union d’un
jour. Mais je trouve prCfCrable que nous convenions de faire en sorte que la rCunion ait lieu le
1er fevrier.

Mr. VYSHINSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics)
(translated from Russian) : Subject
to a postponement of a day or two if our representatives do not arrive in time, I agree that the
meeting be called for 1 February. For my part
I will today take all possible measures to, ensure
their arrival here by 1 February, but weather
conditions between Moscow and London are
sometimes unfavourable.

M. VYCHINSKY
(Union des Rtpubliques socialistes sovittiques)
(traduit du russe) : Je veux
bien que la seance se tienne le ler fevrier, mais
a condition qu’elle soit ajournCe d’un ou deux
fours, au cas 0; nos repr&entants ne seraient
pas ici & cette date. Pour ma part, je fera&.d.&- aujourd’hui,
tout mon possible, pour qu’ils puis;ent arriver vers le ler fkvrier, mais les condi:ions atmosphtriques
entre Moscou et Londres
;ont souvent dCfavorables.

Mr. BEVIN (United Kingdom)
: I think I can
assure the representative of the USSR that the
British Government
will do its best to dispel the
fog before 1 February.

M. BEVIN (Royaume-Uni)
.(truduit de 1Jun$ais) : Je puis assurer le repr&entant de 1’Union
les REpubliques
socialistes sovittiques que le
:ouvernement
britannique
fera tout en son
jouvoir pour disperser le brouillard
d’ici au
er f&riei.

k

A

Mr. VYSHINSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics)
(translated
from Russian) : And, I
hope that the British Government will make the

M. VYUHINSKY
(Union des R~publiques~,~~~~~~~~~
ialistes sovi&iques) (&a&it
du rz&],
w le Gouvernement
@-&-y@jy,
‘I ,,“.,b$,*

-+-%!I/

14

greatest effort, because, as is widely
London has more fogs.
Mr. BEGUN (United
otherwise.

Kingdom)

known,

: Political

qui est en son pouvoir, car, ainsi que nous le
savons tous, c’est ;i Londres que les brouillards
sont le plus frCquents.
M. BWIN

and

(Royaume-Uni)
politiques

glais) : Brouillards

(traduit

de ran-

et autres.

The PRESIDENT: I take it that the proposal
of the representative of the United States of
America is, therefore, adopted.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de Panglais) : Jc:SUPpose que la proposition prCsentte par le rep+
sentant des Etats-Unis d’Amtrique
est adopt&e.

The directive to the Military Staff Committee
to meet in London before I February was
adopted.

La proposition conuoquant le Comitk d’ktatmajor d Londres avant le Ier fkvrier, pour sa
premie‘re rkunion, est adoptke.

9.

9.

Discussion of the composition and Organization of the staff to be assigned to
the Security Council under the Charter,
Article 101, paragraphs 1 and 2

The PRESIDENT:
Until such time as the appointment
of the Secretary-General has been
dealt with, it might be desirable to. defer consideration of item 9 of the agenda. If there are
no objections I shall, therefore, defer consideration of item 9 until a later time.

Consideration of item 9 was deferred.

DQlib&ation
relative 6 la composition
et ir I’organisation
du personnel
b
affecter au Conseil de skurit6 ~U>C termes de la Charte, Article
101, paragraphes 1 et 2

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de Panglais) : 11 se&
je crois, p&f&able
d’ajourner I’examen de co
point, jusqu’au moment oti le Secrttaire g&6
ral aura ttt dCsignt. Si personne n’y voit d’inje remettrai
done ?t plus tard
conv&ient,
I’examen du point 9.
L’examen du point 9 est difdrk.
.

10.

_.

Discussion of the best means of arriving at the conclusion of the special
agreements referred to in the Charter,
Article 43

10.

DQliMration
sur les meillewrs moyerrs
& employer pour aboutir a la concllusion deo accords spiciaux
vis6s dans
la Charte, Article 43

The PRESIDENT: Item 10 is one that concerns
the Military Staff Committee. I would ask members of the Council whether they may. not feel it
desirable that we should deal with item 10 as we
have done with item 9, that is, defer it until a
later time when the Military
Staff Committee
may possibly have met.

Le PRBNDENT
(traduit de Panglais) : Le
point 10 de I’ordre du jour concerne le Cornit
d’etat-major, et je desire suggCrer au Conseil qu’il
serait peut-&tre preferable que nous procCidions
pour le point 10 comme pour\ le point 9, c’estA-dire que nous en ajournions l’examen jusqu’&
ce que le ComitC d&at-major
se soit rCuni.

Mr. KEVIN (United Kingdom) : Would not
the Military Staff Committee need some guidance from the Council?

M. BEVIN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de Z’anglais) : Le ComitC d’Ctat-major aurait petit-&tre
besoin de recevoir des directives du Conseil de
sCcuritC?

Mr. STETTINIUS
(United States of America) :
I feel that it is extremely premature for the
Council to deal with this matter before the Military Staff Committee is organized. I think it
should organize itself, and the various delegations will obviously want to have conferences
with their own military representatives. Perhaps
at a later meeting of the Council we shall wish
to discuss the matter here, certainly on policy
questions, but I do not think there is anything to
be gained by discussion of this subject at today’s
meeting.

M. STETTINIUS (Etats-Unis)
(traduit de Panglais) : 11 serait, a mon avis, t&s prtmatur6
de
discuter cette question au Conseil de s&urit~,
avant que le Comitt d&at-major
ne soit constit&. J’estime que ce Comid devrait s’organiser
lui-m&me, et les diverses dClCgations d&ireront
@videmment consulter leurs repr&entants
militaires. Nous voudrons peut-&re discuter cettc
question par la suite, et ce sera certainement le
cas pour les directives gCnCrales, mais je croia
que nous n’aurions aucun inttr&t a le faire maintenant.

The PRESIDENT: Does any other member of
the Council wish to speak? I take it, then, that
this item is deferred until a later time when it
may be the subject of further consideration by
the Council.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de Z’anglais) : Quelqu’un demande-t-il la parole? Je considkre done
que la discussion de ce point est ajournbe et
pourra &tre reprise au tours d’une shance ulttfrieure du Conseil.

Consideration of it&m !O was deferred.

L’examen du point 10 est diflkrk.

15
i
;s
”

11.

c
#>

Reception
and consideration
ports und recommendations
from the General
Assembly

of re(if any)

The PRESIDENT : With regard to item 11,
there are no reports to be considered at this stage,
:,I,,, *
)a
6$
y?,?
pi’ ” 12. Consideration
of the submission
of a
$,
special report (if any1 to the General
)~ ti
Assembly
(Charter, Article 24, paraI;,
graph 3)
i6’
The PRESIDENT:
With regard to item 12 of.
the agenda, there is nothing for the moment that
we have to submit to the General Assembly in
any special report.
13.

Election
national
Articles

of the members
of the BnterCourt
of Justice
(Statute,
4, 7 to 12, 14)

The PRESIDENT: With regard to item 13 of
*
the agenda, the Council may desire to leave this
I,
item until a later stage of our meetings. Are
ifl~ there any observations that anybody wishes to
r/
I’ ,, make in regard to the proposal to defer this item
;,,
until a later time?
is,,*,
1“11
y
$‘C
BADAWI Pasha (Egypt) : I think it should be
!$;~ dealt with at the same time as it is brought
,i’
‘,), before the General Assembly.
s+$
t*
),,/’,’
:&$*
I believe, also, that the Pre‘_, The PRESIDENT:
?,”
;z:_ paratory Commission requested that it be left as
it!,, late as possible in our proceedings.
1“
I’”
I(
!!A
rig;‘):,,I
p8), I take it, therefore, that members are in agree‘,,” ment that this item should be left until a later
i,-”
;f, stage in our proceedings.
,,,?
;,A
Consideration of item 13 was deferred.
II
,“‘I
II6,
lp’
14. Communications
to the Security
i,
;/
Council
I
:
The PRESIDENT:
I bring to the notice of the
;,;,’ Council certain communications
that have been
IV
II received. I will take them in chronological order,
,s
%
f‘
G,,, as they have been received.
’%’
‘,‘~
The first one is a letter from the Head of the
[, ‘.I
r: Iranian delegation to Mr, Jebb$l The full text
y of this communication
is reported in the Journal.
t I All members of the Council, I presume, have
:” ,I,:, received a copy and have duly noted it.
I*,p<I
:
The second one is a letter, addressed to myself,
;I’ from the Acting Head of the USSR delegation,
4, regarding the question of the situation in Greeceea
f:,r
addressed to
LyL The third is a communication,
i; ‘”
L‘,‘, (,
;?$:h;

‘See O@iti+ Rsoordz of the Security Couticil, First
B; Year, First Series,SupplementNo. 1; Annex 2A,

11.

RBception et examen des rapports et
recommandations
Bmanant (6ventueL
lement) de I’AssembMe
g&n&ale

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de Vanglais) : 11 n’y
a pas jusqu’a present de rapport B examiner en
ce qui concerne le point 11. ~
12.

Question de savoir s’il y a lieu de
soumettre
(6ventuellement)
wn rapport spkial
b I’Assembl&
g&&rate
(Charte, Article 24, parqgraphe
3)

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l’anglais) : En ce
qui concerne le point 12 de l’ordre du jour,
nous n’avons pas, pour It moment, matikre a
faire un rapport special a l’AssemblCe g&&ale.
13.

Election des membres
de la Cour
internationafle
de Justice (Articles 4,
7 B 12 et 14 du Statut)

Le PRI~DENT (traduit de Z’angluis) : Pour ce
qui est du point 13 de l’ordre du jour, le Conseil
desirera peut-8tre en ajourner l’examen jusqu’a
une pCriode ultCrieure de nos reunions. Quelqu’un d&ire-t-i1 prendre la parole sur cette proposition d’ajournement?
BADAWI Pacha (Egypte)
(traduit de l’ang&s) : J’estime que nous devrions traiter ce point
au moment de le dtf6rer a 1’Assemblc’e g&r&ale.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l’anglais) : Je crois
Cgalement que la Commission priparatoire
a
recommandt que nous nous occupions de ces
elections le plus tard possible.
Je considere, par con&quent, que le Conseil’
de s&urite accepte que nous remettions a plus
tard l’examen de cette question.
L’exnmen du koint 13 est difkrk.

14.

Communications
aclress6es au Conseil
de s6curit6

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l’anglais) : Je voudrais maintenant attirer l’attention du Con&l
de stcurite sur un certain nombre de communications qui nous sont parvenues. Je vais les passer en revue dans l’ordre chronologique de leur
arrivCe.
La premiere est une lettre adressCe par le chef
de la d&g&ion
de I’Iran a M. Jebbl; It texte
complet de cette lettre a et& public dans. le
,/ournal, dont je suppose que tous Ies membres
du Conseil ont reGu copie, et ont pris dament
connaissance.
La seconde est un lettre que m’a adresste le
chef par interim de la d6lCgation de I’URSS,
relativement a la situation en Gr&ce’.

3

16
myself, that I have received from ‘the Head of
the delegation of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic dealing with the situation in Indo1 Pd’
nesia.l
There has also been distributed to members of
the ‘Council a letter that has been received from
the Head of the USSR delegation in reply to the
first communication from the Iranian Government.’
Taking now the first in order, the letter which
has been received from the Iranian delegation
and the reply to this letter, I should like to ask
whether it is the pleasure of the Council that this
item shall be* included in the agenda of the
Council. Are there any observations to be made
in regard to the question of the inclusion of this
item in the agenda. of the Security Council?
I take it that, ‘since there are no objections,
this item is included in the agenda of the Security
colmcil.

de la d&gation
de IUkraine,
situation en Indontsiel.

concer~:a~~t

12X

Les membres du Conseil ont egalement
r%U
le texte d’une reponse, faite par le chef & &
delegation de I’URSS a la communioatian
Gouvernement de l’Iran2.
Comrnensons par la premi&re de ces comlnu*
nications, c’est-a-dire’ la lettre de la dClEgati~~~
de I’Iran et la reponse a cette lettre. Je den~t~~~cle
au Conseil de stcuriti: s’il est d’avis de porter cc:
point a son ordre du jour. Quelqu’un
a-t-i1 de3
observations a presenter sur la misc Q l’ordrc dtl
jour de ce point?
Puisque personne ne fait d’objection,
je cons&
d&e clue ce point est inscrit a l’ordre du jaur dtr
Conseil de sCcuritC.
Le point est ins&t It l’ordre du jour.

The item was included in the agenda.
Mr. VYSI-IINSXY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian) : There is
one point I would like to clarify: that is the inclusion of the Iranian question in the Security
Council’s agenda. Does this mean consideration
of the substance of the question or discussion as
to whether it should come before the Council
at all?

M, VYCHINSKY (Union des Republiqws
sC)cialistes sovietiques (traduit du rum) : 11 Y a 1~x1
point que je voudrais Cclaircir : I’inscription
de la
question iranienne a l’ordre du jour du Con+%il de
securite signifie-t-elle que la discussion porter&
sur le fond de la question, ou bien tout simph~ent
sur le point de savoir si le Conseil doit otl MOT]
examiner la question?

If this item is placed on the agenda so that
we may discuss whether the question should be
considered, then I have no objection to its inclusion on the agenda for the next meeting, I
should like to explain my reasons. The Soviet
delegation, on the authority of the Soviet Government has put forward reasons proving that
’ the statement of the Iranian Government should
not be considered by the Security Council.
It therefore seems to me that we should, in the
first place, thoroughly discuss this matter, and,
as the Chairman suggests, the Soviet delegation
should in any case have the opportunity at the
next meeting of putting forward its reasons why
this question should not be considered by the
Security Council.

AU cas on ce point serait inscrit 3, l’ordrc dtt
jour, nous aurions settlement a decider s’il &lit
faire l’objet de notre examen; je ne verrais IXW
alors d’objection a ce qu’il figurPt 2~ l’ordrc d~1
jour de la prochaine seance. Je voudrais expliqwer
mes raisons. ConformCment aux instruction
da1
Gouvernement sovietique, la dClCgation sovib
tique a expost son point de vue a ce sujet; noes
estimons que le Conseil ne doit pas examiners la
dCclaration du Gouvernement iranien.
C’est pourquoi je crois qu’il faut tout d’abord
discuter a fond cette affaire et comme le sugg&rc
le President, la delegation sovietique aura, Xars
de la prochaine sCance, l’occasion de vous SOW
mettre ses observations tendant a prouver qul:
le Conseil de, sCcuritC n’a pas i examiner certc
question.

The PRESIDENT: In answer to the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
I should like to say that the inclusion of the item
in thii agenda does give an opportunity for the
Council to have a discussion, and that the USSR
could, at the initial stage of that discussion, make
such proposal as it might think proper. The inelusion would not deny to the USSR representative the opportunity of being able to move in
whatever direction he might wish.

Le ‘+~DENT
(traduit de Panglais) : ‘Je rcfpondral au representant de 1’Union des R$ubliques socialistes sovietiques que, du fait m&mcr.
que ce point est mis & l’ordre du jour, le Con&i
de securiti: aura l’occasion de le d&utcr,
La delegation de I’URSS pourra done, an &&tt
$e la discussion, faire toute proposition
qu’cllc
Jugera utile, et cette inscription
a l’ordro
dbl
jour n’emp&chera aucunement le represent,znt
de 1’URSS de discuter dans le sens qu’il voudra,

Mr. KEVIN (United Kingdom) : I am very
anxious, in all these cases, that complainants
should be heard by the Council, whoever they
may be. I think it is a mistake if a Government
feels that, having a complaint against another

M. BEVIN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de l’arrglais) : Je serais tres dbireux que, clans tous lm
cas en question, le Conseil entende les Etats plaignants, quels qu’ils soient. I1 serait regrettable
a man avis, qu’un Gouvernement
qui a u&

’ SCC O$‘icial

RecorL

of

Year, First Series, Supplement

the

Security

Council,

No. 1; Annex 4.

‘Ibid., Supplement No. 1; Annex 2A.

First

’ Vpir Pro&-uerbaux.
oficiels
du Conseil
de ~.~~u~itd
:;‘r:~~
Ann&e, Premdre Shie, Supplhment
No 1 ”
’ Ibid.,

‘SupplCment No 1; Annexc 2A.

17

Power, whether it be great or small, it canny It.

come to this Council and state its case, Whil .e
the Government
I represent has been include, d
in subsequent charges of endangering peace, iln
so far as I am principally responsible or at leasit
my Government is principally responsible, in th e
case of Greece, I shall offer no objection to th,e
fullest investigation
and discussion. In fact, I
am so tired of these charges made by the GOV‘ernment of the Union of Soviet Socialist Repub ,lies in private assembly that no one will bc:
happier than I shall be to see them brought ou t
into the open and to see that the British Govern
merit has a. chance to clear its conduct in con.
nexion with this country.

plainte A p&enter centre tine autre P ’
grande ou petite, ne se croie pas auto
exposer son cas devant ce Conseil. Bien que le
Gouvernement que je reprCsente soit de eeux
que l’on a accusts par la suite d’avoir mena&
la paix, dans la mesure oli. je suis ou du maim
dam laquelle mon Gouvemement est particuIi&rcmerit mis en cause, c’est-a-dire, dans l’aff’airc
de G&e, je ne presente aucune objection i cc
qu’on procede a l’enquc?te et 4 la discus&n la
plus approfondie. De fait, je suis si fatigue d’entendre le Gouvernement de I’URSS porter ces
accusations dans les Anions prides, que personne ne sera plus heureux que moi de lea voir
discuter en public et de savoir que le Gouvernement britannique aura l’occasion de justifier sa
conduite a l’tgard de ce pays.

If there is a complaint by the Iranian Gov.
ernment against the Government of the USSR
then I think that the Iranian Government shoulc
be given a chance to come to the table and stat<
its case. Then we should be in a position to judge
whether or not its case is justified. I would like
it to go on the agenda, and to have a discussior
in the open, because I believe that peace depend!
upon bringing these facts out before the world,
whether they are right or whether they arc
wrong.

Si le Gouvernement de 1’Irarr a tine plainte
A Porter centre le Gouvernement de l*IJRSS
j’estime qu’il devrait avoir le droit de v,&
exposer son cas devant le Conseil, et que nous
devrions pouvoir juger si sa rtchunation eat ju+.
tifike ou non: Je desire que cette question soit
mise g l’ordre du jour et discutCe ouvertement,
car je suis d’avis qu’il est nCcess,aireau m&tia
de la paix de porter a la connaissance du monde
entier toute plainte de ce genre, qu’elle soit jm&
fite ou non.

With regard to Indonesia, that is primarily a
matter for the Dutch Government. There is a
situation in which we are clearing up a condition arising out of the war, of disarming Japanese who have trained a crowd of people whc
are mainly fascists and who are resisting the disarming of the Japanese soldiers and following a
policy which is on a rather different footing.
That is a situation which must be argued by the
Government primarily responsible.

Quant a la question de l’Indon&e,
elle in&
resse principalement Ie Gouvemement des PaysBas. La situation dam ce pays est la suivante:
nous avons a liquider un &at de chases r&&ant
de la guerre, c’est-Mire a dtsatmer les Japonais
qui ont endoctrine des masses pop&&,
pour
la plupart fascistes, s’opposant au dbarmexnent
des soldats japonais, et dont la politique suit une
direction tout opposte, C’est une situation qui
doit &tre discutee par le Gouvemement dent la
:esponsabilitC est principalement engag6e.

The PRESIDENT: I am reluctant to intervene,
but I should like to suggest to the representative
of the United Kingdom that, at the moment,
there is no item which makes his remarks quite
regular.

Le PRESIDENT (trnduit de Panghis) : J”h&te
.m peu B intervenir, mais je voudrais faire renarquer au representant du Royaume-Uni que,
aour le moment, la question que nous discutons
;e contient rien qui justifie vraiment
memarques.
La question dont il s’agit, et qui avait I%
;oumise par la delegation de l’URSS, concerne
a procgdure a suivre relativement au pmt
lue nous venons de porter A l’ordre du jm.
>ette inscription A l’ordre du jour a it4 sfh
rdoptie. J’allais ens&e VOW SOI.unettre
Ie
leuxieme point, qui traite, bien entendu, de h
,lainte relative a la Grece. Je puis mdntez=nt
oumettre cette question au Conse& et
emarques du reprCsentant du Royaumeser&nt alors tout A fait pertinent,.
M. BEG (Royaume-Uni)
(tr~dait da
Je voudrais savoir ce qui a ak dk

The last question was by the USSR delegation with regard to the procedure to be adopted
relating to the item that has just been included
in the agenda. That had already been carried.
I was now going to proceed with the submission
of the second item, which, of course, is the item.
dealing with the complaint
with respect to
Greece. I can submit that now to the Council,
and the remarks of the representative of the
United Kingdom then would be strictly in order.
Mr. BEVIN (United Kingdom) : But I should
like to know what has been carried.
The PRESIDENT:
I submitted to the Council
that the matter contained in the letter from the
Iranian delegation should be included as an item
in the agenda of this Council, I asked for such
comment as the Council might have, and it will
be remembered that I indicated, after a slight
lapse of time, that the item had been carried

1%
Subsequently, the Head of the Soviet delegation sub&ted
to me a question in regard to
whether it would have the right to be able to
express its views upon this particular matter, and
to take such action as it might wish when the
matter is discussed or brought forward to the
councl
1 indicated that the delegation would
have a full opportunity of offering such observations as it might wish and moving in such way
as it @$t feel best served its own views of the
matter.
That is how the matter rests, Mr. Bevin.

Le chef de la d&gation
de I’URSS a posd
ensuite la question de savoir si sa delCgatiox~
aurait le droit d’exprimer son point de vue SU:T
la question, et de proceder en toute libertt d’action, lors de la discussion ou de l’examen de cettrg
affaire par le Conseil de stScurit6. Je lul al
rtpondu que la delegation aurait toute libert& dcz
presenter les observations qu’elle jugerait n&es,saires et d’adopter toute ligne de conduite qu’if
lui semblerait utile.

Mr. STETTINIUS (United States of America) :
1 think the situation would be clarified in all our
minds if we could agree on the question of these
cases being put on the agenda for discussion at
the next meeting of the Council.

M. STETTINIUS (Etats-Unis
d’Am6rique 21
(traduit de Z’anglais) : Je crois que la situatiorl
serait plus Claire dans notre esprit a tous si nou:3
pouvions nous mettre d’accord sur l’inscription
de ces questions a l’ordre du jour de la prochainc=
stance du Conseil.

While I am speaking, I wish to make very
clear that the United States Government believes
that any Member country of the United Nations
which makes a complaint has a right to be heard
at this table.

Je tiens Cgalement B sptcifier nettement iei
que le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis d’Amtriqucz
estime que tout Membre des Nations Unies qu:i
a une plainte a presenter a le droit de prendrcz
la parole devant ce Conseil.

The PRESIDENT: The representative of the
United States of America has submitted that
each of these items that have been received-the
correspondence from the delegation of Iran,
from the delegation of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and from the delegation of the
Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic-should
be
listed as items on the agenda for consideration
at the next meeting,

Le PRESIDENT (traduit
de Z’angluis) : lk
representant des Etats-Unis d’Am&ique
propose::
que les trois points qui nous ont &IX? souti,,
c’est-a-dire les communications
adressees par I=3
delegations respectives de l’l’ran, de 1’Union dezzg
RCpubliques socialistes sovietiques et de la RBpu-blique socialiste sovietique d’ukraine,
soient ins+
crits B l’ordre du jour de la prochaine stance.

Mr. STETTINIUS (United
I make that motion.

M. STETTINIUS ( Etats-Unis
d’AmCrique: )
(truduit de Z’ungluis) : Je fais cette proposition.
BADAWI Pacha (Egypte)
(traduit
de Van-glais) : Je desire attirer votre attention
sU1:
PArticle 31 de la Charte relatif au Conseil de:
qu:i
sCcurit.6 : “Tout membre de l’organisation
n’est pas membre du Conseil de securite, peui::
participer, sans droit de vote, a la discussion de:
toute question soumise au Conseil de securitd:,
chaque fois que celui-ci estime que les intt%m
de ce Membre sont particulierement
aff ectes.”
A plus forte raison doit-il en 2tre ainsi quan&L
la question presentte au Conseil a 6th prCcisd-ment prCsentCe sur la demande d’un Membre:
des Nations Unies. Dans ce cas, la participationt
aux debats du Conseil aurait certainement beau-coup plus de raison d’Qtre que dans le cas prt?vut
par 1’Article 31, et la presence des Etats plai-gnants serait alors tout a fait necessaire.

States of America)

:

BADAWI Pasha (Egypt) : May I remark that
Article 31 of the Charter relating to the Security
Council states that “Any Member of the United
Nations which is not a member of the Security
Council may participate, without vote, in the
discussion of any question brought before the
Security Council whenever the latter considers
~~ct$$mere&
of that Member are specially

Surely, there is more reason when the question brought before the Council is brought before
it at the instance of a certain Member of the
United Nations. That would certainly be a case
much stronger than the one provided for by
Article 3 1, and the presence of such complaining
States would be considered as absolutely necesSWThe PRESIDENT: I was about to raise that
Particular point. If you remember, I made some
request to the representative of the United States
of America as to whether he wished’to have that
included in the resolution but that can be a
matter for subsequent decision by the Council.
1 shall now submit to the Council the resolution
which has been placed before the Council’ by the
rePresentative of the United States, that these
items shall be listed on the agenda of the. Council
and shall be the business for the next meeting
Of the Council.
,:,,sv”[
‘, ;‘S1,,
“>C,,
0 : ‘d,
I,,,’
$;>,“,:,;
““?,

Tel est exactement l’ttat
Monsieur Bevin.

actuel de la question,

Le PRPSJDENT (truduit de Z’anglais) : C’esl:
un point que j’allais soulever moi-m&me. Voual
vous souvenez peut-&tre que j’ai demand6 auk
repr&entant des Etats-Unis d’Am&ique
s’il d&i-.
rait que ce point fGt inclus dans la resolution.,
Mais nous pourrons nous prononcer plus tard &
ce sujet. Je vous soumets maintenant la proposi-.
tion, que nous a faite le repr&entant
des Etats-.
Unis d’AmCrique,
tendant a porter ces. troisr
points a l’ordre du jour du Conseil de sCcurit&
pour qu’il les examine au tours de la prochain::
stance.

19
Mr. VAN KLEFFENS (Netherlands) : The representative of ,the United Kingdom has just said
that a third question, the one referring to actions
of British and Japanese troops in Java, is primarily a question concerning the Netherlands
Government, which I have the honour to represent. I want to say that we, on our part, have
no objection to that question, as worded, being
included in the agenda of the next meeting.

M. VAN KLEFFENS (Pays-Bas) (traduit de
Pang&)
: Le reprdsentant du Royaume-Uni
a
dit tout a l’heure que la troisikme question, celie
qui est‘ relative aux activitts des troupes britanniques et japonaises B Java, int&resse surtout le
Gouvernement des Pays-Bas, que j’ai l’honneur
de rep&enter.
Je tiens a dire que, pour notre
part, nous ne faisons a’ucune objection & ce que
cette question, telle qu’elle est r&digCe, soit instrite A I’ordre du jour de notre prochaine &we.

Mr. VYSHINSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics)
(translated from Russian) : I should
like to avoid possible misunderstanding
with regard to procedure. Every Member of the United
Nations has undoubtedIy
the right to be heard
by the Security Council. I am raising no objection to that. I only wish to bring to the Security
Council’s notice that the mere fact of discussing
this or that complaint should not prejudice the
question as to whether or not the Security Council will consider the declaration under discussion.
That is what I wished to say.

M. VYCHINSKY
(Union
des RCpubliques
socialistes sovi&iques)
(traduit du russe) : Je
voudrais Cviter tout malentendu sur la question
de proddure.
IndiscutabIement,
tout Membre
des Nations Unies a le droit d’&tre entendu par
le Conseil de stcuritk. Je n’ai rien A objecter A
cela. Je voudrais simplement rappeler au Conseil
que le simple fait de discuter une plainte ou une
autre ne signifie pas nkessairement
que le
Conseil doive Ctudier la dtclaration en question.
C’est ce que j’ai voulu dire.

The PRESIDENT: I take it now that members
of the Council are agreed that these items should
be included in the agenda for the next meeting
of the Security Council? Does any member of
the Council wish to submit a subsequent resolution about the presence of . . .

Le PR~SXDENT (traduit de l’anglais) : Je crois
que le Conseil est. maintenant d’accord pour inscrire ces points 21I’ordre du jour de la prochaine
stance du Conseil de s&wit& Un membre du
Conseil a-t-il une autre proposition a soumettre
en ce qui concerne la prkence de . . ,

BADAWI Pasha [Egypt)
be moved. I move it.

BADAWI Pacha (Egypte)
(traduit de Yanglais) : Je pense quc c&i deirait &tre proposC, et
j’en fais la proposition.

Mr. STETTINIUS (United
What is the motion?

: I think

that should

States of America)

:

M. STETTINIUS
(Etats-Unis
(truduit de Z’anglnis) : Comment
proposition?

d’AmCrique)
se prksente la

BADAWI Pasha (Egypt) : That the States
which have presented complaints should be invited to part’lcipate in the work, in the sittings
of the Security Council.

BADAW~ Pacha (Egypte)
(traduit de Punglaz’s) : Que les Gouvernements qui ont formult
une plainte doivent &tre .invitCs a participer a
I’examen de la question aux sCances du Conseil
de stcurit&

The PRESIDENT: It will affect Iran, of course,
and may indirectly
affect Greece. The other
nations are, of course, represented on the Security Council,

Le PRUDENT
(traduit de Pangluis) : Ceci
concernera Cvidemment Wan et pourra concerner indirectement
la G&e. Les autres pays,
bien entendu, sont d&ja repr&ent& au Conseil de
sCcuritC.

Mr. BEVIN (United Kingdom) : In view of
the fact that Greece will be affected, and that
the State concerned has put no complaint, Greece
must be heard,

M. BEVIN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de Z’an,&is) : Puisque cela concerne la Gr&ce, et que
1’Etat intCress6 n’a pas dCpos6 de plainte, il y a
lieu d’entendre la G&e.

The PRESIDENT: Do I take it that the resolution made by the representative of Egypt is
adopted?
The resolution was adopted.
Mr, BEVIN (United Kingdom) : I am a Iittle
puzzled. Does that include Greece?

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de Panglais) : Puis-je
considgrer que la proposition que nous a soumise
le rcprt%entant de l’E&ypte est adoptbe?
La proposition est adopt&e.
M. BEMN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de Vanglais) : Je ne suis par sQr d’avoir t&s bien compris. Est-ce que cela comprend la ,Grtce?
Le PR&TDENT (traduit de Pan&s)
: Oui, La
proposition soumise par M. Stettinius englobait
toutes les communications
en question.
M. BEVIN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduz’t de Z’anglaris) : Merci beaucoup,

The PRESIDENT: Yes. Mr. Stettinius made a
comprehensive resolution covering all the items
in the correspondence.
Mr. BEWN (United Kingdom) : Thank you
very much.
The PRESIDENT: Now it will be necessary for
the- members of ‘the Council to determine the
date and time of’its next meeting.

,,

I

--.z
20

Mr. BEVIN (United Kingdom)
: There is one
point I want to put to you, Mr. President. I
assume that when the case is on the agenda and
we have heard it, it will then be subject to discussion. Is that clear?

M. BEVIN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de l’ang/a&) : J’ai une question a vous poser, Monsieur
le President. Je crois comprendre que, quand la
question aura CtC inscrite a l’ordre du jour, et
que nous aurons entendu les declarations, la question fera l’objet d’une discussion par le Conseil:
Est-ce bien cela?

The PRESIDENT: The position is this. It is for
the Council itself to determine the procedure that
it wishes to adopt in regard to this matter, that
is, whether it wishes to proceed to a discussion
or to take any other action it might wish.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de Pang&)
: La situation est la suivante: il appartient au Conseil,de
dtcider comment il doit traiter cette affaire,
c’est-A-dire s’il entend proceder a la discussion ou
prendre toute autre mesure qu’il peut juger
n&essaire.

Mr. BEVIN (United Kingdom)
: I am awfully
sorry to be persistent. I think it ought to be settled now that, when we have heard the case, it
is then open to discussion as to whether we
should dispose of the matter or whether we
should take any other steps to settle it. I do not
want the situation to arise that, after we have
gone through all the performance of hearing the
case, somebody says that the Council cannot discuss it.

M. BEVIN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de Z’anglais) : Je m’excuse d’insister encore sur ce point.
J’estime que nous devrions decider dts maintenant qu’aprts avoir entendu exposer la question,
nous aurons B discuter s’il y a lieu de classer
l’affaire, ou de prendre d’autres mesures pour la
regler. Je desire Cviter qu’apres avoir suivi tout
l’expost de l’affaire, quelqu’un ne dise que le
Conseil ne peut pas la discuter.

I want the facts placed on the table and the
Council to be free to discuss the case and arrive
at a means of disposing of it in some way or
another, and I want all countries concerned to
be heard.

Je d&ire que toutes les don&es soient present&es au Conseil, qu’il ait toute libertt de discuter l’affaire et d’arriver a une solution ou B une
autre, et que tous les Etats interesses soient entendus.

The PRESIDENT: In answer to the representative of the United Kingdom,
I want to say that
the Security Council will be quite competent at
its next meeting either to proceed to a discussion, if it so wishes, or to take any action that it
might wish in regard to it. But of course, as you
will realize in regard to whatever may be the
nature of the resolution submitted, the question
of, the method of voting would be actually the
subject of some difference; but it &ill be for the
Council itself when it meets to determine just
how it shall treat this particular subject, By its
own resolution it will be able to determine how
it will proceed to the consideration of these questions.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l’anglais) : Je rCpondrai au representant du Royaume-Uni
que,
lors de la prochaine seance, le Conseil de s&urite aura tout pouvoir soit pour discuter la question, s’il le juge bon, soit pour prendre toute autre
mesure ii ce sujet. Vous comprenez cependant
que, selon la nature de la proposition qui sera
faite, il y aura lieu de determiner la methode a
suivre pour le vote; il appartiendra
au Conseil
lui-m&me de dCcider, au debut de la seance, de la
procedure a suivre pour l’examen de ce cas particulier. I1 d&idera ensuite comment il entend
proctder a l’Ctude de ces questions.

15.

15.

Albanian
application
of the United

for membership
Nations

Demande
de I’Albanie
b faire
des Nations
Unies

partie

The PRESIDENT: I feel that I should intimate
to the members of the Council that I have just
received a communication1
from the Yugoslav
Government
or delegation regarding the application of Albania for membership of the United
Nations. This communication
is in the course
of being typed so that it can be distributed to
members of the Council ; as soon as that is possible, it will be done. This might possibly be the
subject of some consideration at our next meeting
as to whether it should be included in the
agenda.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l’anglais) : Je crois
devoir informer les membres du Conseil que j’ai
re$u une communication1
du Gouvernem’ent
yougoslave, ou de sa dClCgation, relative B la
demande d’admission de 1’Albanie aux Nations
Unies. Cette communication
vient de m’&re
don&e, et l’on est en train de la polycopier pour
pouvoir la distribuer aux membres du Conseil
le plus t6t possible. 11 y aura peut-&re lieu, au
tours de notre prochaine stance, de d&cider si
elle doit &tre inscrite a l’ordre du jour.

Mr. VYSHINWY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics)
(translated
from &&an)
: .The
Soviet delegation supports the Albanian Government’s request and the Yugoslav delegation’s

M. VYCHINSKY
(Union des Republiquts
socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe) : La d&5gation sovietique appuie la demande du Gouvernement albanais ainsi que Ia proposition de Ia

‘See Oficial
Records
of the Security
Council,
Year, First Series, Supplement No. 1; Annex 5.

1 Vpir ProcBt-varbaux.
oficiels ,du Conseil
ds dcurittf,
~;nw~~.~ Annee, Rem&e
S&q
Suppl6mcnt No 1;

First

21

proposal, and suggests that this question be
placed on the agenda for the next meeting on
Monday.
The PRESIDENT: The only difficulty in regard
to that is that this item has not as yet been
actually circulated among members of the Council. Therefore, members are not really fully
aware of the text of the communication that has
been received.
As to the suggestion of the representative of
the USSR that at this moment it be placed upon
the agenda, it might possibly be more appropriate
if it could be left until the next meeting. Then
members would be fully apprised of the nature
of the text of that communication.
Mr. STETTINIUS (United States of America) :
May I suggest that we deal with the question of
new membership as a whole later on, at one
meeting rather than piecemeal? I am sure there
are a number of delegations which have statements to make relative to new membership, and
I think it would be much better to deal with the
subject in loto.
The PRESIDENT: I would suggest to the representative of the United States that when we
receive a communication
such as this, it cannot
possibly be ignored, but must be dealt with expeditiously. Therefore I feel we are under an
obligation to receive this communication
and
deal with it, since governments have been
prompted to make their application in proper
order. Therefore, I think it would be quite
proper that this matter might be brought to the
attention of the Council on Monday, and then
we could decide whether it be included in the
agenda for consideration on that day or some
subsequent day.
Mr. MODZELEWSKI
(Poland)
(translated
from French) : I wish to support the request of
the Yugoslav Government that Albania be admitted to the United Nations. And the more so
because, as the representative of France has
pointed out to us in his recent declaration, there
are still thirteen States in Europe which are not
yet Members of the Organization. Therefore, I
should like this subject to be included in the
agenda of the Security Council.
The PRESIDENT: This item will be the subject of consideration at the next meeting of the
Council. At that stage any member of the
Security Council will be quite in order in submitting his own approval or otherwise of the
adoption of this particular communication.
Any further business?
The Council stands adjourned until Monday
at 3 p.m.
The meeting rose at 4.10 p.m.

dtlCgation yougoslave. La d&gation
de I’URSS
propose d’inscrire cette question a l’ordre du jour
de la prochaine sCance, qui aura lieu lundi.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l’anglais) : La seule
difficult6 a ce sujet est que cette communication
n’a pas encore tt(: distribuCe aux membres du
Conseil. Par constquent, ils n’ont pas eu le temps
d’en Etudier le texte.
En ce qui concerne la suggestion du reprbentant de 1’URSS d’inscrire db ii Dr&ent cette
question B notre ordre du jour, il seiait peut-&tre
prtfirable d’attendre la prochaine sCance. Ainsi,
les membres du Conseil auraient alors pris plus
amplement connaissance du texte de cette communication.
M. STETTINIUS (Etats-Unis
d’Amtrique)
(traduit de l’anglais) : Je voudrais proposer que
nous discutions en une seule stance la question
g&&ale de l’admission des nouveaux membres,
plut& qu’en plusieurs fois. Je suis stir qu’un certain nombre de d&gations auront des dhlarations B faire P ce sujet, et j’estime qu’il vaudrait
beaucoup mieux traiter cette question dans son
ensemble.
Le PRUDENT (traduit de Panglais) : Je me
permets de rappeler au reprksentant des EtatsUnis d’AmCrique que, lorsque nous recevons une
communication
de ce genre, nous n’avons pas
le droit de ne pas en tenir compte, et que nous
devons au contraire procider sans retard & son
examen. C’est pourquoi je pense que nous devons
recevoir et examiner cette communication, parce
qu’elle a CtCprtsentCe sous une forme rCgulibre.
J’estime par constquent qu’il conviendrait de
prCsenter cette question au Conseil d&s Iundi, et
nous pourrions decider alors s’il y a lieu de l’inscrire B I’ordre du jour de la sCance de lundi ou
de celui d’une sCance ulttrieure.
M. MODZELEWSBI (Pologne) : Je d&sire appuyer la demande du Gouvenement de la Yougoslavie d’admettre I’Albanie aux Nations Unies ;
d’autant plus que, comme nous l’a fait remarquer le reprksentant de la France, dans sa rCcente
dlclaration, il y a encore treize Etats europifens
qui ne sont pas Membres de I’Organisation.
Je
suis done partisan d’inscrire cette question a
l’ordre du jour du Conseil de s&m%.
Le PR~SXDENT (traduit de Panglais) : Ce point
sera discutt au tours de la prochaine sCance du
Conseil. Tous les membres du Conseil de S~CUritC pourront alors exprimer leur avis pour ou
centre l’adoption de cette communication.
f
Y a-t-il autre chose a discuter?
La prochaine dance du Conseil aura lieu
c
lundi, & 15 he&es.
La se’ance est levke d 16 h. 20.
