S/PV.9099

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9099th meeting

Tuesday, 26 July 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Costa Filho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mrs. Koumba Pambo
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-43837 (E)
*2243837*

S/PV.9099

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Cuba, Egypt, Indonesia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Malaysia, Morocco, Pakistan, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Türkiye and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Lynn
Hastings, Deputy Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and United Nations Resident
Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator for the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, to participate in
this meeting.
There being no objection, it is so decided
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: Mr. Thibault
Camelli, Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations; His Excellency
Mr. Maged Abdelfattah Abdelaziz, Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States to the United
Nations; His Excellency Mr. Arrmanatha Christiawan
Nasir, Vice-Chair of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People;
and Ms. Amina Kader, Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Observer Mission of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation to the United Nations.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
2/34

26/07/2022

accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. Hastings.
Ms. Hastings: I am pleased to deliver this briefing
on behalf of Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland,
covering the reporting period of 27 June to 21 July.
While the specific developments of the conflict
fluctuate, the structural reality has not changed. We
continue to witness concerning levels of violence
against civilians, which exacerbates mistrust and
undermines a peaceful resolution to the conflict.
For years, illegal settlement expansion in the
occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, has been
steadily shrinking the land available to Palestinians for
development and livelihoods, limiting their movement
and access and eroding the prospects for establishing
a viable Palestinian State. Three hundred and ninetynine demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures and evictions in Area C this year have left
over 400 Palestinians displaced. There is a growing
sense of hopelessness among many Palestinians, who
see their prospects for statehood, sovereignty and a
peaceful future slipping away.
Internally, they also see a crumbling and constrained
Palestinian economy, lack of progress in advancing
intra-Palestinian unity and governance reform and
the urgent need for renewed legitimacy to national
institutions, including through a democratically elected
Parliament and Government in Palestine.
Many Israelis also understand the perils of
continuing along the current path. They see endless
cycles of violence, the constant risk of escalation and
the absence of prospects to end the conflict.
Against that worrisome backdrop, the visit by
President Biden of the United States to the region
earlier this month signalled renewed consensus for a
two-State solution based on the 1967 lines. During the
visit, for the first time in years, Israeli, Palestinian and
American leaders also reiterated their support for a twoState solution as essential for the future of Palestinians
and Israelis alike. In addition to meeting with Prime
Minister Lapid and President Abbas, President Biden
made a noteworthy visit to Augusta Victoria Hospital
22-43837

26/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in East Jerusalem. We must build on those reaffirmed
commitments and work collectively to encourage steps
that allow for a return to a meaningful political process.
Daily violence continued throughout the occupied
Palestinian territory during the reporting period.
Three Palestinians were killed in the occupied West
Bank during search and arrest operations, and 287
Palestinians, including 28 children, were injured by
Israeli security forces during demonstrations, clashes,
search-and-arrest operations, attacks and alleged
attacks against Israelis and other incidents in the West
Bank. Israeli settlers or other civilians perpetrated 27
attacks against Palestinians, resulting in 12 injuries
and/or damage to Palestinian property, including 1,000
olive trees
In all, 18 Israeli civilians, including two women,
and seven Israeli security personnel were injured by
Palestinians in shooting and stabbing attacks, clashes
and the throwing of stones and Molotov cocktails
and other incidents. In total, Palestinians perpetrated
50 attacks against Israeli civilians, 39 of which were
stone-throwing incidents, resulting in injuries and/or
damage to Israeli property.
On 29 June, Israeli security forces shot and killed
a 25-year-old Palestinian in the context of clashes
following an arrest operation conducted in Jenin, in the
West Bank. According to the Israeli security forces,
the man had thrown explosive devices towards Israeli
soldiers. Palestinian Islamic Jihad later claimed the
man as a member.
On 2 and 6 July, Israeli security forces fatally shot
two Palestinians in the village of Jaba’a, near Jenin.

S/PV.9099

On 19 July, an Israeli was stabbed and moderately
injured by a Palestinian on a bus in Jerusalem. The
assailant was subsequently shot and injured by an
Israeli civilian.
On 2 July, the Palestinian Authority transferred
the bullet that killed Palestinian-American journalist
Shireen Abu Akleh to United States authorities to
undergo forensic testing. On 4 July, following an analysis
overseen by the United States Security Coordinator, the
United States announced that the examiners could not
reach a definitive conclusion regarding the origin of the
bullet, due to its damaged condition. The United States
also said that, after viewing the results of both Israeli
and Palestinian investigations into Abu Akleh’s death,
it had concluded that gunfire from Israel Defense
Forces positions was likely responsible and that it found
no reason to believe that that was intentional.
Settler-related violence continued during the
reporting period, with particularly concerning incidents
in the West Bank community of Ras Al-Tin.
On the night of 6 July, individuals believed to
be Israeli settlers set fire to four points around the
community, damaging several structures, including
tents. The attack comes on the heels of additional settler
attacks against the community in recent weeks, during
which two residents were injured.
I reiterate that perpetrators of all acts of violence
must be held accountable and brought swiftly to justice.
I also reiterate that security forces must exercise
maximum restraint and use lethal force only when
strictly unavoidable in order to protect life.

On 6 July, a Palestinian man was shot and killed as
he left his house during a nearby Israeli security forces
arrest operation. Israeli security forces said the man
had been shot after trying to run away.

On 20 and 21 July, thousands of Israelis participated
in a widely publicized campaign by a settler
organization to establish settlement outposts across
the West Bank. In advance of the campaign, Israeli
Defense Minister Gantz issued a statement that such
efforts are illegal activities that the security services
are preparing to thwart. The Israel Defense Forces and
Israeli police also issued similar statements. On 21 July,
the Israeli security forces removed the seven makeshift
encampments that had been set up and evacuated the
Israeli civilians from the area.

On 5 July, an Israeli man was seriously injured
after being stabbed on a pedestrian bridge in Bnei
Brak in central Israel. On 6 July, the Israeli security
forces announced they had arrested a Palestinian man
suspected of carrying out the attack.

I welcome the statements and actions by the
Government of Israel to prevent the establishment of
new outposts. I reiterate that all settlements are illegal
under international law and remain a substantial
obstacle to peace.

On 2 July, according to video and eyewitnesses, a
17-year-old was shot from some 30 metres as he was
turning away, after having thrown stones towards the
soldiers. The Israeli security forces said they fired after
the boy had thrown a Molotov cocktail.

22-438373/34

S/PV.9099

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

During the reporting period, Israeli authorities
demolished, seized or forced owners to demolish 77
Palestinian-owned structures in Area C and five in
East Jerusalem, displacing 61 Palestinians, including
31 children. The demolitions were carried out due to
the lack of Israeli-issued building permits, which are
nearly impossible for Palestinians to obtain.
In the wake of the 4 May ruling by the Israeli
High Court of Justice allowing the eviction of the
communities in Masafer Yatta, in the southern West
Bank, to proceed due to their presence in an Israelideclared “firing zone”, Israeli forces continued
to adopt restrictive measures negatively affecting
Palestinian communities and humanitarian actors
providing support. Such measures include ongoing
military training, related movement restrictions,
arrests, including those involving use of force, as well
as restrictions on the access of staff of international
organizations and Palestinian non-governmental
organizations to the area. I remain deeply concerned
about the potential implications of the High Court’s
ruling and the humanitarian toll on the communities in
question if the eviction orders are carried out.
In a positive development, on 12 July, Israeli
authorities announced that they would advance six
plans for Palestinian construction in Area C. I urge
Israel to further advance such plans and to issue
building permits for all previously approved plans for
Palestinians in Area C and in East Jerusalem.
On 21 July, Israel’s Supreme Court partially
accepted the appeal of a Palestinian family under threat
of eviction in the East Jerusalem neighbourhood of
Silwan, freezing the eviction order until proceedings
are completed in a lower court.
I call on Israeli authorities to end the displacement
and eviction of Palestinians, in line with its obligations
under international humanitarian law, and to approve
additional plans that would enable Palestinians to build
legally and address their development needs.
On 30 June, the Israeli Knesset voted to dissolve
itself and call for new parliamentary elections, now
scheduled for 1 November. Due to the coalition
agreements, on 1 July, Yair Lapid became Israel’s
Prime Minister and will head the interim Government
through the upcoming elections and Governmentformation process. I congratulate Prime Minister
Lapid, and the Special Coordinator looks forward to
continuing to work with him to advance steps towards a
4/34

26/07/2022

two-State solution and a lasting peace between Israelis
and Palestinians.
Between 13 and 15 July, United States President
Biden visited Israel and the occupied Palestinian
territory, meeting with Israeli and Palestinian leaders.
During the visit, the President announced a series of
initiatives to support the Palestinian people, including a
new multi-year contribution of $100 million to the East
Jerusalem Hospital Network, subject to congressional
approval; $201 million in funding for the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA); an additional $15 million
in humanitarian assistance for Palestinians aimed at
addressing food insecurity; and two new grants under
the Middle East Partnership for Peace Act.
On 16 July, in the context of President Biden’s
meeting with regional leaders in Saudi Arabia, the
United States announced that Kuwait, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates also each
pledged an additional $25 million to the East Jerusalem
Hospital Network.
The Biden Administration’s announcement that
Israel has agreed to allow the Allenby Bridge ,between
the West Bank and Jordan, to operate 24 hours a day,
seven days a week, by the end of September will go
some way to reduce the long wait thousands undergo
at the crossing. The United States also said Israel had
agreed to accelerate the transition to 4G technology
in the West Bank, and then in Gaza, and to convene
the long-dormant Joint Economic Committee with the
Palestinian Authority.
I welcome the crucial United States and regional
support pledged to East Jerusalem hospitals, vital
Palestinian institutions that provide health care to
patients from across the occupied Palestinian territory.
Support for structural reform of the health sector is still
needed for sustainable operations of the heavily indebted
Hospital Network. I also welcome and look forward
to the implementation of the important commitments
made by Israel to improve movement and access for
Palestinians at the Allenby Bridge and the transition to
4G technology to support economic growth.
In advance of President Biden’s visit, on 7 July,
President Abbas and Defense Minister Gantz met in
Ramallah, and on 8 July Israeli President Herzog and
Prime Minister Lapid spoke with President Abbas by
phone. The continuing high-level contacts between
Israeli and Palestinian officials are encouraging. I urge
22-43837

26/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

leaders on all sides to expand that engagement to
encompass the underlying political issues. In addition,
on 12 July, Israeli authorities announced the approval
of the registration of 5,500 previously unregistered
Palestinians and the expansion of a crossing in the
northern West Bank to include vehicular traffic between
Israel and Jenin for the use of Israeli Arabs. On 21 July,
President Abbas visited France and met with President
Emmanuel Macron. At a joint press conference
following the meeting, President Macron affirmed
his willingness to help mobilize the international
community in efforts to support the resumption of a
political dialogue towards a just and lasting peace.
Statements issued by 10 European Foreign Ministries
announced that their Governments had reviewed the
21 October designation of six Palestinian NGOs as
terrorist organizations. The statements highlighted that
no substantial information had been received that would
justify a review of the Member States’ policies, and,
in the absence of such evidence, they confirmed that
they would continue their cooperation with and strong
support for civil society in the occupied Palestinian
territory. Going forward, the Ministry of Defence has
requested that the three lawyers representing the six
NGOs seek approval before continuing to do so. On
several occasions in July, Palestinian legal associations
organized demonstrations in Ramallah, attended by
hundreds of participants, to protest the Palestinian
Authority’s practice of issuing and amending laws by
presidential decree. Protesters called for the election of
a new Legislative Council and a resumption of regular
legislative procedures.
The situation in Gaza remains fragile, as efforts by
the United Nations and other partners continue to deliver
vital humanitarian and development assistance and to
further ease restrictions on the movement of people and
goods into and out of the Strip. On 16 July, following a
period of relative calm, militants in Gaza launched four
rockets towards Israel. According to Israeli authorities,
one rocket was intercepted by the Iron Dome system,
while the others landed in open areas in Israel. No
injuries were reported. In retaliation, the Israel Defense
Forces (IDF) conducted air strikes against what it
said were Hamas targets in the Strip, with no injuries
reported. On 19 July, Israeli authorities announced that
they had found a bullet in Netiv HaAsara, in southern
Israel, which they determined had been fired earlier
that day from the Gaza Strip, damaging an industrial
building. Subsequently, the IDF launched missiles at

S/PV.9099

what it said were Hamas targets in the Strip, once again
with no injuries reported.
The reconstruction and repair of damages incurred
during the 2021 escalation still requires additional
funding as well as the timely disbursement of funding
that has already been pledged. There remains a funding
gap of at least $45 million for the reconstruction of
ruined housing units and $9 million for repairs to
damaged housing. On 3 July, on the occasion of the
Muslim holiday of Eid Al-Adha, the Israeli authorities
announced that 400 permits would be issued for men
over the age of 55 and women over the age of 50 to visit
Jerusalem from Gaza. They are the first such permits to
be issued since 2017. In addition, it was announced that
some 500 permits would be issued for Gaza residents to
visit first-degree relatives in the West Bank and Israel
over the holiday.
In June, some 72,000 crossings of people holding
Israeli-issued permits through the Israeli-controlled
Erez crossing were recorded, the highest number in
one month since the tightening of the Israeli closures
following Hamas’s takeover of the Strip in 2007. June
also witnessed an increase of imports into Gaza through
the Kerem Shalom crossing between Israel and Gaza,
with a 12 per cent increase in the number of trucks
compared to May. The number of trucks entering Gaza
through the informal Salah ad-Din crossing between
Gaza and Egypt increased by 45 per cent compared to
May 2020.
Across the occupied Palestinian territory, soaring
commodity prices continue to have a negative impact
on Palestinians’ lives. The UNRWA emergency
food assistance programme requires an additional
$72 million by September to meet the food assistance
needs for 1.1 million Palestinian refugees in Gaza in the
fourth quarter. The World Food Programme needs an
additional $24 million to continue providing assistance
until the end of the year to compensate for the drop
in purchasing power. In that context, I welcome recent
announcements by the United States and the European
Union confirming their 2022 contributions to UNRWA,
which will allow the Agency to maintain education,
primary health care and other critical services to
Palestine refugees during the summer months. I
encourage additional contributions from Member States
to ensure that the needs on the ground can be met.
With regard to the region in general, while the
ceasefire between Israel and Syria continues to be

22-438375/34

S/PV.9099

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

generally maintained, the situation remains volatile
with continued violations of the 1974 Disengagement
of Forces Agreement by the parties. The latest reported
incident was brought to the attention of the President
of the Security Council and the Secretary-General
through identical letters of 22 July from the Permanent
Representative of Syria concerning the situation
between Israel and Syria. It is important that the
parties respect their obligations under the terms of the
Agreement and prevent an escalation of the situation
between them.
In Lebanon, following the parliamentary elections
of 15 May, efforts to form a new Government continue.
It is crucial that a new Government be formed as soon
as possible and that progress be made on reforms
needed to address the country’s multiple crises. I also
underscore the risks to stability posed by incidents such
as Hizbullah’s launch on 2 July of three unarmed drones
from Lebanon towards the Karish offshore natural-gas
field. I urge all the parties to exercise restraint and avoid
provocative actions that could lead to escalation. On
15 and 16 July, President Biden visited Saudi Arabia,
where he met with leaders of the Gulf Cooperation
Council (GCC), Egypt, Iraq and Jordan. Following the
summit, the United States and the GCC issued a joint
statement reaffirming their commitment to preserving
regional security and stability and supporting diplomacy
with the aim of regional de-escalation.
Immediate steps to reverse the negative trends
and to support the Palestinian people are essential.
The violence must stop. The tensions that have been
mounting, particularly in the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, amid continued settlement
activity and settler-related violence, must be addressed.
However, there is no substitute for a legitimate political
process that will resolve the core issues driving the
conflict. As history has so painfully demonstrated,
the factors contributing to the corrosive situation,
if left unaddressed, will only deteriorate further.
We must focus on reaching the ultimate goal — two
States, living side by side in peace and security, in
line with the relevant United Nations resolutions,
previous agreements and international law. The United
Nations remains committed to supporting Israelis
and Palestinians to move towards a just and lasting
peace, and we will continue to work with the parties
and regional and international partners to achieve
that objective.
6/34

The President:
her statement.

I

thank

26/07/2022

Ms.

Hastings

for

I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Allow me at the outset
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting, and to reiterate our appreciation to Brazil for
its leadership of the Security Council this month. We
also thank Ms. Hastings for her briefing this morning
and for all her and her team’s tireless efforts to address
the humanitarian situation on the ground in occupied
Palestine, including East Jerusalem.
States are currently discussing preparations for
the Summit of the Future. Let me therefore talk about
the future. We know what the future will look like if
nothing is done differently. For Palestinian children, it
is a future of fear, harassment, intimidation, arbitrary
arrest and detention, injury and death. The SecretaryGeneral’s recent report on children and armed conflict
(S/2022/493) once again highlighted the vast array of
violations of which Palestinian children are victims.
The Secretary-General stated,
“I am shocked by the number of children killed
and maimed by Israeli forces during hostilities,
in air strikes on densely populated areas and
through the use of live ammunition during law
enforcement operations, and by the persistent lack
of accountability for these violations.” (S/2022/493,
para.93)
The lack of accountability demonstrates that nothing
has been done to truly address the situation.
The Secretary-General has warned that a repeat of
Israeli violations similar to those of May 2021 would
lead to the listing of Israel among the violators of child
rights. However, what the report described was not a
one-time event but a persistent pattern over the years of
abject disregard for the lives and rights of Palestinian
children that justifies listing Israel several times over,
not merely warning it of such a prospect.
The Palestinian nation and this Palestinian
generation are full of potential. That can be seen in
every field despite the terrible circumstances — from
Loay Elbasyouni, who made his way from Gaza to
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration,
to the Gaza Sky Geeks who shaped a horizon despite
the blockade; from Hanan Al Hroub, who received the
22-43837

26/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Global Teacher Prize, to Iqbal Al-Assad, the youngest
doctor in the world.
However, the Palestinian story is also one of
unrealized potential and interrupted journeys — from
the journalist Yasser Murtaja, who was killed while
covering the violent repression by the Israelis of the
Gaza Great March of Return, to the journalist Shireen
Abu Akleh, who was shot dead while covering yet
another Israeli military raid in the refugee camp
of Jenin.
It is the story of the families in Sheikh Jarrah,
Silwan and Massafer Yatta, who are under the constant
threat of being forcibly displaced from their homes,
like many before them. It is the story of entire families
buried under the rubble of their homes — what was
to be their safest haven. It is the story of more than
2 million people trapped by a medieval blockade. It is
the story of thousands who are arbitrarily detained and
imprisoned, including children — their minds, bodies
and souls traumatized. It is the story of human rights
and humanitarian non-governmental organizations
that are labelled as terrorist organizations. It is the
story of the victims being blamed for their fate and an
oppressor claiming the right to oppress the people and
steal the land.
What does the future hold for Palestine? What does
the future hold for Palestinians? It is an entire nation
fighting to exist to live in freedom and dignity on its
ancestral land. It fights for justice. For a century, it
has fought just to exist. From the day Palestinians are
born until the day they die, they are acutely aware that
they have no control over their life and that at any point
and for no reason, they can be killed, arrested, injured
or denied entry to or exit from their own country, the
right to education, access to health care, the freedom to
worship at their holy sites without fear or harassment,
the right to live with their loved ones and the right to a
safe home and a secure life.
They know that a settler or a soldier has been
endowed with the right to take away their life, while
enjoying blanket immunity. They know that, whatever
happens, Palestinians will be deemed to be guilty and
Israelis will be deemed to be innocent in Israeli courts.
They know that the world, too accustomed to that
pattern of tragedy and injustice, will express dismay
and then look away.
At a time when the international community
rightfully proclaims that we are entitled to equal

S/PV.9099

measures of freedom, security and prosperity, Israel
persists in denying us all three. What will the Security
Council and the broader international community do
about it?
United States President Biden’s visit to the
region provided an occasion to reaffirm fundamental
principles about ending the occupation and the conflict,
including the two-State solution based on the 1967
borders; opposition to unilateral measures, including
settlement activities, demolitions and evictions; and
the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination
and a sovereign and independent State.
The Jeddah communiqué stated in no uncertain terms
the enduring commitment to the two-State solution,
wherein a sovereign and contiguous Palestinian State
lives side by side in peace and security with Israel, as
the only way to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
in accordance with the internationally recognized
parameters and the Arab Peace Initiative. However,
Israel announced yesterday, only days after the visit
of President Biden, that it was yet again advancing
hundreds of settlement units, including in occupied
East Jerusalem — our capital.
It is time for the political and financial engagement
of the international community to translate into a
common agenda for freedom, justice and peace — a
common agenda to protect the Palestinian people, fulfil
Palestinian rights and achieve peace for all. It is time for
the international community to determine what steps
need to be immediately taken to allow us to reach our
common objectives. I repeat, we must determine what
practical steps need to be immediately taken to allow us
to reach our common objectives. The fate of an entire
nation cannot be held hostage by Israeli politics or the
settlers’ agenda. The stakes are too high, the issue too
serious and the implications too grave.
Ten years ago, the General Assembly adopted a
historic resolution (resolution 67/19) granting Palestine
observer State status at the United Nations. Many
members present today voted in favour of that resolution,
and we thank them. Since then, we have demonstrated
our ability to be an effective and constructive actor
in the international community. Our leadership and
chairmanship of the Group of 77 and China for a whole
year is a clear testimony to that fact. We have every right
to be a Member of the United Nations. Nothing justifies
delaying that prospect. We have every right to freedom
and independence. Our right to self-determination,

22-438377/34

S/PV.9099

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

sovereignty and territorial integrity is enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations.
Six years ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2334 (2016), which set out a clear path
towards salvaging a two-State solution, ending the
occupation and achieving a just and secure peace. It
is the responsibility of the Security Council and its
members to ensure that we embark on that path. If we act
now, together, peace is possible. I know that everyone
around this table and beyond wants peace. The only
question that remains is whether we are ready to do
what is necessary to achieve it. Is the Security Council,
entrusted with the maintenance of international peace
and security, ready to achieve our collective objective?
The Secretary-General has rightly warned that we
risk losing the opportunity for a two-State solution
altogether. Ms. Hastings also reflected that notion in her
briefing today. The future will be determined by what
we do right now. There are two tasks that cannot be
deferred or delayed, and they are providing protection
to the Palestinian people — and we are working with the
Secretary-General and his teams in that regard — and
preserving a two-State solution based on the 1967
borders. If there is to be a different future, that is what
needs to happen in the present. We must act now before
it is too late. What the Council needs to do is act. The
Council members know what the objective is and what
our common position is. Reiterating it is not sufficient.
Action is what is needed.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Erdan (Israel): I am now nearing my twoyear benchmark as Israel’s Ambassador to the United
Nations, and I have to admit that I am feeling deeply
frustrated. The main reason is that these debates on
the situation in the Middle East and the Palestinian
question are supposed to be dedicated to two primary
topics, the Middle East and the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict. Yet at every one of these meetings, the most
dangerous threat to the region is hardly discussed,
while the true obstacles to solving the conflict are
never addressed. When it comes to the situation in the
Middle East, everyone knows that the biggest threat to
the region is the nuclearization of the radical Ayatollah
regime in Iran, as well as its funding of terror and
hegemonic ambitions — threats that are almost never
discussed here.
8/34

26/07/2022

When we discuss the Palestinian question, the
debates do not focus on productive ways forward,
collaborative progress or building a bottom-up
peace, all of which are entirely possible. Instead, we
dedicate our time and resources to biased reports,
often condemning the decisions of Israeli courts or
discussing trivial local conflicts between Palestinians
and Israelis. We take a century-old conflict and put it
under a supermicroscope to analyse its most useless and
insignificant aspects, rather than looking at the bigger
picture and seeking real solutions to our real problems.
Sadly, nothing noteworthy has been achieved as a result
of these debates — nothing, for decades. How can it be
that the Council cannot see the true barriers to peace?
The current approach is broken and now is the time to
work together to fix it. Let us start by taking a look at
some of the primary challenges.
Despite what has been presented here today, as
always, the main obstacle to peace was not and is not
the Jewish presence in Judea and Samaria. After all,
the Palestinians refused to live with us in peace even
before 1967. It is a fact that no progress was made even
when Israel unilaterally disengaged from the Gaza
Strip — indeed, the opposite happened. It is a fact
that no progress was made even when peace plans that
were presented and supported by several Israeli Prime
Ministers and American Presidents — and that included
far-reaching Israeli concessions — were all rejected by
the Palestinians, one after another. The members of
the Council are all aware that the Palestinians’ absurd
prerequisite to negotiations is that Israel has to accept
all of their radical demands before even sitting down
at the table. Is such rejectionism not a topic that should
be discussed in these debates? Why does the Council
allow it to be forgotten? What about the endless
incitement to terror coming from the highest offices of
the Palestinian Authority, which is poisoning the minds
of an entire generation? Is that colossal barrier to peace
not worthy of discussion? Every year, President Abbas
pays hundreds of millions of dollars to terrorists as part
of the Palestinians pay-for-slay policy. Sickeningly,
those payments use a sliding scale. The more horrific
the terror attack, the greater the reward. Does that
twisted practice not warrant a discussion here?
What about Hamas, the radical terror organization
that rules over Gaza with an iron fist? It targets Israeli
civilians with its rockets while using its own civilians
as human shields. Everyone here knows that the reason
there have been no elections in the Palestinian territories
22-43837

26/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

for 17 years is out of fear that Hamas’s influence and
power will only grow. That is a huge obstacle to peace.
Today Israel does not even have a possible partner
for negotiations, because President Abbas does not
represent all of Palestinian society. And nevertheless,
despite the heinous actions of Hamas, the Council
remains silent. That sadistic terror organization took
Hisham Al-Sayed hostage — a Muslim Israeli suffering
from mental health issues — and after seven years of
silence, recently released a video of a dazed Hisham
breathing through a ventilator. The Council is so quick
to issue statements regarding events that happen in
the Palestinian territories. Where is the statement
condemning Hamas for Hisham’s kidnapping and
torture? When Hisham’s father, Shaaban, heard that I
would bring his son’s plight before the Council today,
he asked me to share his heartfelt message. Here is a
very short video of what he begged me to say.
A video recording was shown in the Chamber.
Here is the father of a son with special needs, who
is begging the Security Council and its members to
take action. Hamas is using his boy as a sick bargaining
chip, and the world remains silent. I hope that we all
internalized his words.
Hamas is undoubtedly one of the most critical
barriers to any advancement between Israelis and
Palestinians, but it seems from the United Nations
reports that the murderous terror group does not even
exist. If each debate feels exactly like the last, and no
progress has been made, perhaps the time has come to
revise the approach. Rather than focusing on the minutia
of the conflict, it is time to put the Security Council’s
microscope away and look at the bigger pictures.
If we are interested in moving forward towards a
better future, the starting point should be analysing
best practices, and we do not need to look far to find
success stories of regional peace. Just two weeks ago,
during President Biden’s violence visit to the region, the
evolution of a big part of the Middle East from conflict
to coexistence was openly displayed for the world
to see. Without baseless condemnations, repetitive
debates or poisonous libel, countries of the region chose
peace and, as a result, received progress. That is what
happens when one chooses the future of one’s people
over conflict — a concept that the Palestinians, who
still sadly hate us Israelis more than they love their own
children, have yet to adopt. During President Biden’s
visit, President Abbas lied again when he announced

S/PV.9099

that the Palestinian Authority was committed to
renouncing violence. Nothing could be further from the
truth. Not only does President Abbas himself praise and
finance terror attacks; he incites them, and members
of his party even commit them. The time has come for
the Security Council to address the rampant culture of
hate that the Palestinian Authority has been cultivating
for decades.
Security Council members should look at what can
happen when the path of collaboration and coexistence
is chosen. The fruits of our new regional architecture are
being enjoyed across the Middle East and far beyond.
With the help of the recent free trade agreement, in
the first six months of 2022, trade between Israel and
the United Arab Emirates surpassed $1 billion. Last
week, the Israeli military chief of staff travelled to
Morocco in order to build and cement growing defence
ties between our nations. The Negev Forum, held in
Israel with Secretary Blinken and four Arab foreign
ministers, is a symbol of our shared commitment to
future cooperation. It is a taste of what can be achieved
when we work together to overcome shared challenges.
When I mentioned that the peace can be felt far
beyond the region, I truly meant it. We should take, for
example, the recent I2U2 Virtual Summit. The leaders
of Israel, India, the United Arab Emirates and the
United States held a meeting discussing how to work
together to tackle the greatest global challenges, from
combating water scarcity and food insecurity to new
initiatives regarding energy, health care, transportation
and space exploration. The Palestinians can also
benefit from all those gains and collaborative projects
if they only put the well-being of their people ahead
of breeding hatred and incitement against us. Our new
peace accords have also reinvigorated far-reaching
projects with our old partners, Egypt and Jordan, and
those projects are changing the face of the Middle East
and beyond.
The momentum that that peace has ignited is
pushing us to even higher peaks. Following President
Biden’s visit to Jerusalem and Jeddah, Saudi Arabia
opened its airspace to Israeli airlines. That is a crucial
step, and we thank the American Administration and
President Biden for helping to facilitate it. Israel looks
forward to further developments with Saudi Arabia.
While the good of our peoples was the driving factor
behind that deep people-to-people peace, there was
also another factor at play that is hardly ever discussed

22-438379/34

S/PV.9099

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

here — the nuclearization process of the radical and
dangerous Iranian regime. Iran’s dangerous nuclear
ambitions and its axis of terror proxies pushed the
moderate Powers of the region together. The peace that
we have built is also a by-product of the international
community’s inaction. As we sit here, hearing the same
grievance every month, the writing on the wall has never
been clearer. From the forced removal of International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) oversight to the
expanded enrichment of uranium to almost weaponsgrade level, those are not the actions of a country with
innocent intentions. Is stopping a radical regime from
acquiring nuclear weapons not high on the Security
Council’s priority list? What are we waiting for? Mere
days ago, the IAEA’s Director General, Mr. Grossi,
warned of Iran’s galloping advances, while leaving his
Agency in the dark. That may lead to an immense and
pressing threat to global security. But we could also
hear that directly from the Iranians themselves. Kamal
Kharrazi, Ayatollah Khamenei’s foreign policy adviser,
openly stated that Iran was now capable of building a
nuclear bomb. A fanatical regime, which blatantly calls
for Israel’s annihilation, claims to have the capabilities
to build a nuclear weapon, and we are sitting here using
a magnifying glass to identify minor conflicts in every
village in Judea and Samaria.
Kharrazi’s statement, coupled with the Supreme
Leader’s poisonous vitriol, presents a clear threat not
just to Israel, but to the entire region. Here are some
of Ayatollah Khamenei’s recent tweets. I would love
to hear what participants think of them and what they
mean for the future of the Middle East.
“The plague of Zionism should be exposed, in
any way you can. These Arab and non-Arab States
that shook hands, kissed and held meetings with the
Zionists will not benefit from what they did at all,
not at all. This will only be to their loss.”
“Today, Zionism is an obvious plague for the
world of Islam. The Zionists have always been a
plague, even before establishing the fraudulent
Zionist regime. Even then, Zionist capitalists were a
plague for the whole world. Now they are a plague,
especially for the world of Islam.”
Those are not just words. That is pure anti-Semitism.
That is a blatant call to commit terror against Jews and
Israel. The diplomatic route was tested with Iran time
and again. It has failed. Now the Security Council must
take action or, at the very least, it must use these debates
10/34

26/07/2022

to start addressing the Iranian nuclear Shia elephant in
the room.
As the centrifuges spin and Iran’s stockpiles of
enriched uranium grow, the Ayatollah’s terror proxies
continue to spread chaos and destruction throughout
the region. After all, Iran takes its role as the world’s
number one State sponsor of terror very seriously.
If only the Iranian people were given the care and
attention that their leaders give to Hizbullah, Hamas
and the Houthis, then maybe the people of Isfahan
would have water to drink.
Last week, we commemorated two deadly Iraniansponsored terror attacks — the horrific 1994 attack
in Buenos Aires, which killed 80 people and injured
hundreds, and the 2012 attack in Bulgaria, which killed
five Israelis. But Iranian terror is not a thing of the past.
Over the past couple of weeks, armed Iranian hit squads
were caught in Istanbul moments before murdering
innocent Israelis. Meanwhile, Hizbullah, Iran’s terror
army in Lebanon, is doing everything in its power to
destabilize the already fragile country. Productive
advances between Israel and Lebanon are under way.
Yet Hizbullah is taking every possible step to torpedo
any potential progress. We should make no mistake:
all Hizbullah’s attempts to destabilize negotiations
between Israel and Lebanon are with Iran’s permission
and blessing. While the Iranians go to great lengths to
clean up the evidence of their involvement in global
terror, every member of the Security Council knows
exactly who is responsible.
Nevertheless, here we are, moving from one biased
anti-Israel report to the next, focusing on inaccurate
supposed building-violation conflicts, with zero
influence on the bigger picture.
Just two weeks ago, Hizbullah launched three
drones at the Karish gas field in Israel’s economic
borders. Such brazen acts will not be accepted by Israel,
and we hold Lebanon, as a sovereign State, responsible
for Hizbullah’s military expansion and attacks. I can
no longer count how many times I notified the Council,
whether in writing or in person, that Hizbullah will
wreak havoc on Lebanon. Yet the Council’s silence
is deafening.
The time has come for the Council to take action,
not only against Iran and its nuclear programme but
also against its proxies. Hizbullah must no longer get
a free pass, just as Lebanon must not get a free pass.
22-43837

26/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.9099

Action against those sowing discord and destroying
peace must be taken now.

allow Israeli airlines to use Saudi airspace was another
important step in building a more integrated region.

If we wish to bring stability and prosperity to our
region, which has seen perpetual conflict for the past
century, then the time has come to rethink our ways.
The time has come to put away our microscopes and
our magnifying glasses. The time has come to remove
the blinders from our eyes. By repeating the same
argument while ignoring the groundbreaking progress,
the only thing we accomplish is the tarnishing of this
debate’s credibility and the perpetuity of the conflict.

Critically, the President also highlighted the
opportunity those normalization agreements provide
to advance Israeli-Palestinian relations and address the
needs of the Palestinian people. As we have repeatedly
said in the Council, normalization agreements are
important in their own right, but they are not a substitute
for a negotiated two-State solution. Indeed, President
Biden reiterated the Administration’s commitment to a
two-State solution and emphasized the importance of
promoting a future in which Israelis and Palestinians
alike can enjoy equal measures of security, freedom
and prosperity. After their meeting, Prime Minister
Lapid also expressed support for a two-State solution.

I truly hope that our subsequent debates come
to reflect a safe and prospering Middle East — one
devoid of radical terror, teeming with cooperation and
driven by coexistence. That is the future we all want
and deserve.
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
members of the Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): At the outset, let me thank Deputy Special
Coordinator Hastings for her briefing.
Today I would like to share an update from
President Biden’s visit to Israel and the West Bank
this month, which demonstrated the strength of the
bilateral relationship between the United States and
Israel, including our continued steadfast commitment
to Israel’s security. The trip also highlighted our
determination to bolster the United States-Palestinian
relationship, which has roots going back to the 1800s.
The President had productive meetings with Israel’s
President Isaac Herzog and Prime Minister Yair Lapid,
as well as other Israeli leaders, on the full range of
issues that define our strategic partnership. He was also
able to visit Yad Vashem, where he met with some of the
last living Holocaust survivors — a powerful reminder
of the sacred promise we have made: “Never again.”
President Biden commended the Abraham Accords
and Israel’s normalization agreements with the United
Arab Emirates, Bahrain and Morocco, which, alongside
Israel’s peace treaties with Egypt and Jordan, contribute
to security, prosperity and peace in the Middle East.
The I2U2 Virtual Summit of India, Israel, the United
Arab Emirates and the United States that the President
convened showed the potential of closer cooperation
between Israel and other countries in and outside the
region. And Saudi Arabia’s announcement that it would

The President also acknowledged Jerusalem’s
importance to the multiple faiths and nationalities when
he said:
“Jerusalem is central to the national visions of both
Palestinians and Israelis — to your histories, to
your faiths, to your future. Jerusalem must be a city
for all its people.”
During his visit, President Biden also met with
President Mahmoud Abbas in the West Bank and
reaffirmed our shared commitment to strengthen the
Palestinian economy and improve the quality of life for
Palestinians. To that end, as we heard, he announced
several initiatives to support the Palestinian people,
including expanding 4G digital connectivity to Gaza
and the West Bank, improving accessibility to the
Allenby Bridge and providing $316 million in new
assistance — all for the benefit of the Palestinian people.
That aid includes a plan to provide up to $100 million
in support for the East Jerusalem Hospital Network,
which delivers specialized care and emergency services
to 50,000 patients from East Jerusalem, the West Bank
and Gaza annually. We were pleased that Kuwait, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates committed
to provide an additional $100 million to those Jerusalem
hospitals, and we urge other countries to support the
Palestinian people.
Our new assistance also includes $201 million
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to
continue delivering critical services to the Palestinian
refugees in the West Bank, Gaza, Jordan, Lebanon and
Syria. We fully support UNRWA’s life-saving work
and continued efforts to improve its operations and to

22-4383711/34

S/PV.9099

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

guarantee that its works fully support and respect the
principles of neutrality, tolerance, respect for human
rights, equity and non-discrimination. We call on others
to join us in supporting UNRWA in order to ensure its
services can continue.
Finally, President Biden announced that the
United States is providing $15 million in additional
humanitarian assistance to support 210,000 vulnerable
Palestinians who are food-insecure among a growing
global food security crisis exacerbated by Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine. In short, the President’s visit
demonstrated that the United States remains deeply
committed to peace and prosperity in the Middle East.
We urge all parties in the region and around the
world to support — in word and deed — the goal of
a peaceful and prosperous region, including through
bolder action to create the conditions for a twoState solution.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to thank
Deputy Special Coordinator Hastings for her briefing. I
also want to thank the Permanent Representative of the
United States for updating us on President Biden’s visit
to the region.
Last month, the Security Council held an open
debate on strengthening accountability and justice for
serious violations of international law (see S/PV.9052).
Accountability is vital across all files on the Council’s
agenda, particularly in the context of the issues that we
are discussing today.
In the first six months of this year, 60 Palestinians
were killed and more than 5,900 injured by Israeli
security forces. We are concerned about the pervasive
culture of impunity for incidents of possible excessive
use of force by Israeli security forces, or even for
potentially unlawful killings. An independent
investigation into the killing of Shireen Abu Akleh
remains essential. It is now well overdue.
We strongly condemn settler violence and other
ideologically motivated violence. Action to bring
perpetrators to justice remains extremely limited.
We urgently need to reverse that trend and hold those
responsible accountable.
Ireland remains of the view that ongoing Israeli
settlement activity gravely undermines the prospects
of a two-State solution. Immediate action is required
to preserve the viability of that goal. That applies
particularly to those settlements, including Givat
12/34

26/07/2022

Hashaked, Lower Aqueduct, Givat Hamatos and Area
E-1, that would gravely undermine the viability and
contiguity of a future Palestinian State.
Ireland is particularly concerned about the situation
in Area C, which is part of the occupied Palestinian
territory and, in line with the Oslo Accords, should be
gradually transferred to Palestinian jurisdiction. We
reiterate the critical importance of social and economic
development in Area C and call on Israel to allow more
access and control for the Palestinian Authority (PA).
We also call on Israel to cease evictions and the
demolitions of Palestinian homes and related structures,
in line with its obligations under international
humanitarian law. The recent Masafer Yatta eviction
decision in the South Hebron Hills in the occupied West
Bank is one of the more egregious examples, which
increases the risk of the forcible transfer of some 1,200
Palestinians and the demolition of their homes. Recent
removals of water tanks are gravely concerning.
The people of the Gaza Strip continue to suffer.
Cycles of violence and war and an illegal blockade
have resulted in extreme hardship, including poverty
and food insecurity. We welcome Israel’s granting of
additional permits and its easing of some restrictions,
but such measures will never be a substitute for ending
the blockade.
During the escalation of hostilities in May 2021,
Israeli attacks may have violated international
humanitarian
law
principles
of
distinction,
proportionality and feasible precautions, as documented
by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights. However, more than a year later, we
are not aware of any criminal investigation of those
incidents. Neither have there been any measures to
ensure accountability for the indiscriminate firing
of rockets towards Israel in breach of international
humanitarian law or for other possible violations of
international humanitarian law.
Civil society has a vital role to play in shining a
light on violations of international law and promoting
accountability for those responsible. We are alarmed
at the reduced space for civil society in the occupied
Palestinian territory. We will continue our strong
cooperation with and support for Palestinian civil
society, as affirmed by Ireland and eight other member
States of the European Union in a statement made
on 12 July. Ireland supports the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Right’s call on Israel to
22-43837

26/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

revoke the designations against Palestinian civil society
organizations as terrorist entities.
Moreover, Ireland calls on the Palestinian Authority
to ensure a safe space for civil society and human rights
defenders, who must be allowed to operate freely without
fear of being subjected to intimidation, arbitrary arrest
or abuse. We call on the Authority to exercise greater
responsibility, within the constraints faced under the
occupation. The PA must work to reduce tensions
and violence, reinvigorate preparations for essential,
inclusive elections and increase meaningful efforts on
intra-Palestinian reconciliation.
Ireland underlines our support for the work of the
United Nations in the occupied Palestinian territory and
calls on Israel to facilitate that work. The United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East plays a vital role in regional stability and
merits strong support, including regionally.
As I leave for a new posting next month, this is my
last statement on this file as Permanent Representative
of Ireland. Unfortunately, the prospects of reopening a
political horizon for meaningful negotiations between
the parties on achieving a two-State solution are as
remote today as when I arrived at the United Nations
five years ago, in 2017. I deeply regret that.
The same can be said for accountability.
Accountability is not something separate from the
peace process and a political horizon. It cannot wait
for political conditions to be right, and it cannot be
substituted by economic development. Ireland will
continue to draw attention to violations by all duty
bearers and will continue to call for accountability.
In conclusion, Ireland calls on the Council to
reinvigorate its efforts through coherent and effective
action towards ending the occupation.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I thank Deputy Special Coordinator Hastings for her
briefing. I would also like to thank the representative
of the United States for her update. We were pleased
to see President Biden’s visit to Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territories this month and the announcement
of United States funding for East Jerusalem hospitals
and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
We welcomed Israel’s commitment during that visit
to restart the Joint Economic Committee and accelerate
the transition to 4G cellular technology in the occupied

S/PV.9099

Palestinian territory. Those are important steps that
have the potential to bolster the Palestinian economy.
We echo President Biden’s calls for urgent progress in
both cases, and the United Kingdom stands ready to
provide support.
Recent direct discussions held by Prime Minister
Lapid, President Herzog and Defence Minister Gantz
with President Abbas and other Palestinian Authority
leaders are similarly welcome. Such cooperation and
dialogue are essential to tackling shared challenges.
However, the situation on the ground remains
fragile. We note with concern the latest report of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights on the increase in fatalities. In the
first six months of 2022, 60 Palestinians were killed
by Israeli security forces during law enforcement
operations in the West Bank. In the same period, 19
Israelis were killed in terror attacks. Terrorist attacks
against civilians are abhorrent and unacceptable. We
call on all parties to de-escalate tensions and stop the
continued loss of life.
We welcome the United States engagement with
Israel and the Palestinian Authority to seek the truth
surrounding Shireen Abu Akleh’s death, and we now
urge accountability for those responsible.
We continue to be deeply concerned about the
imminent risk of the forcible transfer of more than 1,000
Palestinians at Masafer Yatta and the recent detention
of staff members of humanitarian organizations
seeking to aid the community. This month, we saw the
disbandment of the community at Ras Al-Tin, following
the demolition of its residents’ homes and settler
attacks. We urge Israel to abide by its obligations under
international law in order to ensure that the residents
of Masafer Yatta and other communities in Area C are
protected and that humanitarian access is permitted,
and to refrain from further evictions and demolitions.
We also call on Israel to halt plans to advance 1,900
settlement units in East Jerusalem on 25 July.
Settlements are illegal under international law and
threaten the physical viability of a two-State solution.
The United Kingdom believes that Palestinians
and Israelis deserve equal measures of peace, security
and prosperity. A negotiated settlement leading to
a safe and secure Israel living alongside a viable and
sovereign Palestinian State remains the best way to
achieve that outcome.

22-4383713/34

S/PV.9099

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank Ms. Lynn Hastings, Deputy Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for
her briefing.
France continues to support a two-State solution
with Jerusalem as the capital of both States, and is
determined to work for its implementation, as set out
under international law, the relevant Security Council
resolutions and the agreed parameters. It is the only
solution that meets the legitimate aspirations of both
peoples and protects Israel’s security interests and the
region’s stability. We must act with a sense of urgency
to prevent another deadly spiral like the one that took
place in Gaza in May 2021. To that end, it will be
essential to establish a political horizon for addressing
the root causes of a deadlock that has lasted for far too
long. President Macron reminded President Abbas of
that during his visit to Paris on 20 July. It is in the direct
interests of both countries’ peoples and their security.
France will remain committed to ensuring Israel’s
security, and we condemn the recent rocket strikes that
targeted Israeli territory.
In the short term, the priority is to end the
unilateral measures that are increasingly undermining
the viability of a future Palestinian State, day after day.
That is crucial, together with the measures announced
by Israel for easing restrictions on Palestinians’
freedom of movement and facilitating the development
of the Palestinian territories. France firmly condemns
the advancement of plans for expanding and building
settlements, in particular in Area E1, and for evicting
Palestinian families and demolishing their homes. We
are very concerned about the recent developments
in Masafer Yatta and call for an end to the evictions
and demolitions, which are in breach of the Fourth
Geneva Convention.
Over the medium term, the priority should continue
to be facilitating a resumption of direct political
dialogue between Israelis and Palestinians. President
Macron underscored that point to President Abbas
and Prime Minister Lapid during their recent visits to
Paris. In that regard, we welcome the recent positive
gestures by the parties, such as the most recent call
between Mr. Lapid and Mr. Abbas and the prospects for
a resumption of the Israeli-Palestinian Joint Economic
Committee. Such gestures are crucial, as we must
rebuild trust and reopen a path to peace. That said, we
will see long-term results only with the cessation of
unilateral measures on the ground. For now, France will
14/34

26/07/2022

continue to fully support the Palestinian people with
bilateral assistance, assistance through the European
Union and support to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
Such support is even more important in the light of the
global food insecurity caused by the war in Ukraine
The Council has an important role to play in
establishing a credible political horizon. To that end,
we invite all members to make an active contribution.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Ms. Lynn Hastings, the Deputy
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Process, for
her briefing on the situation the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question.
Once again, we have to note that the fact that
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict continues unresolved
triggers frequent outbreaks of violence in the occupied
Palestinian territories that undermine regional and
international security. The deadlock in the peace
process, compounded by provocative unilateral
measures, is capable of igniting the situation in
the conflict zone at any point. We are particularly
concerned about reports that the Israeli settlements
designed to expand and entrench the occupation in the
West Bank have not ceased their attempts to create a
series of outposts, which are illegitimate even from the
point of view of Israel’s much-criticized legislature.
Against a backdrop of impunity for crimes against
the Palestinian people, the number of acts of violence
continues to grow steadily. In the past month at least
four Palestinian civilians have been killed and more
than 50 wounded. In Masafer Yatta, more than 1,200
Palestinians continue to face the threat of forced
evictions and confiscations of their property. Besides
that, Palestinians are targeted by ongoing arbitrary
arrests and a disproportionate use of force by the
Israeli armed forces, whose victims are often women
and children. Another telling incident was the murder
on 11 May in Jenin of the Al Jazeera correspondent
Shireen Abu Akleh. In the opinion of an overwhelming
number of experts, as well as the conclusion reached by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights on 24 July following an investigation
into the tragic incident, the shots that killed the
journalist and wounded her colleague were fired by
Israeli security forces.
We once again underscore the importance of
stepping up the efforts to consolidate the international
22-43837

26/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

consensus on a settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict based on the principle of a two-State solution
and the existing international legal framework,
including the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council and the Arab Peace
Initiative. We consistently advocate for a resumption
of direct Palestinian-Israeli negotiations, which should
lead to the creation of an independent Palestinian State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, while taking account
of Israel’s national security concerns. We believe that it
is essential to ramp up the multilateral efforts for this,
including in the format of the Middle East Quartet of
international mediators. In that regard, we reiterate our
focus on cooperation with the partners in the Quartet,
aimed at improving the effectiveness of this Councilapproved format. At the same time, we should emphasize
the importance of coordination between international
mediators and regional partners. That is what is behind
Russia’s initiative to hold an expanded ministerial
meeting of the Middle East Quartet with key members
of the League of Arab States. Regrettably, that has still
not been decided, thanks to the United States’ lack of
interest in resuming the Quartet’s activities.
It will be impossible to see sustained and long-term
progress in the peace process without intra-Palestinian
unity that is grounded in the Palestinian Liberation
Organization and the holding of Palestinian general
elections. In that regard, we support the initiatives of
Egypt and Algiers aimed at conducting another round
of negotiations between the representatives of Fatah
and Hamas. Our proposal for making use of Moscow’s
potential as a platform is still on the table. We also
consider it very important to provide comprehensive
humanitarian assistance to Palestinians in the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip, as well as to refugees in
neighbouring Arab States. We support the activities in
this area of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which is a key
organization for supporting Palestinians in need.
In conclusion, we once again underscore that the
Russian Federation will continue its efforts to coordinate
joint initiatives to revive the Middle East peace process
and bring about a just solution to the Palestinian
question. As we have seen, attempts to monopolize the
settlement efforts and impose an economic peace on
the Palestinian people rather than finding a fair way
to fulfil their aspirations for the creation of their own
independent State have not produced tangible results
and never will.

S/PV.9099

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Deputy Special
Coordinator Hastings for her briefing.
We remain concerned about the situation on
the ground. The tensions remain high, and violence
continues to harm civilians. We want to reiterate once
more our firm condemnation of any terrorist attacks on
Israel. Nothing ever can or will justify such attacks.
Rocket fire, the launching of incendiary devices and
other attacks by Hamas and other terrorist groups
remain unacceptable. Albania will continue to call
on all parties to avoid actions and provocations that
undermine the prospects for peaceful coexistence
between Israelis and the Palestinians. Evictions and
settler violence serve only to exacerbate tensions and
should be properly investigated.
We reiterate our support for a two-State solution,
with the State of Israel and an independent, democratic
and viable State of Palestine living side by side in peace
and security and mutual recognition, with Jerusalem
serving as the future capital of both States. Israelis
and Palestinians have a right to live in peace with one
another and with full and equal enjoyment of human
rights and freedoms. Despite the difficulties, challenges
and setbacks, we should not let that goal fade away. The
hopes of millions are invested in it.
We value every effort that seeks to bring the
parties closer together and establish a political horizon
for a resumption of talks within the United Nations
framework to find a lasting solution to the conflict. In
that context, we welcome President Biden’s recent visit
to the region.
An improved atmosphere and better relations
among the countries of the region promotes stability for
the benefit of all. It is important that the Palestinians
also be involved in, and benefit from, that process.
The announcement by Saudi Arabia that it will allow
overflights rights to all carriers, including Israeli
airlines, is welcome and will further contribute to
efforts towards building a robust regional architecture
by deepening the ties among the countries of the region.
We believe that cooperation is always a better
choice and a more secure path, as its dividends benefit
all those involved. In that respect, the announcement
of 4G wireless Internet access in the West Bank is
welcome and should contribute to improving economic
prospects for Palestinians.

22-4383715/34

S/PV.9099

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We condemn all forms of incitement to violence
and hate speech and call on all sides, especially political
leaders, to firmly and continuously condemn such acts.
Hate speech stigmatizes others, erodes social cohesion,
divides solidarity and undermines trust. It can lead
to hate crimes, and unfortunately very often does. It
should not be tolerated. Cases should be investigated
and perpetrators held accountable.
As we see in every conflict, innocent civilians,
women and children are disproportionately affected,
even when they are not directly targeted. We deplore
any loss of civilian life. Civilians should always be
kept out of conflicts, and no effort must be spared in
protecting civilians in accordance with international
humanitarian law. Civilian life is the same, whether
it is Israeli, Palestinian or anyone else’s. Civil society
is a vital pillar of any democratic society and must be
protected. All impediments to the operation of civil
society must be removed. It is our firm view that
democratic institutions based on respect for the rule of
law and human rights are vital everywhere, including
for the Palestinian people.
We reiterate our opposition to unilateral actions
that exacerbate the conflict and undermine efforts to
achieve a just and comprehensive solution. In line with
international law, settlements and their expansion are
an obstacle to peace and the realization of a two-State
solution. We think that they are wrong and should
be stopped.
We reiterate our support for the preservation of
the status quo of the holy sites and our respect for
Jordan’s custodian role, as well as the need to prevent
all attempts to disrupt them.
In conclusion, we welcome any steps towards
concrete and continued engagement between the parties
to restore what many of our colleagues have rightly
highlighted as a missing political horizon. There is no
alternative to the path towards peace for all through
a negotiation process, which should be launched as
soon as possible. Finding solutions to difficult issues
is always a matter of continued efforts of persistence,
goodwill, confidence and trust, and everything must be
done to help that process.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): Let me begin
by thanking Ms. Lynn Hastings, Deputy Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for her
comprehensive briefing, which highlighted the efforts
16/34

26/07/2022

of the United Nations and other stakeholders to bring
lasting peace to the Middle East region.
Ghana also associates itself with the statement
to be delivered on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
In furtherance of Ghana’s firm and long-held belief,
we reiterate our call on Israel and Palestine, as well as
the countries in the region, to commit to a negotiated,
just and peaceful resolution of the protracted conflict
with a view to pacifying the region and ensuring an
equal measure of security, freedom, opportunity and
dignity for all countries. We are therefore concerned
about the worsening security and humanitarian situation
in the region. Since March, at least 52 Palestinians have
been killed in the occupied West Bank. We are equally
concerned by the death in Israel of 19 persons and
condemn all such violence.
We believe that the growing insecurity in the Middle
East, especially the West Bank, does not augur well for
a peaceful resolution of the conflict. Accordingly, we
urge the parties to de-escalate existing tensions and
build confidence to generate political momentum for
negotiations. We also call for maximum restraint and
urge both Israel and Palestine to refrain from unilateral
actions that could escalate tensions and prejudice the
mutual trust urgently needed to stabilize the situation
and reverse the negative trends on the ground.
Ghana is therefore concerned about the activities of
Israeli settlers in six locations across the occupied West
Bank, including Ramallah, Salfit and Hebron. We urge
Israel to respect the inalienable rights of all those in the
West Bank and the occupied territories and abide by its
legal obligations and responsibilities under the Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the protection of civilian
persons in time of war.
We also encourage Israel to protect the religious
freedom of all, as well as to implement measures to
ensure the viability of the historic Christian, Jewish
and Muslim communities in Palestine and Israel and
the entire region.
In conclusion, we reiterate our position that the
path towards lasting peace and stability in the Middle
East runs through the internationally negotiated twoState solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by
side on the basis of the 1967 borders. The realization
of goals for the Middle East process, however, requires
the Council and the wider international community to
22-43837

26/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

sustain the engagement of the parties, whose efforts
in good faith are required to resolve the decadeslong conflict.
Mrs. Koumba Pambo (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
thank Ms. Lynn Hastings, Deputy Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for her enlightening
briefing. I also welcome the participation in this
meeting of the Permanent Representative of Israel and
the Permanent Observer of the State of Palestine.
While it is clear that peace in the Middle East is not
a foregone conclusion, it remains an achievable goal.
The pacification of the region, which we are all anxious
to see, is essentially based on the establishment of
peace between Israel and Palestine. That is an absolute
imperative that requires the firm commitment of all.
My country, Gabon, reaffirms its commitment to a twoState solution, with Palestine living side by side with
Israel on the basis of the 1967 borders, with Jerusalem
as its capital.
The exposure of the communities of Masafer Yatta
to the imminent risk of forced evictions, arbitrary
displacement and forcible transfers is a source of
concern, and we note the decision of the Israeli High
Court of Justice to that effect.
We also note the findings of the first report of
the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, and Israel of 7 June.
We note with great interest the meeting on 7 July held
between President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian
Authority and the Israeli Defense Minister, Mr. Benny
Gantz, which resulted in the latter’s approval of a series
of confidence-building measures between the parties.
Therefore, 5,500 persons will be added to the
Palestinian population register, in addition to the
12,000 whose registration has already been approved.
In addition, a further 1,500 Gazans will be allowed
to enter Israel to work or conduct business, bringing
the total quota to 15,500 Gazans. We will continue to
monitor developments on the issue, and we encourage
Israel to continue on that path in the hope that it will
help to rebuild trust between the parties. We also
welcome the continued dialogue between the parties
and their ability to work together to find solutions on
issues of common concern.
It is worth recalling the humanitarian consequences
of the crisis, particularly in the Palestinian territories,

S/PV.9099

which have been exacerbated by the coronavirus disease
pandemic. According to the latest report of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs thereon,
the number of children killed, maimed or otherwise
abused is worrisome.
The strong commitment of the international
community is therefore essential in order to ensure
predictable funding for humanitarian assistance, which
must of course also be extended to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East, which is doing its best to continue
to provide basic services, such as education, health
and food services, to the displaced and vulnerable
Palestinian population. It is therefore essential to close
the funding gap of that important body. We call on donor
countries to increase their contributions and support.
Without that financial support, the risk to vulnerable
civilian populations is a drastic increase in social unrest
on the ground: poverty, hunger, psychosocial problems
and violence.
On the issue of the return of human remains to the
families, we call on the parties to find an agreement that
will clearly help to create a climate of trust conducive
to peacebuilding.
In conclusion, we call on the parties to relaunch
negotiations in order to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian
crisis for a genuine and lasting peace, based on
respect for the principles agreed by the parties and the
application of the rules of international law. We reiterate
our support for, and solidarity with, the Palestinian and
Israeli civilian populations, who have paid a heavy
price since the beginning of this conflict.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank Ms. Lynn Hastings for
her comprehensive briefing.
After myriad complex crises and challenges in
our region, we have seen intensive diplomatic efforts
during the reporting period that have focused on
regional security, sustainable development and effective
diplomacy. The momentum generated by those efforts
aligns with the long-established approach of the United
Arab Emirates since its founding to restore security
and stability throughout the region, so as to provide
its peoples economically prosperous and peaceful
societies. Those objectives can be achieved through
initiatives that strengthen cooperation and strategic
partnerships regionally and internationally.

22-4383717/34

S/PV.9099

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In addition to those positive trends, we have also
witnessed several developments that we hope will
restore confidence between the Palestinian and the
Israeli sides, pave the way towards the revival of the
Middle East peace process and create an environment
conducive to a return to the negotiations. One of those
developments is the recent high-level communication
between the two parties, which we hope will constitute
a glimmer of hope for new opportunities to engage
in dialogue.
Furthermore, the United Arab Emirates commends
a series of recent measures that included approval for
the reunification of 5,500 Palestinian families, six
structural maps for Palestinians in the West Bank and
the reopening of a crossing point into the city of Jenin,
in the northern West Bank.
The international community should support recent
positive steps and encourage further steps to help
both parties return to the negotiating table and reach
a two-State solution based on relevant international
resolutions and the Charter of the United Nations.
The tension, escalation and violent clashes that we
have seen in the occupied Palestinian territory during
reporting period require the parties to refrain from
taking any provocative measures that may exacerbate
the situation. We also emphasize the need to stop all
illegal practices in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, that undermine the twoState solution and the prospects for peace. Those
practices include the construction and expansion of
settlements, as well as the confiscation of Palestinian
lands and property.
In the light of the deteriorating economic, health
and humanitarian conditions in the occupied Palestinian
territory, my country continues to uphold its historic
commitment to support the brotherly Palestinian people
in various fields, including humanitarian, health, social
and educational fields. To that end, the United Arab
Emirates recently announced a donation of $25 million
in support of Al-Makassed Hospital, an integral part
of the East Jerusalem Hospital Network that represents
the backbone of the Palestinian health system. We urge
the international community to continue providing
humanitarian and development assistance to the
Palestinian people. In that context, we appreciate the
United States announcement of an assistance package
this month to support the economic and health sectors
in the occupied Palestinian territory.
18/34

26/07/2022

It is important for the international community, and
particularly the Security Council, to seize the existing
opportunities in the region to revive the Middle East
peace process and to reach a two-State solution with an
independent and sovereign Palestinian State based on
the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in
accordance with resolutions of international legitimacy,
international law and the relevant agreements.
One of the most important aspects of the current
diplomatic initiatives in the Middle East is that they lead
to regional efforts that reflect genuine will to achieve
peace for all our peoples and creates prospects for
cooperation in vital areas that will help countries tackle
crucial challenges. That can be seen, for example, in the
recent summits held in the region, including the Jeddah
Security and Development Summit and the I2U2 Virtual
Summit, which yielded decisions coinciding with the
recent visit of United States President Joe Biden to the
region. We look forward to building on those efforts to
achieve security, stability and prosperity for our region
and the world.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Deputy Special
Coordinator Lynn Hastings for her briefing on recent
developments and the current situation on the ground.
I welcome the participation of the representatives
of Israel and the Observer State of Palestine in this
open debate.
My delegation reaffirms that peace efforts, at
both the official and the grass-roots levels, that
comprehensively
integrate
the
socioeconomic
development of all sectors of the society are, and will
be, critical to the stability and peace of the region in the
interim and for the long term.
In that regard, we note that the joint statement
issued by the summit of the leaders of the Gulf
Cooperation Council countries and the United States
also highlighted efforts to enhance contributions to the
East Jerusalem Hospital Network. Kenya welcomes
that and other cooperation initiatives, including the
23 June pledging conference to ensure adequate and
predictable funding for the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, and other recent practical confidence-building
measures in the area of commerce between the Israeli
and Palestinian authorities. They speak to what is
immediately practical in the context of an elusive peace
process when it comes to addressing the challenges in
the West Bank, Gaza and East Jerusalem.
22-43837

26/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We have also noted the importance of championing
grass-roots efforts that contribute to harmonious
coexistence and conducive conditions for official
negotiations. The important work of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon and the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force remains vital to the
stability of the subregion. Nonetheless, the success of
every initiative requires the resumption of the political
process and dialogue between both parties, not only
for the sustainability of such initiatives but also for the
stability and peace of the region.
My delegation once again reaffirms that the
actualization of the long-held goal of a region where
two democratic States, Israel and Palestine, live side by
side in peace and within secure and recognized borders,
based on the 1967 lines, will require a meaningful
commitment to the peace process by all parties, in
line with international law, the Charter of the United
Nations, Security Council resolutions, including the
comprehensive pillars of resolution 2334 (2016), and
the existing regional peace initiatives and frameworks.
We believe that such a commitment by both Israeli and
Palestinian leaders and its urgent operationalization
will contribute to addressing persistent challenges and
inject much-needed hope and trust in the multilateral
system by the general public.
A united response, including ongoing regional
efforts to revive intra-Palestinian reconciliation, can
also contribute to addressing the persistent spoilers of
peace in the region.
Kenya continues to strongly condemn the launches
of fire rockets from Gaza, including the recent launches
during President Biden’s official visit to the region.
Again, no cause can justify the deliberate targeting
of civilians.
But beyond condemnation, we urge armed and
militia groups that pursue ideological aims far outside
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, including Hamas and the Palestinian
Islamic Jihad, to publicly renounce terrorist acts and
genuinely commit to the peace efforts facilitated by
regional and international mechanisms.
Commitment to an independent, sovereign, viable
and contiguous Palestinian State also means the
immediate and complete cessation of Israeli settlement
activity in occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, as demanded by resolution 2334 (2016).
We are concerned about the human and property

S/PV.9099

implications of the recent announcements of settler
expansions, outposts and increasing settler violence in
the West Bank, including in Masafer Yatta. We note
the declaration and efforts of the Israeli authorities to
mitigate the settler outposts, as we heard today.
As I conclude, let me reaffirm that Kenya’s interest
remains to support an end to this protracted conflict,
whose damaging effects have proved to be far-reaching.
We urge all parties to avoid unilateral steps that stand
in the way of a resumption of the political process and
the peace and stability of the region. Kenya again calls
for real commitment, actual movement and tangible
outcomes that are in keeping with the principles of the
United Nations Charter and the Council’s resolutions.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I thank Deputy Special
Coordinator Lynn Hastings for her briefing on the
situation in the Middle East.
We remain concerned about the developments
in Israel and Palestine, in particular the continued
violent attacks, the killing of civilians and the acts
of destruction and provocation. We have consistently
advocated against all such acts of violence and reiterate
our call for their complete cessation.
All unilateral measures that unduly alter the status
quo on the ground and undercut the viability of the
two-State solution must be eschewed. The international
community and the Security Council must send a
strong signal against any step preventing the possibility
of durable peace between Israel and Palestine.
We urge the parties to focus on addressing the
urgent security and economic challenges, including
the precarious financial situation of the Palestinian
Authority, and chart a clear path for discussing key
political issues. In that regard, we recognize the
international community’s recent confidence-building
measures for the Palestinians and the important steps
Israel has taken to ease Palestine’s economic situation.
Such initiatives are in the interests of both parties, help
maintain stability and serve to prevent the recurrence
of terror and violence. Moreover, those initiatives
should create a conducive environment leading to
political dialogue.
We reiterate the need for an early resumption
of the political course by launching credible direct
negotiations on all final-status issues. India has
consistently called for direct peace negotiations between
Israel and Palestine, which, we believe, is the best path

22-4383719/34

S/PV.9099

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

towards achieving the goal of a two-State solution.
Those negotiations must be based on the internationally
agreed framework, taking into account the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people for statehood and
Israel’s legitimate security concerns.
Intra-Palestinian unity is critical for the wellbeing of the Palestinian people. We hope that efforts
to achieve reconciliation among the Palestinian parties
will soon bear fruit and help overcome the current
stalemate, leading to legislative and Presidential
elections in Palestine.
In response to the financial crisis of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), India enhanced
its annual pledge to the Agency from $1.25 million to
$5 million and has contributed $20 million over the
past four years. We have also pledged $5 million for
UNRWA’s programme budget for 2022. I am pleased to
inform the Council that the first tranche of our pledged
commitment for this year has already been released.
India has a vital stake in peace and prosperity in the
Middle East. During a recent I2U2 Virtual Summit, the
leaders of India, Israel, the United Arab Emirates and
the United States agreed to increase joint investment in
six key areas — water, energy, transport, space, health
and food security. We are confident that, with I2U2, we
will make significant contributions to energy security,
food security and economic growth in the Middle East
and South Asia.
We believe that the peaceful resolution of the
Israel-Palestine conflict would bring lasting peace
and stability to the region. The absence of a political
settlement between Israel and Palestine does not
augur well for long-term regional peace and stability.
Therefore, in addition to the stated political support for
a two-State solution, the international community must
expend energy and political capital to reinvigorate the
Middle East peace process.
Given our long-standing and firm commitment
to the establishment of a sovereign, independent and
viable State of Palestine within secure, recognized and
mutually agreed borders, living side by side with Israel
in peace and security, India remains fully supportive of
all efforts to restart the peace process.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Deputy Special
Coordinator Hastings for her briefing.
20/34

26/07/2022

Long-term solutions are needed to bring peace and
prosperity to the Israeli and Palestinian peoples. The
two-State solution — based on the 1967 lines — remains
the only viable pathway to settle this conflict.
We welcome the recently announced commitments
by Israel to increase the number of permits for
Palestinians in Gaza to work in Israel, roll out digital
infrastructure for 4G connectivity in the West Bank
and Gaza, resume discussions in the Joint Economic
Committee and increase access to the Allenby Bridge.
The overcrowding and severe delays seen at the crossing
last week underscore the urgent need to enhance the
efficiency of its operations.
We also commend the efforts under way on the
measures agreed in Brussels during the May meeting of
the donor group. We urge the parties and their partners
to make serious progress before the planned ministerial
meeting in New York in September.
We welcome the announcement of increased
financial support by the United States as well to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, which delivers critical
services to millions of vulnerable Palestine refugees.
And we applaud the United States for its intention to
extend funding to the East Jerusalem Hospital Network,
which Norway has long supported.
While those are all positive steps, they cannot
replace the need for a comprehensive peace process that
addresses the underlying drivers of conflict. There is
an urgent need for a political horizon with the ultimate
goal of implementing the two-State solution.
The settlements on occupied land are illegal under
international law. They undermine the prospects of a
two-State solution and escalate the conflict. Norway
repeats its call to Israel to halt all settlement expansions,
evictions and demolitions. We remain deeply concerned
about attempts by Israeli settler groups to establish
outposts in Area C of the West Bank. We welcome
the efforts of the Israeli authorities to stop those
recent attempts.
The situation in Masafer Yatta, however, with
the planned demolition orders and expulsion of 1,200
civilians, remains alarming. We call on Israel to
immediately halt those plans.
It is imperative in all circumstances to protect
civilians. As of 30 June, 60 Palestinians had been killed
this year by Israeli security forces in the West Bank. We
22-43837

26/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

call on Israel to implement effective practices to protect
all civilians, especially children. We will continue to
call for accountability for the killing of the PalestinianAmerican journalist Shireen Abu Akleh.
Norway continues to support the normalization of
relations between Israel and a number of Arab States.
We hope that those changes in the region will help pave
the way for resuming meaningful negotiations between
Israelis and Palestinians. Palestinians must be involved
in and benefit from the process.
Lastly, I would like to note the important mediation
efforts to establish a maritime delimitation line
between Israel and Lebanon. Norway encourages the
Governments of Lebanon and Israel to come swiftly
to a mutual agreement to the benefit of both countries.
That should also help solve the outstanding issues
concerning the land border. We strongly oppose the use
of any military means in or around the disputed areas,
which could escalate to a new regional conflict. The
relevant Security Council resolutions must also be fully
respected and adhered to.
Mr. De La Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I am grateful to Deputy Special Coordinator
Hastings for her briefing, and we welcome the
delegations of Palestine and Israel to this meeting.
We also thank the representative of the United States
for updating us on President Biden’s recent visit to
the region. We welcomed the recent talks between
President Abbas and President Herzog. We note that the
conversation between Mr. Abbas and Prime Minister
Lapid marks the first time in five years that an Israeli
Head of Government has held a meeting with the leader
of the Palestinian Authority. Similarly, we welcome
the meeting between Mr. Abbas and Defence Minister
Gantz, and we take note of the confidence-building
measures promoted by Mr. Gantz.
In the light of the upcoming elections and formation
of the next Israeli Government, all efforts to broaden
civilian, fiscal and security cooperation are welcome.
They are encouraging signs with regard to promoting
the Palestinian economy, and the prosperity of the
Palestinian population contributes to the prosperity
and security of the Israeli population. It is now time
for such encouragement to be matched by progress on
the political horizon to address the underlying issues.
The assistance provided by Arab States, in particular
Algeria, which facilitated the meeting between
leaders of the Palestinian factions at the beginning

S/PV.9099

of this month, is commendable. We hope that such
efforts will continue and will further intra-Palestinian
reconciliation. We once again stress the importance of
calling for general elections in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem and Gaza. We
should note the increase in cooperation between Israel
and Arab countries, and we hope that they will deepen
and capitalize on those relations in order to promote
dialogue with the Palestinian Authority and ultimately
to resume peace negotiations.
We are concerned about the evictions in Masafer
Yatta and the Israeli army’s training activities in
the firing zone that it has established, as well as the
attacks on humanitarian personnel. We urge the Israeli
authorities to prevent the more than 1,200 civilians
involved from being displaced, as the appropriation and
demolition of Palestinian property and their eviction
and forced displacement contravene international law.
With regard to the case of the journalist Shireen Abu
Akleh, my delegation has taken note of the forensic
analysis recently conducted by United States experts.
We reiterate the call for carrying out an independent
investigation to bring those responsible to justice.
We welcome the fact that several European States
have resumed their assistance to six civil-society
organizations that had been designated by Israel as
terrorists in November 2021. We reiterate our concern
about the financial situation of the Palestinian Authority
and that of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which, as has
been said many times, plays a critical role in providing
assistance and basic services to millions of Palestinians,
and we therefore welcome the outstanding aid provided
to the Palestinian hospital system in East Jerusalem.
Mexico once again condemns the attacks using
rockets and other ordnance launched from Gaza
on Israeli urban centres. We note with concern the
resurgence of so-called lone-wolf activities, particularly
in East Jerusalem, and the drone attacks on Israel’s
northern border. We call on the de facto authorities in
Gaza, as well as organizations in the region, to exercise
restraint and avoid further provocations.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Mexico’s support for a
two-State solution, which is the only way that we can
address the legitimate security concerns of Israel and
the creation of an economically and politically viable
Palestinian State, in accordance with international law
and the relevant United Nations resolutions.

22-4383721/34

S/PV.9099

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Deputy Special Coordinator Hastings for her
briefing and welcome the presence of the representatives
of Palestine and Israel at this meeting.
The Middle East peace process remains at an
impasse. The relevant United Nations resolutions have
gone unimplemented for many years, and the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people continue to be violated,
further exacerbating their predicament, which is of
great concern to China. The question of Palestine is at
the heart of Middle East issues affecting regional peace
and security and should not be marginalized, much
less forgotten. The international community should
fully acknowledge the severity of the situation and take
immediate, concrete action to put a settlement of the
Palestinian issue back on track as soon as possible.
First, there should be no more delays in reversing
the situation on the ground. Israel continues to expand
its settlement activities in the occupied territories, with
more than 300 settlements built and more than 700,000
settlers moved in so far, which is further shrinking the
Palestinian people’s living space and undermining the
contiguity of the occupied Palestinian territory and the
prospects for an independent and sovereign Palestinian
State. We urge Israel to abide by international law,
implement resolution 2334 (2016) and immediately stop
all settlement activities.
Secondly, we cannot defer achieving common
security. Violent incidents in the occupied territory
have continued one after another since the beginning
of this year, and the clashes in Gaza are worrisome.
According to statistics recently released by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, 63
Palestinians have been killed and more than 6,000
injured in operations by Israeli security forces so far
this year. The Secretary-General’s report on children
and armed conflict (S/2022/493) noted that last year
Israeli security forces killed 78 Palestinian children
and maimed 982. Attacks on Israeli civilians that result
in casualties also occur from time to time.
The security of Israel and Palestine is interdependent
and indivisible. The two sides should uphold a common,
comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security
concept and find a way to live side by side and in peace.
Seeking absolute security by using one’s advantageous
position can lead only to a greater security dilemma.
The international community should attach equal
importance to the security concerns of both Palestine
22/34

26/07/2022

and Israel. As the occupying Power, Israel should
fulfil its obligations under international humanitarian
law by ensuring the safety of civilians in the occupied
territories. We once again urge Israel to thoroughly
investigate the killing of female journalist Shireen Abu
Akleh, and the findings should stand the test of time
and history in order to bring about justice for the victim.
Thirdly, there should be no delay in advancing
the two-State solution. The Palestinian question has
dragged on for more than 70 years. Piecemeal crisis
management is no substitute for a comprehensive
and impartial solution. The international community
should work earnestly to promote the Middle East
peace process. Countries with influence on Palestine
and Israel should shoulder their dual responsibility,
uphold an objective and impartial position and play
their part in promoting the swift resumption of peace
talks between the two sides.
The Council should take more active and vigorous
actions on the Palestinian question and work with the
League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and other organizations to bring about
broader and more effective efforts to promote peace.
China calls for a larger, more authoritative and more
influential international peace conference, in which the
permanent members of the Council and all stakeholders
in the Middle East peace process are invited to
participate in exploring effective ways and means to
find a political solution to the Palestinian question.
The Middle East is an ancient land that has given
birth to impressive civilizations. The people of the
Middle East have lived on that land for generations
and are the true master of it. There has never been a
so-called vacuum in the Middle East. There has never
been a need for external countries to play a so-called
leading role. Since modern and contemporary times,
colonialism and foreign interference have brought
untold suffering to the countries and the peoples of the
region, and their negative effects persist.
Above all, the Middle East needs peace and
security. The people of the Middle East primarily
desire development and progress. The international
community should help the countries of the region to
seek peace through unity and development through
cooperation, instead of stoking bloc confrontations or
geopolitical rivalries, which will serve only to further
destabilize the region.
22-43837

26/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

As a strategic partner of the countries in the
Middle East, China has always supported them in
resolving regional security issues through solidarity
and cooperation and supported their peoples in
independently exploring their own development paths.
We have worked with the countries of the region to fight
the pandemic, advance the Belt and Road Initiative and
make an active contribution to the development of the
Middle East. China is willing to further contribute to
the achievement of peace and development in the region.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that China
supports the establishment of a fully sovereign and
independent Palestinian State, based on the 1967
borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital. We
support the peaceful coexistence of Palestine and Israel
and the common development of the Arab and Jewish
peoples. China will continue to work tirelessly with the
international community towards a comprehensive and
just solution to the Palestinian question.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Brazil.
I thank Ms. Lynn Hastings, Deputy Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for
briefing the Security Council today.
Brazil remains concerned about the ongoing
episodes of violence in the West Bank, including in
East Jerusalem, and in Israel in recent months. There is
no justification for any attacks on civilians. We call on
both sides to exercise maximum restraint and protect
the lives of civilians.
Brazil agrees with the assessment that the mere
management of this conflict in perpetuity is not a viable
option. There is no substitute for a legitimate political
process to bring about lasting peace and stability. We
must reflect on the role the Council should play in
reinvigorating the peace process in the region, while
paving the way for new negotiations.
Without a horizon for conversations, faith in peace
wanes and the reality on the ground precludes the
possibility of a viable agreement. The Abraham Accords
offered renewed hope in dialogue and diplomacy. Some
important high-level meetings continue to be held,
but the involvement of relevant stakeholders in efforts
towards the two-State solution has stalled. Important
mechanisms established by resolutions of the Council
remain practically inoperative.

S/PV.9099

In Brazil’s view, we should seriously pursue the
objective of promoting political negotiations for a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, based on all relevant Security Council resolutions.
That requires involvement and commitment from all
relevant parties. Intra-Palestinian reconciliation is a
crucial step towards resuming genuine dialogue within
the framework of the peace process. International
cooperation aimed at restoring and improving basic
infrastructure and the economic empowerment of the
Palestinian population can also improve prospects
for reconciliation.
It is equally important to address the structural
impediments imposed on the Palestinian economy,
which needs support to strengthen its industrial and
agricultural production. Brazil believes that fostering
the Palestinian economy is one of the best ways to give
peace concrete meaning.
Palestine has great economic potential in many
sectors that can create job opportunities and raise the
income of families, which means allowing Palestinian
businesspeople to export their products to the
world market.
Confidence-building measures on both sides must
continue. Brazil commends the Israeli authorities’
recent measures aimed at building trust with the
Palestinians, including increasing the quota of workers
from the Gaza Strip and the opening of a new vehicular
crossing on the north of the West Bank, as well as
measures to prevent the establishment of new outposts.
We are following the developments in the talks
regarding the exchange of prisoners and hope the
parties can come to an understanding. Last month,
General Assembly President Abdulla Shahid convened
a donor conference in support of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA), a much-needed meeting as the
Agency continues to face chronic underfunding against
the backdrop of the competing needs of the growing
number of refugees worldwide.
We commend the initiative of the President of the
General Assembly and welcome the encouraging results
of the conference. Brazil reiterates its commitment to
UNRWA’s tireless humanitarian action, which provides
essential services to one of the most vulnerable refugee
populations in the world. UNRWA plays a key role in
stabilizing the region, in which poverty and political
instability provide fertile ground for extremist forces.

22-4383723/34

S/PV.9099

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Over the past few decades, the Agency has consistently
strived to contain violence and improve the living
conditions of Palestinian refugees. Last month, despite
severe budgetary constraints at the national level,
Brazil announced an additional financial contribution
to UNRWA.
The ongoing violence must stop, which requires
efforts by all parties to defuse tensions and reverse
the negative trends that undermine the prospects for a
peaceful resolution of the conflict. Violent escalations
prevent durable solutions. The lack of lasting solutions
fuels frustration and despair, which in turn result in
further violent escalations. Reinvigorating the political
process should not be a goal for the distant future but
a necessary condition for preventing violence in the
present and breaking the cycle.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Brazil’s long-standing
commitment to achieving a just and sustainable peace
in the Middle East, with Israelis and Palestinians living
side by side in peace and security, in two democratic,
prosperous and sovereign States, within secure and
internationally recognized borders.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I would like to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than three minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I give the floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): I would like to start by
congratulating you and Brazil, Sir, on your presidency
of the Council and on convening this meeting.
The Middle East has seen two important
developments in the past month, the common position
reached at the Jeddah Security and Development
Summit, in particular on the Palestinian issue, and the
visit of President Joe Biden of the United States and
his reaffirmation of the long-held American position
on the Arab-Israeli conflict. Those two developments
showed that the Palestinian issue is still central to
any peace efforts in the region. In the meantime, the
situation in the Palestinian territories continues to be
mired in tension, reminding us that the conflict is still
unresolved. Daily Palestinian casualties remain a grim
reality, making it clear to all that ignoring the plight
of the Palestinians will not make the conflict go away.
It also proves that the much-promised peace is still a
pipe dream, while the peace process remains blocked,
24/34

26/07/2022

leaving the Palestinian people more hopeless and
without a political horizon.
The Jeddah Summit in Saudi Arabia came back to
a consensus on the need to reach a just solution to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict on the basis of a two-State
solution and the Arab Peace Initiative. It also called
for a halt to all unilateral measures that undermine the
possibility of a two-State solution and affirmed the
historical status quo of Jerusalem, with the Hashemite
guardianship over the holy sites in Al-Quds. The visit
of President Biden also brought a much-needed change
and rebalancing of the United States’ position. President
Biden reaffirmed the United States’ commitment to
a two-State solution along the 1967 lines, with land
swaps mutually agreed by the Israelis and Palestinians.
He highlighted the importance of direct negotiations
leading to “an independent, sovereign, viable and
contiguous Palestinian State alongside the State of
Israel”, enabling the two peoples to live side by side in
peace and security, and called on both sides to avoid
unilateral measures. Those pronouncements inspired
hope in a new American peacemaking effort.
However, the President told the Palestinians that
the ground was not ripe for new attempts to reach
peace. The argument that the ground is not ready for a
peaceful settlement is as old as the peace process itself.
This theory permits unilateral measures and facts on
the ground to put an end to Palestinians’ dreams of a
State of their own. The President also stopped short
of reassuring Palestinians on two important issues,
those of Jerusalem and the settlements. With regard
to Jerusalem, he reiterated the previous United States
Administration’s position recognizing Jerusalem as the
capital of Israel and stopped short of fulfilling his pledge
to reopen the United States consulate in Jerusalem. He
did not talk about East Jerusalem as the capital of a
future Palestinian State either. Nor did the President
take a strong position on the settlements, which remain
the thorniest of the unilateral measures and which are
considered illegal and the main obstacle to peace by
Palestinians, Arabs and the international community.
The key to peace in the region, as Palestinian
President Mahmoud Abbas has said, is simply ending
the occupation.
Prime Minister Najib Mikati of Lebanon and his
Government are upholding their role as a caretaker
Government and continuing their positive work on
the reform steps that the Prime Minister’s Cabinet
started and that have to be followed up with the
22-43837

26/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

international community, especially the International
Monetary Fund. The Prime Minister was asked to form
a new Government during a very trying time for the
country and is continuing his efforts to do so. The new
Government will also play an important role in making
sure that the presidential elections take place on time
and in a safe, healthy atmosphere this autumn.
The situation in south Lebanon regarding peace
and security is calm but fragile. Lebanon is committed
to a just, lasting and comprehensive peace for the
conflict in the region, based on international legality
and the relevant Security Council resolutions. In that
regard, Lebanon reiterates its commitment to the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) in its entirety
and calls on Israel, the other party to the conflict, to
do the same. The daily Israeli violations of Lebanese
sovereignty add to the tension in the region and must
stop. Lebanon is proceeding with negotiations and
is committed to finding a peaceful solution to the
question of its maritime border, based on guaranteeing
its national rights to its gas and oil resources. The good
offices of the United States and the United Nations in
its sponsorship and hosting of the talks have offered
a peaceful path to a resolution of the issue through
negotiation at a time that is very difficult for Lebanon
on the economic and financial fronts. That opportunity
should not be missed, and Lebanon therefore appeals
to the international community to help it achieve a
peaceful, equitable and fair resolution of the maritime
border dispute. Lebanon is not interested in conflict or
in escalating tensions, and with the help of its friends
will continue its efforts to bring about a good conclusion
to the negotiations.
In a month’s time, the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) will be up
for renewal. UNIFIL has been an indispensable force
for stability in south Lebanon in partnership with the
Lebanese army. We support the important role that
UNIFIL plays in peace and security in the south of the
country, and we hope that its mandate will be renewed
without any changes. We also hope that the Council
will extend UNIFIL’s support for the Lebanese army,
especially in providing the Lebanese Armed Forces
with provisions at this difficult time in Lebanon. We
count on the support of the Council and its members.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.

S/PV.9099

Mr. Ishikane (Japan): At the outset, Japan reaffirms
its commitment to supporting a two-State solution
based on the relevant Security Council resolutions and
internationally agreed parameters, in which both Israel
and a sovereign, independent and viable Palestinian
State can live side by side in peace and security.
However, we remain deeply concerned about the
level of violence in Israel and the West Bank, which
has led to many casualties, including the killing of the
Al-Jazeera correspondent Shireen Abu Akleh. We call
for an independent and transparent investigation into
her killing and stress the need for those responsible
to be held accountable. Japan also strongly condemns
the firing of rockets by Palestinian militants in Gaza
into Israel hours after the visit of President Biden of the
United States. The Israeli settlements in the West Bank
remain deeply alarming, as they flagrantly violate
international law.
We call on all the parties to exercise the utmost
restraint and avoid provocative unilateral actions. It
will be crucial to reverse the negative trends on the
ground that are undermining the prospects for a twoState solution. Japan hopes that evolving regional
partnerships in the Middle East such as the Negev
Forum will help ease tensions and contribute to regional
stability. In that context, Japan, Egypt and Jordan are
working together closely in a trilateral consultation
format to discuss regional peace and prosperity and
contribute to the Middle East peace process.
Given the precarious financial situation of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), we welcomed
the holding on 23 June of a pledging conference for
the Agency with a view to ensuring the delivery of
life-saving services to Palestinians. Japan contributed
more than $50 million to the Agency in 2021 and
has already provided $28 million for 2022, including
emergency food aid. We call on other donors to increase
their contributions to UNRWA as well.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Japan’s determination
to spare no effort to achieve a two-State solution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
situation in occupied Palestine remains dire, as the
Israeli regime’s brutality and grave and systematic
violations of the human rights of the Palestinian

22-4383725/34

S/PV.9099

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

people continue unabated. According to a United
Nations report, the Israeli regime continues to kill
innocent people, including women and children, as
well as seizing and demolishing Palestinian houses
and forcibly evicting Palestinians from their homes.
At the same time, in blatant violation of international
law and the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions, the establishment of settlements
in occupied Palestine continues.
The recent assassination of Shireen Abu Akleh,
a veteran Palestinian journalist, was in line with
Israel’s long-running and well-documented campaign
of harassment, intimidation and violence against
journalists, with the ultimate goal of obscuring the
atrocities committed by the Israeli regime against
Palestinians. Meanwhile, the annual report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2022/493) revealed that the Israeli regime continues
to commit the most systematic and flagrant violations of
children’s rights in the Middle East. In 2021 the regime
murdered 86 Palestinian children and imprisoned
637 more.
The humanitarian situation in Gaza is tragic.
According to United Nations reports, nearly 2 million
Palestinians are locked in, with the vast majority
unable to access the rest of occupied Palestine or the
outside world. Long-standing Israeli policy on access
restrictions against Gaza has egregiously impacted
its economy, resulting in high unemployment,
food insecurity and reliance on aid. As collective
punishment against all its inhabitants, the continued
blockade of Gaza constitutes a clear manifestation of a
war crime and a crime against humanity. In accordance
with international law, the blockade must be lifted
immediately and completely.
Furthermore, the Israeli regime’s destabilizing
activities against countries of the region continue. The
regime continues to violate Syria’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity through its prolonged occupation of
the Syrian Golan, as well as numerous attacks against
civilian targets and civilian infrastructure within Syria,
including the recent terrorist attacks against Damascus
International Airport on 10 June.
The Israeli regime also continues to occupy and
violate Lebanese territory in a flagrant violation of
international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions, in particular resolution 1701 (2006). We
strongly condemn such grave violations and malevolent
26/34

26/07/2022

and destabilizing activities, which clearly threaten the
peace and security of the region.
The Security Council’s inaction has emboldened
the Israeli regime to continue its crimes against the
oppressed Palestinian people, as well as its aggression
and malicious activities against the countries in the
region. The lack of accountability for such serious
violations contributes to that impunity. The Security
Council must uphold its Charter obligation to maintain
international peace and security. The Council is
expected to implement its own resolutions and to
compel the Israeli regime to immediately cease its
systematic violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.
Finally, the representative of the Israeli regime has
once more abused this forum and made false accusations
against my country, all of which are categorically
rejected. Those unfounded allegations are intended to
distract attention from the continuous atrocities and
violations of international law committed by the Israeli
regime in occupied Palestine and other countries of
the region.
The weapons of mass destruction in the hands of
the Israeli regime have made the regime even more
dangerous for the entire region. The regime’s nuclear
arsenal, according to multiple reports, comprises 400
warheads, including thermonuclear weapons. It has
access to all delivery systems for weapons of mass
destruction. The Israeli regime has even threatened
nuclear annihilation against the countries of the region.
It has refused to adhere to any disarmament or control
regimes for weapons of mass destruction and has
ignored repeated international calls to join the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, to accept
the comprehensive safeguards agreement or to submit
its nuclear programmes to International Atomic Energy
Agency inspections.
It is high time for the Security Council to
condemn the Israeli regime and force it to adhere to
the international regimes banning weapons of mass
destruction. The time to act is now.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Larbaoui (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my sincere appreciation
to the friendly delegation of Brazil for its capable
presidency of the Security Council this month and
22-43837

26/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

for convening this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
Unfortunately, despite these repeated meetings and
their unchanging outcomes, they are never equal to
the suffering and sacrifice of the brotherly Palestinian
people. For years the Council has adopted a conflictmanagement approach, which has led to the temporary
containment of a violent conflict instead of looking
for the necessary solutions that would put an end to
the occupation and empower the Palestinian people to
enjoy their legitimate right to establish an independent
State with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The occupation therefore persists, with its
settlement policies and systematic actions to impose
the status quo, including by changing the historical
and legal nature of Al-Aqsa Mosque and attempts to
Judaize religious sites in Jerusalem, in a manner that
runs counter to the provisions of international law.
Such flagrant practices, which expose the region
to risks that threaten peace and security, represent a
blatant violation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, including the freedom of worship, which
are granted by all laws and faiths. We reject the silence
about what is happening in Jerusalem, the first of the
two Qiblahs and the third of the Two Holy Mosques,
which contravenes all standards, whether Palestinian,
Arab, Islamic or humanitarian.
Jerusalem, the flower of cities, is continuously
subject to Judaization in an escalating and repeated
manner. There are daily incursions into the Al-Aqsa
Mosque. Settlements are being expanded inside Arab
communities, and the residents of Jerusalem are forcibly
displaced, detained and killed, while Arab institutions
are closed and destroyed.
Algeria is steadfast in its position regarding the
Palestinian question. We spare no effort to support the
brotherly Palestinian people politically, economically
and financially. We stress what was stated by the
President of the Republic, Mr. Abdelmadjid Tebboune,
that the international community, especially the
Security Council, must shoulder its responsibility to
put an end to the violations and aggression against the
brotherly Palestinian people and provide the necessary
international protection for them and for the holy sites
in occupied Jerusalem.
We believe that a peaceful political solution is the
only way to resolve the Palestinian question. Algeria

S/PV.9099

has worked to unite Palestinians by hosting a national
Palestinian dialogue that promotes internal unity
and the acceptance of all resolutions of international
legitimacy in order to ensure that the brotherly
Palestinians are ready to engage peacefully as one in
any future negotiations. My country works hard to
advance Palestinian reconciliation and unity.
The efforts of President Tebboune succeeded
in uniting the Palestinians at a historic meeting held
in the capital, Algiers, following years of inaction.
That meeting was held on the occasion of the sixtieth
anniversary of Algeria’s glorious independence. Algeria
will always uphold its principles and values in defence
of Palestinian question and the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination, in line with resolutions of
international legitimacy and the Arab Peace Initiative,
which is one of the internationally recognized terms of
reference. That is the only way to achieve a just and
comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question.
Those who allow time to impose the status quo in
Palestine and wait for it to turn what is unnatural into
something natural are holding on to a fleeting hope.
They have not learned from lessons from history, which
have proved that there is no legitimacy whatsoever to
occupation. Those who have rights will always retain
those legitimate and inalienable rights until they can
realize them in practice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to commend the efforts of Brazil
in leading the work of the Security Council during the
month of July. I also thank Ms. Lynn Hastings, Deputy
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for her valuable briefing.
The Kingdom of Morocco and its King, His
Majesty Mohammed VI, Head of the Al-Quds
Committee of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
attach great importance to the Palestinian question
and the rights of the Palestinian people. Security and
stability in the Middle East are linked to a just and
comprehensive peace settlement of this question, based
on international legitimacy and a two-State solution, as
the international community has agreed. Regrettably,
as a result of the impasse of the political process in the
Middle East, what we have been seeing is an increase
in violence, which amounts to an additional cause of
extreme conflict, which in turn leads to further tension

22-4383727/34

S/PV.9099

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and encourages hate speech in the entire region. That
widens the gap between the Palestinian and Israeli
sides and undermines the prospects for security and
peace in the Middle East. Morocco therefore urges all
the parties involved to avoid any action that could lead
to an escalation in the region.
King Mohammed VI, Head of the Al-Quds
Committee, has spared no effort, politically or
diplomatically, to maintain the unique position of
the sacred city of Jerusalem. That is why, in his
announcement during Pope Francis’s visit to Morocco
in March 2019, His Majesty stressed the importance
of preserving Jerusalem as the common heritage of
humankind and maintaining its legal, historic and
demographic nature as a destination for all believers
of the three major monotheistic religions. The Al-Quds
Committee plays a political and practical role in
supporting the Palestinian people in general and the
residents of Jerusalem in particular, while harmonizing
the political efforts of King Mohammed and the work
on the ground of the Bait Mal Al-Quds Al-Sharif
Agency under his personal supervision. Morocco
contributes nearly 89 per cent of the Agency’s annual
budget. Since its launch in 1995 the Agency has worked
to preserve the rights of Arabs and Muslims in the holy
city by supporting and financing a number of vital
social, cultural, educational, health and architectural
projects, with a major and tangible impact on the lives
and resilience of Jerusalem’s residents.
Through direct mediation by Morocco under the
leadership of King Mohammed, the Israeli authorities
decided to open the King Hussein Bridge (Allenby)
Terminal, which links the West Bank to Jordan, while
a joint mediation effort by Morocco and the United
States has led to an agreement on permanently opening
a bridge crossing for Palestinians. This border crossing,
50 kilometres from Amman, is soon to open once some
logistical issues are finalized and will have a major
positive impact on Palestinians’ daily life through its
facilitation of the movement of people and goods. The
importance that His Majesty attaches to the Palestinian
question and people continues to be demonstrated in
these examples of mediation by Morocco.
Morocco believes that a settlement of the
Palestinian question is central and vital to the future of
the Middle East. It is also a priority for the international
community. We consistently emphasize that position,
based on our belief that the stability of the region and its
prosperity are dependent on finding a just and lasting
28/34

26/07/2022

solution to the issue that is in line with international
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
In his solidarity address on 29 November 2021, the
International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, King Mohammed said that Morocco’s steadfast
position is not conditional or a matter of mere politics,
but rather is based on firm belief supported by a serious
and meaningful diplomatic effort, along with concrete
efforts on the ground, to reach a solution to the question
of Palestine and of Al-Quds Al-Sharif.
In conclusion, I want to emphasize that Morocco
will continue to invest in its historic and effective
role regarding the Palestinian question. Our unique
relationship with all the parties and other important
international powers helps to create an environment that
is conducive to a resumption of negotiations between
the Palestinian and Israeli sides, which is the only path
to achieving security and stability in the Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Mr. Al Omoush (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate Brazil on its
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
to thank Ms. Hastings for her briefing.
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan reiterates the
importance of reaching a just and comprehensive
solution to the Palestinian question, based on the
existence of two States. There can be no security,
stability or prosperity in the region without a solution
that guarantees the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State within the borders of 4 June 1967,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side in
security and peace with Israel.
We need effective action to make political progress
that can lead to a just and comprehensive peace based
on a two-State solution. The alternative is continued
conflict, exacerbated by constant violations of the
Palestinian people’s rights and illegal measures that
undermine the prospects for peace, and Jordan rejects
any unilateral measures that contribute to that. We
emphasize the importance of respecting the legal and
historic status of Jerusalem and its holy sites, based
on the historic Hashemite custodianship of Muslim
and Christian holy sites undertaken by His Majesty
King Abdullah. We must stabilize the situation and
put an end to the unilateral measures undermining the
possibility of a two-State solution and of reaching a just
and comprehensive peace. We should work collectively
22-43837

26/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.9099

to create a mechanism that makes it possible to reach
a genuine political horizon that can enable a return to
serious, effective negotiations to resolve the Palestinian
question, in accordance with international law, the
resolutions of international legitimacy, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the agreed parameters.

entity launched a flagrant attack on Syrian sovereignty
from the Syrian Arab Golan, which has been under
occupation since 4 June 1967. It targeted the suburbs
of the city of Damascus, which led to three military
martyrs and the injury of seven others, in addition to
material losses.

As the occupying Power, Israel has a responsibility
with regard to what happens in Jerusalem and should
therefore respect the current legal and historic status of
the city, uphold the provisions of international law and
international humanitarian law regarding the duties of
the occupying Power and refrain from violating basic
principles, especially with regard to the historic status
of the Muslim and Christian institutions in Al-Quds,
the Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif, all of
which are under the Hashemite custodianship. In that
regard, we reiterate that pursuant to the provisions
of international humanitarian law, the Jordanian
administration of Al-Quds and the Al-Aqsa Mosque
is the only responsible party for managing all affairs
related to the Al-Aqsa Mosque in its entire area of
144,000 square metres. Preserving calm means that
Israel must respect the Mosque’s legal and historic
status and work for a genuine political future that
guarantees the implementation of all the legitimate
rights of our brother people of Palestine.

The escalating and hysterical aggression of the
Israeli occupation forces came under the protective
umbrella of the United States of America and its
Western allies. That led Israel to persist in targeting
civilians and civilian facilities, as was the case in its
aggression against Damascus International Airport on
10 June, which endangered civilians and fully halted
airport operations for a few weeks, including halting
United Nations humanitarian flights. That was preceded
by similar aggression against the commercial port of
Latakia at the end of last year, which led to massive
damage to the civilian structure of the port and to
humanitarian materials owned by the United Nations.

The continued efforts of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) to provide its services are essential until
a just and lasting solution for Palestinian refugees can
be found, ensuring their right to return and to redress,
in accordance with international law and resolutions of
international legitimacy, above all resolution 194 (III).
In conclusion, Jordan will continue to support our
brother Palestinian people and to work to help them
enjoy all their legitimate rights, especially their right
to self-determination and the creation of a sovereign
and independent State within 4 June 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): Every time the Security Council holds a
meeting on this agenda item, we find ourselves before
new blatant Israeli aggression against the Arab people,
be it in Palestine, Syria or south Lebanon. That comes
amid complete and unacceptable silence on the part
of the Council. Two days ago, the Israeli occupation

Our Arab people in the occupied Palestinian
territories and the occupied Syrian Golan are subjected
in parallel to aggressive practices by the Israeli
occupation authorities, in clear violation of the principles
of international law and the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations, as well as relevant resolutions of
international legitimacy, in particular resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981). Israel, the occupying
Power, continues its endeavours to entrench its
occupation of the Syrian Golan, prolonging it through
the confiscation of more Syrian properties and lands
and the stealing of natural resources. It also continues
to implement settlement projects and other illegitimate
measures that aim to alter the legal and demographic
nature of the Golan and void it of its Syrian identity.
At the same time, the Israeli occupation authorities
continue their incursion into Palestinian cities and
towns, demolishing Palestinian homes, displacing
Palestinians and confiscating their lands and uprooting
their trees to build thousands of new settlement units.
The Syrian Arab Republic calls upon the Security
Council to end its silence and urgently shoulder its
responsibility to end the Israeli occupation of Arab
lands and hold its authorities accountable for its
violations and aggressive practices that escalate threats
to regional and international peace and security. My
delegation also calls upon the representatives of the
Secretariat and the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process to shoulder their obligations and

22-4383729/34

S/PV.9099

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

not stand idly by before those Israeli practices, or cover
them up in their reports and briefings.
The Syrian Arab Republic underlines once again
that it upholds its right to restore the entire occupied
Syrian Golan by all means, according to international
law, since it is an eternal right that is not governed by
statute of limitations. We also stress that all decisions
and measures taken by Israel to annex the Golan or
alter its legal or demographic nature or impose any
laws, authorities or administrations upon it are null and
void and have no legal impact, pursuant to international
law and relevant United Nations resolutions, especially
resolution 497 (1981).
My country stresses the right to respond
adequately to the repeated Israeli aggression, in line
with international law and the United Nations Charter.
We also stress that we will continue to mobilize all
international efforts to condemn Israel and to expose
its aggressive goals, especially as it washes its hands
of the implementation of any requirements to achieve a
just and comprehensive peace in our region.
The Syrian Arab Republic reiterates its commitment
to support the Palestinian question and the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people. We will stand by them
in their legitimate struggle to end the Israeli occupation
and establish an independent State on its territory, with
Jerusalem as its capital. We also stand in solidarity with
respect to the right of return of the Palestine refugees,
in line with international law and relevant United
Nations resolutions, in particular General Assembly
resolution 194 (III) of 1948.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Ms. Rizk (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to express our appreciation for Brazil’s
wise leadership of the work of the Security Council
during this month. I would like to thank Ms. Hastings,
Deputy Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process and United Nations Resident Coordinator for
the Occupied Palestinian Territory, for her briefing.
I would also like to associate ourselves with
the statement made on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
The suffering of the Palestinian people in their
occupied territory has continued amid repeated
violations by the Israeli occupation forces for decades,
with no hope for ending those violations. The situation
30/34

26/07/2022

is exacerbated by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
current international tensions and the hike in prices for
basic goods, especially food.
The Israeli practices in the West Bank, including
occupied East Jerusalem, have increased in frequency
over the past few years in the light of the violations of
the occupation forces and the settlers against unarmed
Palestinian people. That was underlined in many
relevant international reports. Settlement expansion
has increased, which undermines the two-State
solution. It has also led to the eviction of Palestinians,
the demolition of their homes and increased detention,
even of children. That is in addition to what has been
documented by many international reports, which have
stated that live bullets have been used increasingly
against unarmed Palestinian civilians, leaving
hundreds of martyrs, especially children, without any
accountability on the part of the perpetrators.
Turning to the Gaza Strip, the situation is not any
better. This year marks 15 years since the imposition
of the blockade, with all its repercussions on the daily
lives of the Palestinians in Gaza. In the light of the
above, Egypt has stressed time and again that the status
quo cannot continue. We must work on enhancing the
situation on the ground and rebuilding trust between
the two sides to achieve an environment conducive to
the revitalization of the Palestinian-Israeli negotiations.
That will lead to the independence of the Palestinian
State along the 4 June 1967 lines, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, in line with the agreed-upon decisions
of international legitimacy, international law, United
Nations resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016),
and the two-State solution.
Egypt welcomes the additional assistance
announced by the United States of America during
the visit of the United States President to Jerusalem
this month, as well as the measures taken to enhance
the situation. Egypt also welcomes the outcome of
the Ad Hoc Committee of the General Assembly for
the Announcement of Voluntary Contributions to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), held on 23 June,
which garnered almost $160 million in new pledges. We
look forward to further support to UNRWA to fill its
budget gap.
Needless to say that a just, lasting and comprehensive
solution to the Palestinian question is the only way to
put an end to the suffering of the Palestinian people.
22-43837

26/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

That was stressed by President Abdel Fattah Al Sisi
when he participated in the Jeddah Security and
Development Summit this month. He described the
Palestinian question as the primary Arab issue. He also
emphasized the importance of intensifying our joint
efforts, not only to revitalize the peace process track
but to reach a final and irrevocable solution that would
drive peace endeavours in the region.
Egypt would like to stress that the information
provided by Ms. Hastings on the so-called Salah ad-Din
crossing is incorrect, as the so-called Rafah crossing
is currently the only border crossing for the movement
of people. Egypt will spare no effort to support its
Palestinian brothers.
Regionally, turning to developments in our sister
State of Libya, with the participation of the Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General Egypt recently
hosted three rounds of talks between the House of
Representatives and the Supreme State Council on
reaching an agreement on the necessary constitutional
basis for holding parliamentary and presidential
elections, which have been delayed since December
2021. The last round of talks was held between 12 and
20 June. Considerable progress was made on reaching
a consensus on a number of controversial articles from
Libya’s 2017 draft constitution. We hope that the United
Nations and all Member States will shoulder their
responsibilities and encourage all parties to finalize the
constitution, building on the progress made in Cairo,
and avoid any measures that would prolong the status
quo. That is particularly important given the expiration
of the 18-month deadline for the maximum transitional
period, in line with article 3 of the road map of the
Libyan Political Dialogue Forum held on 22 June. Egypt
also stresses the need for concerted efforts to maintain
the ceasefire in Libya and ensure the just and equitable
use of Libyan resources in the interests of all Libyans,
rather than in support of the narrow and individual
interests of a few at the people’s expense.
With regard to the crisis in Yemen, Egypt
underscores its support to all efforts aimed at reaching
a comprehensive settlement in line with the aspirations
and ambitions of our brother people of Yemen. Egypt
will continue to support the endeavours of Mr. Hans
Grundberg, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen, to achieve a comprehensive settlement
through a political solution that can ensure Yemen’s
unity, territorial integrity and sovereignty and end
the humanitarian suffering of the Yemeni people. It

S/PV.9099

should be in line with the primary terms of reference,
particularly the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2216 (2015), as well as the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative and its implementation
mechanism and the outcomes of a comprehensive
national Yemeni dialogue, in addition to the outcome
of the recent Yemeni consultations in Riyadh, which
led to the establishment of the Presidential Leadership
Council. In that regard, Egypt stresses its firm position
in support of Yemen’s legitimate State institutions. We
also welcome the truce renewal between the Yemeni
parties and hope it will enable the completion of the
transitional period so that our brother nation of Yemen
can achieve security, stability and an intra-Yemeni
consensus on ending the crisis and realizing a
comprehensive solution.
In conclusion, Egypt stresses the importance of
ensuring that the Security Council plays a more effective
role in ensuring a political settlement and achieving
peace and stability in the Middle East, while freeing all
the Arab territories occupied since 1967 in Palestine,
the Syrian Golan, Shebaa Farms, Kafr Shouba Hills and
the area north of Ghajar village and environs.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
Mr. Camelli: I have the honour to deliver this
statement on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. The candidate countries North
Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania align themselves
with this statement.
The European Union is worried about the
persisting negative trends on the ground, including
illegal settlement expansion, violence against civilians
committed by all parties, terror attacks and increasing
numbers of demolitions and evictions, which severely
threaten the concept of a two-State solution. The EU
affirms its commitment to a just and comprehensive
resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, based on
a two-State solution, with the State of Israel and an
independent, democratic, contiguous, sovereign and
viable State of Palestine living side by side in peace and
security and mutual recognition, and with Jerusalem
serving as the future capital of both States.
The EU condemns all acts of violence and calls
for accountability. We deplore the increase in violence
that has not only resulted in the tragic loss of lives
but is also fuelling tensions and animosity. We firmly

22-4383731/34

S/PV.9099

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

condemn the recent terror attacks in Israel and remain
committed to preventing and fighting terrorism and
violent extremism. The European Union also firmly
condemns the growing settler violence and calls for
accountability. We are deeply concerned about the
increasingly high number of casualties, including
children. We would like to remind all concerned that
any use of force must be proportionate and in line with
international law, including international human rights
and humanitarian law, and must be applied only as a
last resort and when strictly unavoidable in order to
protect life. The EU reiterates its call for a thorough
investigation into the killing of the journalist Shireen
Abu Akleh while she was covering an Israeli security
operation in the occupied West Bank and for bringing
those responsible to justice.
The EU’s opposition to Israel’s settlement policy
and actions taken in that context, including in East
Jerusalem, and especially in sensitive areas such as
E1, is well known. We reiterate that settlements are
illegal under international law and call for a halt to
all settlement activities. Actions such as building the
separation barrier beyond the 1967 line, demolitions
and confiscations — including of EU-funded
projects — evictions, forced transfers, including
of Bedouins, illegal outposts, settler violence and
restrictions on people’s movement and access severely
threaten the possibility of a two-State solution and will
only escalate an already tense environment. The EU is
concerned about the growing number of demolitions and
evictions, including in East Jerusalem. It is important
to ensure that Israel refrains from proceeding with any
planned demolitions and evictions.
The European Union recalls the special significance
of the holy sites and calls for upholding the status quo
put in place in 1967 for the Temple Mount/Al-Haram
Al-Sharif, in line with previous understandings and
with respect for Jordan’s special role. The EU underlines
the importance of also respecting the status quo for the
Christian holy sites and of maintaining the peaceful
coexistence of the three monotheistic religions. We
will closely monitor developments in that regard and
their implications on the ground, and we remain ready
to contribute further to the protection and the viability
of a two-State solution.
The European Union reiterates the vital importance
of consolidating the ceasefire in Gaza and emphasizes its
unequivocal position that rocket fire and the launching
of incendiary devices and other attacks by Hamas and
32/34

26/07/2022

other terrorist groups are unacceptable. The EU calls
for lifting restrictions further and underlines the need
for unimpeded humanitarian access to Gaza. We call
on all the parties to take necessary steps to produce
a fundamental change in the political, security and
economic situation in the Gaza Strip, including ending
the closure and fully opening the crossing points, while
addressing Israel’s legitimate security concerns.
The European Union reiterates its call to the
Palestinian Authority to organize the postponed
national elections without further delay and urges
all Palestinian factions to engage in good faith in the
reconciliation process, adhere to previous agreements,
renounce violence and terrorism, recognize Israel’s
right to exist and commit to democratic principles,
including the rule of law. Democratic Palestinian
institutions based on respect for the rule of law and
human rights are vital for the Palestinian people, and
ultimately for a two-State solution.
All the parties must allow Palestinian civil society
to carry out its important tasks freely, while freedom
of expression must be upheld. The EU recalls the need
to hold accountable those responsible for the death of
Nizar Banat. The EU is proud of its continued support
to civil society, which contributes to peace efforts and
confidence-building between Israelis and Palestinians.
The EU urges parties to refrain from using anti-terrorism
legislation to undermine civil society and its valuable
work and contributions to the pursuit of accountability.
Until a just, fair, agreed and realistic solution to the
refugee issue in accordance with international law is
found, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) remains
crucial for providing the necessary protection and
essential services for Palestine refugees and supporting
peace and stability in the region. The EU will continue to
support UNRWA in all its fields of operations, including
in East Jerusalem. We welcome the recent Ad Hoc
committee of the General Assembly’s announcement of
voluntary contributions to the UNRWA conference on
23 June, and we call upon all partners to increase their
contributions to UNRWA.
The European Union encourages further
engagement between the parties to restore a political
horizon and open the path towards the relaunching of
the peace process as soon as possible.
The European Union welcomes measures to
improve Palestinian livelihoods and calls for the
22-43837

26/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

implementation of the commitments made at the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee meeting in Brussels on
10 May. To that end, the European Union reiterates the
importance of a deepened dialogue between the parties
and encourages easing restrictions on Palestinian
movement. Together with the necessary reform of
the Palestinian Authority, that will also contribute to
improving its dire fiscal situation.
More than decade after the start of the Syria
conflict, the Syrian people continue to suffer
from violence and hardship. It is essential that the
international community keeps pursuing a sustainable
and comprehensive political solution in Syria. The
European Union remains firm in its commitment to
that goal.
A durable solution to the conflict requires a
genuine and inclusive political transition with the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women in
line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). The EU fully
supports the efforts of Special Envoy Geir Pedersen
to advance on all aspects of resolution 2254 (2015),
including his steps-for-steps approach in furthering the
political process.
According to the most recent report by the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, over 300,000 civilians were killed in Syria
between 2011 and 2021 — that is, 83 per day — as a
direct result of the conflict. The report confirms the
extent of the human suffering in Syria. Civilians must
be protected at all times. Therefore, once again, the EU
echoes the call made by the Security Council for the
implementation of a nationwide ceasefire.
The Syrian regime must fully cooperate with the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
including in its investigations of the use of chemical
weapons in the conflict.

S/PV.9099

justice, the prosecution of war crimes under national
jurisdiction where possible, now under way in
several EU member States, represents an important
contribution towards securing justice. In addition, the
Netherlands and Canada are engaged in an important
initiative to hold Syria to account for breaching the
Convention against Torture. The EU will continue to
support efforts to gather evidence with a view to future
legal action, including by the International, Impartial
and Independent Mechanism for Syria and the work of
the Commission of Inquiry.
Türkiye’s security concerns stemming from
northern Syria should be addressed through political
and diplomatic means, not by military action, and in
full respect of international humanitarian law. In that
respect, recent announcements on another military
operation in northern Syria are alarming, and we
urge restraint.
The underlying causes of the refugee and
displacement crisis must be addressed under resolution
2254 (2015). The EU continues to warn against any
further displacements in any part of Syria, as well as
against the potential exploitation of such displacements
for the purposes of social and demographic engineering.
Conditions for the safe, voluntary and dignified return
of refugees and displaced persons to their places of
origin, in line with the parameters defined by the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and in accordance with international law, must be met.
The EU will be in a position to support returns only
once those conditions are satisfied.
Early-recovery projects are also important for the
dignity of the Syrian people and for their future. EUfunded projects are intended and designed for those
in genuine need. The EU will not fund early-recovery
efforts that could support social and demographic
engineering

All parties responsible for breaches of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, some of which
may constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity,
must be held accountable. The EU reiterates its call to
have the situation in Syria referred to the International
Criminal Court.

Humanitarian needs in Syria continue to increase.
More than 12 million people — 55 per cent of the
population — are food insecure. There is an estimated
14.6 million people in need inside Syria. The European
Union and its member States are the largest donor and
have provided €25 billion to meet the needs arising
from the crisis over the past decade.

Accountability and justice for victims is essential
for a stable, peaceful Syria, based on a credible,
inclusive and viable political solution in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015). In the absence of international

At the sixth Brussels Conference on Supporting the
Future of Syria and the Region, held on 9 and 10 May
and hosted by the EU, the international community
pledged close to €6.4 billion for 2022 and beyond.

22-4383733/34

S/PV.9099

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Out of that amount, over €4.8 billion were pledged by
the European Union, with over €3.1 billion coming
from the European Commission and €1.7 billion from
the member States. That funding will help people in
Syria and the neighbouring countries hosting Syrian
refugees. We will continue to demonstrate solidarity
with the Syrian people and call on the international
community to increase their commitments. We
commend the neighbouring countries for hosting large
number of Syrian refugees for more than a decade and
call on all leaders to avoid divisive rhetoric regarding
Syrian refugees.
On 12 July, the Security Council extended for
six months, until 10 January 2023, the authorization
for the United Nations to use the crossing point of
Bab Al-Hawa from Türkiye to Syria for humanitarian
deliveries, with a further extension of an additional six
months requiring a separate resolution. The European
Union regrets that the mechanism was not renewed for
12 months, as called for by the Secretary-General and
the humanitarian community as a whole and supported
by most members of the Security Council. The
extension is a humanitarian imperative to preserve the
functioning of a critical humanitarian lifeline for the
4.1 million Syrian men, women and children, including
2.8 million internally displaced persons, in north-west
Syria, who depend on the vital humanitarian assistance
delivered through the mechanism to help them survive.
The European Union will continue to advocate for
all parties to depoliticize and allow unimpeded and

34/34

26/07/2022

continued delivery of humanitarian aid to all those
in need. Cross-border assistance will continue to be
vital to meet the immense humanitarian needs in
Syria, especially in the context of the increasing food
insecurity in the region caused by Russia’s unprovoked
and unjustified war of aggression in Ukraine. The EU
fully supports the renewal of this essential mechanism,
scheduled to be voted on in January 2023.
The EU reiterates its call for a political solution and
emphasizes that no normalization, lifting of sanctions or
reconstruction will be possible until the Syrian regime
engages in a political transition, in the framework of
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva process.
The EU looks forward to the report of the SecretaryGeneral on a possible independent mechanism for
an international mandate to clarify the fate and
whereabouts of missing persons in Syria.
The EU remains committed to the unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Syrian State and calls
once again on all parties to the conflict to advance a
credible, sustainable and inclusive political solution
based on the full and comprehensive implementation of
resolution 2254 (2015). It is the only route to sustainable
peace in Syria.
The President: There are still a number of speakers
remaining on my list for this meeting. Given the lateness
of the hour, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, I intend to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m.

22-43837
