S/PV.8085

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8085th meeting

Monday, 6 November 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cardi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Allen
Ms. Tachco
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in Myanmar

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-36478 (E)
*1736478*

S/PV.8085

The situation in Myanmar

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Myanmar
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Bangladesh and Myanmar to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:
“The Security Council condemns the attacks
against Myanmar security forces carried out by
the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army (ARSA)
on 25 August in Rakhine state and expresses
grave concern over accounts that ARSA has been
responsible for human rights abuses.
“The Security Council strongly condemns
the widespread violence that has taken place in
Rakhine state, Myanmar, since 25 August, which
has led to the mass displacement of more than
607,000 individuals, the vast majority belonging to
the Rohingya community.
“The Security Council further expresses grave
concern over reports of human rights violations
and abuses in Rakhine state, including by the
Myanmar security forces, in particular against
persons belonging to the Rohingya community,
including those involving the systematic use of
force and intimidation, the killing of men, women,
and children, sexual violence, and including the
destruction and burning of homes and property.
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, political
independence, territorial integrity and unity of
Myanmar, stresses its support to the Government
of Myanmar in the pursuit and consolidation of
its ongoing democratic transition process, and
emphasizes the importance of reforms to promote
accountable Government institutions, especially
in the security and justice sectors and to build the
confidence of the people of Myanmar.
2/6

06/11/2017

“The Security Council stresses the primary
responsibility of the Government of Myanmar to
protect its population, including through respect
for the rule of law and the respect, promotion and
protection of human rights.
“The Security Council calls upon the
Government of Myanmar to ensure no further
excessive use of military force in Rakhine state, to
restore civilian administration and apply the rule of
law, and to take immediate steps in accordance with
its obligations and commitments to respect human
rights, including the human rights of women,
children and persons belonging to vulnerable
groups, without discrimination and regardless of
ethnicity, religion or citizenship status; further
calls on the Government of Myanmar to implement
measures in line with resolution 2106 (2013) to
prevent and respond to incidents of sexual violence;
and encourages in this regard the Government of
Myanmar to work with the Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
“The Security Council expresses further grave
concern over accounts of intercommunal violence
and calls upon the Government of Myanmar to
take all necessary measures to counter incitement
to violence or hatred and restore peace and
intercommunal harmony through dialogue and
a comprehensive reconciliation process, and by
respecting the rule of law.
“The Security Council expresses alarm at the
significantly and rapidly deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Rakhine state and grave concern at
the increasing number of refugees and internally
displaced persons, which has a destabilizing impact
in the region.
“The Security Council notes the initial
steps taken by the Government of Myanmar and
humanitarian agencies to provide humanitarian
assistance to individuals in Rakhine state,
including through granting access to the World
Food Programme, expresses its deep concern
that humanitarian access remains severely
limited and that humanitarian needs exceed the
current levels of provision, and demands that the
Government of Myanmar grant immediate, safe
and unhindered access to United Nations agencies
and their partners, as well as other domestic and
international non-governmental organizations, to
17-36478

06/11/2017

The situation in Myanmar

provide humanitarian assistance in Rakhine state,
as well as to ensure the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel.
“The Security Council highly commends
the efforts undertaken by the Government of
Bangladesh, with the assistance of the United
Nations, their partners and other nongovernmental
organisations, to provide safety, shelter and
humanitarian assistance to those who have fled
the violence, encourages the Government of
Bangladesh to continue to do so until those who
have fled the violence can return voluntarily and
in conditions of safety and dignity to their homes
in Myanmar, with due regard to the principle of
non-refoulement, welcomes States’ provision of
support to Bangladesh, and encourages States able
to do so to provide further financial and logistical
support to Bangladesh, the United Nations, in
particular to the United Nations Rohingya Refugee
Crisis Humanitarian Response Plan, and other
humanitarian partners engaged in this effort.
“The Security Council welcomes the signing
of a memorandum of understanding on 24 October
2017 between the Governments of Myanmar and
Bangladesh on the situation in Rakhine state, urges
the Government of Myanmar to work with the
Government of Bangladesh and the United Nations
to allow the voluntary return of all refugees in
conditions of safety and dignity to their homes in
Myanmar, welcomes in this regard the commitment
to establish a joint working group between the
Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh to
implement this process, urges the Governments
of Myanmar and Bangladesh to invite the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
other relevant international organization to
participate fully in the joint working group and
implementation of the returns process, and further
calls upon the Government of Myanmar to expedite
the voluntary return of all internally displaced
persons in conditions of safety and dignity to their
homes in Myanmar.
“The Security Council welcomes the
Government of Myanmar’s decision to establish
the Union Enterprise Mechanism for Humanitarian
Assistance, Resettlement, and Development in
Rakhine (the Union Enterprise Mechanism) as well
as its commitment to ensure that humanitarian
assistance and development work undertaken by

S/PV. 8085

the Union Enterprise Mechanism is provided for
the benefit of all communities in Rakhine state
without discrimination and regardless of religion
or ethnicity, urges the Government of Myanmar
to ensure that the Union Enterprise Mechanism
supports the voluntary, safe and dignified return of
displaced individuals and refugees to their homes in
Rakhine state, and to allow United Nations agencies
to operate with full access in Rakhine state.
“The Security Council urges the Governments
of Myanmar and Bangladesh, the United Nations
and other humanitarian partners to pay special
attention to the specific needs of women and
girls in all assessments, planning and delivery
of humanitarian assistance and to ensure the
availability of specialized medical and psychosocial
services for survivors of sexual violence.
“The Security Council commends the continued
efforts of countries of the region and regional
organizations, in particular the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation and the European Union, in
providing humanitarian assistance and supporting
dialogue between all relevant stakeholders.
“The Security Council calls upon the
Government of Myanmar to address the root
causes of the crisis in Rakhine state by respecting,
promoting and protecting human rights, without
discrimination and regardless of ethnicity or
religion, including by allowing freedom of
movement, equal access to basic services, and
equal access to full citizenship for all individuals.
“The Security Council welcomes the
Government of Myanmar’s public commitment to
implement the recommendations of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State, chaired by Dr.
Kofi Annan, as well as the establishment of a
ministerial-level committee to implement the
recommendations, and urges all parts of the
Government of Myanmar to work together to
implement these recommendations swiftly and
in full.
“The Security Council stresses the importance
of undertaking transparent investigations into
allegations of human rights abuses and violations,
including sexual violence and abuse and violence
against children, and of holding to account all

17-364783/6

S/PV.8085

The situation in Myanmar

those responsible for such acts to provide justice
for victims.
“In this regard, the Security Council calls upon
the Government of Myanmar to cooperate with all
relevant United Nations bodies, mechanisms and
instruments, in particular the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and
to continue further consultations on opening a
country office of the OHCHR.
“The Security Council calls upon the
Government of Myanmar to urgently grant
domestic and international media organisations
full and unhindered access to Rakhine state and
throughout the country and to ensure the safety and
security of media personnel.
“The Security Council requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to provide his good offices and
to pursue his discussions with the Government of
Myanmar, involving all relevant stakeholders, to
offer assistance to the Government of Myanmar
in this regard, and encourages him to consider,
as appropriate, appointing a special adviser
on Myanmar.
“The Security Council remains determined to
continue to closely follow the situation in Myanmar
and requests the Secretary-General to brief the
Security Council on developments on the situation
in Rakhine after 30 days from the adoption of
this statement.”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2017/22.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Myanmar.
Mr. Suan (Myanmar): We are deeply concerned by
the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2017/22,
on the situation in Myanmar.
We thank those delegations that tried hard to
balance the text and reflect the reality. However, it
fails to give sufficient recognition to the Government
of Myanmar for its efforts to address the challenges
in Rakhine state. It also singles out a Member State
based on accusations and false evidence. We strongly
reject the use of self-designated nomenclature in the
statement, which will not help to resolve the issue. The
statement will not help our efforts to resolve the issue,
but rather lead to further polarization and escalation of
4/6

06/11/2017

tensions among different religious communities in the
country and beyond. It exerts undue political pressure
on Myanmar.
Some elements of the statement infringe on the work
of the other organs of the United Nations. The same
issue is under consideration in the Third Committee of
the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council.
At this time, many delegations, including those in the
Security Council, are pointing to the need to avoid
duplication of work and to make stringent use of the
budget of the United Nations. Such duplication of work
is unwarranted.
I take this opportunity to apprise the Security
Council of the recent developments in Rakhine state. As
members are aware, the 25 August terrorist attacks and
ensuing terrorist actions committed by the so-called
Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army (ARSA) triggered
one of the most tragic situations in Rakhine state.
Innocent civilians from different communities had to
flee their homes and villages out of fear. Thousands of
ethnic Rakhine, Hindu and small minority groups, such
as the Daing-net, Mro, Thet and Mramagyi, sought safe
places in southern Rakhine, whereas the majority of the
Muslim community took refuge on the Bangladesh side
for various reasons. We feel deeply for the suffering of
all the people who have been caught up in the conflict.
Recognizing the unfolding humanitarian tragedy,
the Government of Myanmar, in a spirit of goodneighbourliness, has reached out to Bangladesh. There
has been exchange of visits at the ministerial level, most
recently in October. On 24 October, two memorandums
of understanding were also signed on the establishment
of border liaison offices and on security cooperation
and dialogue. We have been working closely with
Bangladesh on the voluntary, safe and dignified return
of displaced persons. We are currently working on the
arrangement for repatriation. Once we finalize the
arrangement, a joint working group will be set up and
the repatriation process will start immediately.
I would like to highlight some of the measures
taken by Myanmar towards solving the issues we face
in Rakhine state.
A ministerial-level committee has been set up and
started its work for the expeditious implementation of
the recommendations the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State, led by Mr. Kofi Annan.
17-36478

06/11/2017

The situation in Myanmar

S/PV. 8085

With regard to the current humanitarian situation
in Rakhine state, the Union Enterprise Mechanism
for Humanitarian Assistance, Resettlement and
Development in Rakhine has been launched and
begun its work. State Counsellor Daw Augn San Suu
Kyi visited the areas in northern Rakhine state on
2 November.

We will continue to work with all stakeholders who are
interested in being part of the solution in our quest to
find a sustainable answer to the protracted and tragic
issue of Rakhine state. We are determined to work
with the international community, including the United
Nations and interested parties, towards sustainable
peace and development for all in Rakhine state.

We are also working with the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations Coordinating Centre for
Humanitarian Assistance on Disaster Management
and the Red Cross Movement to provide humanitarian
assistance to people in need, in accordance with
humanitarian principles. Moreover, the World
Food Programme and the United Nations Food and
Agriculture Organization are already working on the
ground. We continue to maintain our cooperation with
the United Nations. We are engaging with high-ranking
officials from the Secretariat and United Nations funds,
programmes and agencies. The Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman,
recently visited Myanmar.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.

We are disappointed by the presidential statement’s
failure to mention the attacks of 25 August as a terrorist
act. Everyone in the Chamber agrees with me that we
cannot condone terrorism in any form or manifestation.
I hope that the statement will not help to spread
terrorism in the world.
Allow me to draw the Council’s attention to a
news article under the headline “Foreign Militants In
Rakhine”. The article says:
“Scores of foreign militants — mostly Pakistanis
and Bangladeshis — are fighting besides rebels
of the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army (ARSA)
since radical groups across the Islamic world called
for ‘a jihad against Burmese colonialism’ in the
Arakans (Rakhine).
“Indian intelligence officials say they have
intercepted communication between some of the
Pakistani militants fighting for ARSA when they
called their principals and relatives in Pakistan.
“On the basis of the intercepts, the number of
Pakistani militants fighting in Rakhine has been
estimated around 30 to 40, but if such recruitment
is a continuous process, these numbers may go up.”
Alhough we reject some elements contained in
the presidential statement, we are determined to find
a sustainable solution for the issue of Rakhine state.

Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I thank you, Sir, for
giving Bangladesh this opportunity to speak. We
wish to thank you and, through you, all members of
the Council for the consensus adoption of the fairly
comprehensive presidential statement S/PRST/2017/22
this afternoon.
It will be quite reassuring to the Rohingya and
other communities forcibly displaced from northern
Rakhine state since 25 August that the Council remains
engaged with their prolonged suffering, insecurity and
uncertainty. We believe that the presidential statement
can be a critical building block to help the Council to
pursue timely, decisive and appropriate action until
the time when a peaceful, just and lasting solution to
this unfolding humanitarian crisis is achieved. From
our perspective, it is of paramount importance that the
Council speak in a unified manner on this situation,
even though time is of the essence.
Bangladesh thanks the Council for its recognition
of the efforts of our Government and people to stand
by those in desperate need of safety, shelter and
humanitarian assistance. We thank the United Nations
and relevant humanitarian partners for sharing the work
with us during this unprecedented influx of nearly
610,000 people, many of them children. I can assure
the Council that Bangladesh will continue to work
towards fulfilling what the Council has recommended
and invited us to do. We shall remain engaged with
Myanmar in good faith to find a lasting solution to
this dire humanitarian situation, provided that our
overtures and initiatives are reciprocated in a sustained
and meaningful manner.
This time around, we shall also seek the international
community’s sustained engagement in and ownership
of our bilateral efforts with Myanmar. As we have said
time and again, Bangladesh stands ready to do our part
but, as we know from experience, we shall not be able to
make any headway unless the international community,
especially the Council, stays hands-on as custodian of

17-364785/6

S/PV.8085

The situation in Myanmar

06/11/2017

our efforts. The statement just made by my Myanmar
counterpart gives a hint of the complex challenges to
be encountered, not least the persistent denial of the
situation on the ground.

We reiterate our Prime Minister’s observation that
the problem has its roots in Myanmar, and its solution
has to be found in Myanmar. For now, the priorities are
clear to all.

The presidential statement aptly recognizes that
the growing number of refugees and forcibly displaced
persons has a destabilizing impact on the region. On
the specific question of their repatriation, we are yet
to embark on any concrete steps between Bangladesh
and Myanmar. There has been a decision to constitute
a joint working group, but the details of its mandate
and parameters will need to be just, transparent and
comprehensive, without the imposition of unnecessary
caveats. The presidential statement offers some broad
guidelines for the process and recognizes the many
commitments and pronouncements made by Myanmar.
It will now be critical to make sure that those statements
of intent result in concrete deliverables so that the
Rohingya can gain the trust and confidence that they
may return to their homes in Rakhine state in safety
and dignity.

First, there has to be sufficient and unimpeded
provision of humanitarian assistance in northern
Rakhine state so that the remaining Rohingya
population — whatever small number remains — does
not feel compelled to leave. Secondly, the Union
Enterprise Mechanism for Humanitarian Assistance,
Resettlement and Development in Rakhine set up
by the Myanmar authorities must start making a
real difference on the ground in Rakhine state, and
the joint working group between Bangladesh and
Myanmar must start demonstrable, result-oriented
and sustainable work on the repatriation process.
Thirdly, the recommendations made by the Kofi Annan
Advisory Commission on Rakhine State must be used
as a viable and comprehensive road map for restoring
the rights and freedoms of the Rohingya, including
their citizenship, with a view to ensuring their safety
and peaceful coexistence with other communities in
Rakhine state.

We sincerely hope that there will be some positive
and tangible progress in the situation on the ground
by the time the Secretary-General reports to the
Council in 30 days from now. In the meantime, the
General Assembly, through its Third Committee, is
poised to further strengthen the Secretary-General’s
tireless efforts by giving him the mandate to appoint
a special envoy on the situation in Myanmar. We take
this opportunity to invite all Member States to support
the General Assembly’s draft resolution in order to
reinforce the complementarity of the work of the
Assembly and the Council.

6/6

We hope the presidential statement adopted by the
Council today will give further impetus to addressing
these priorities. We wish to put on record our profound
appreciation to the delegations for the United Kingdom
and France for their relentless efforts in achieving this
consensus outcome in the Council.
Referring to the statement made by the representative
of Myanmar, the allegation that Bangladesh abets
terrorism in Rakhine state is pure fiction.
The meeting rose at 3.30 p.m.

17-36478
