UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

,_
c “ : -,q

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2260)

Adoption of the agenda ........

... .. .. .. .. ... ... .. .. .. ... .. .. ... .. ..

1
1 ...

........................................

The situation in the occupied Arab territories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV .2260

.’

i

/

N’~TE,

.”

’

.

”
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters cornbiked with figures. Mention of such ,a symbol indicates a reference to a United ” +.-: ::
Nations document.
I
,
i
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published”in
quarterly Supplements pf the Offiial .Rccords of the Security Council. The date
of the document indidates the supplement in which it appears or in which infor,
*.
mation about it is given. 8 1
-

.
;_

:
L
.’ I. ,,
c
:/.

.‘..
.I
..

’

‘.
)..

:’
..

*.

..

:.
.. ..
.*t..

I

. : ,.

:
‘I

I
: . -‘.:
r:

.I..,
‘,

‘_ .

,.
.j

.

The &solutions of the: Security ‘Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964,‘ are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions und
Decisions of the Security ‘Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to,resolutions adopted before 1January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.
. ..
‘_
,.,,
,~.
, . . . 1”.
,I_.
., ,
.a
..
-,, .“, ;
. .?
,.
,. : ‘,.
.,I.‘. ., .‘..
: :,,
.
.‘, ‘. . .‘I. ,,
I
: .: ,.:. ~.c’
_.‘I.
.,
,.,,
_
,, .j ,
;:
.,
..
,’ ’
,*
.’
.
I,,.,
;
I.
L
-’
l:*:‘:‘
.I.
” ,,..
,;.’
I _ .I,
,, ,.(, .,.
‘. .,- _‘. ,. _...,
: -7

,..

*,

/,r

..

.;
- 1..

?

.,
_.

.s I.‘.
.:
:

i,

*
‘,)
‘..‘_
‘...
”
‘.I
,..

2260th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 19 December 1980, at 3 p.m.
Mr. Donald F. McHENRY
(United States of America).

community. If we are to safeguard the Organization’s
credibility and that of the Council, it is time that resolutions adopted by the United Nations were implemented fully.

President:

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philip
pines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

3. This morning we heard Mr. Mohamed Milhem
and Mr. Fahd Qawasma, Mayors of the towns of
Halhoul and Al-Khalil, which are both under Israeli
occupation; two offtcials elected and chosen by their
fellow citizens to administer their towns. But the
Israeli occupying authorities, flouting popular elec‘tions, human rights .and basic ‘principles of intemational law, decided to arrest them without the slightest
consideration, to expel them from their towns, their
lands and their homes, and to prevent them from returning there. The occupying Power, without the
slightest hesitation;’ then threw them into gaol for
weeks on end.

agenda. (S/Agenda/2260)
, ‘,

1. Adoption of the agenda

I
2. The situation in the occupied Arab territories
The meeting

wus culled to order at 3.15 p.m;I
,
Adoption of the agenda
_.:
I, .(
.,
The agenda was adopted.

’

.4: ’ ‘But actually what can we reproach those men for?
What have they done wrong? They have merely committed the crime of being fully in agreement with those
whom they governed and of venturing to think differently from the occupier, They cannot be reproached
for any reprehensible act. The Supreme Court of Israel
itself has recognized that fact.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions taken at the 2259th meeting, I invite the representatives of Egypt, Israel and Kuwait to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber and I invite the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to take a place at
the Council table.

5. But Israel, continuing in its attitude of obstinacy
and obstruction, has decided once again to expel them.
That measure, which is a most serious one, is part and
parcel of the attitude of systematic defiance shown by
Israel with respect to international law and unanimously acknowledged rules. That act constitutes
another flagrant violation of the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949,’ the applicability of which has been
repeatedly confirmed by relevant resolutions of the
Security Council and which forbids any forced transfer
or deportation of individuals for any reason.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Abdel Meguid
(Egypt), Mr. Blum (Israel) and Mr. Bishara (Kuwait)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber and Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation
Organization)
took a place at the Council table.

2. Mr. SLIM (Tunisia) fintermetation
from French):
Article 25 of the Charter‘makes it binding on Member
States to accept and carry out the decisions of the’
Security Council. The item on our agenda has been
discussed by the Council on several occasions. Each
time a resolution has been adopted: resolutions 468
(1980), 469 (1980) and 471 (1980). Here we are again
today with the same agenda, ready to adopt yet
another resolution. This proves to us yet again that
Israel does not intend to comply with Article 25 of
the Charter. Its invariable defiance and continued
violation of principles of the Charter denotes a deliberate willingness to remain outside the international

6. The draft resolution before us [S/14306] expresses
our concern at those arbitrary measures and demands
the return of the Mayors to their homes so that they
may resume the duties for which they were elected.
After having heard the particularly instructive statements that were made this morning by Mr. Milhem
and Mr. Qawasma, as well as their objective testimony regarding the intolerable daily realities of life
in the region, we express the hope that the draft resolution will .be adopted unanimously by the. Council.
The implementation of that resolution can brook no
delay; otherwise, the credibility of the Organization
1

will run the risk of being seriously compromised. It
is important that an end be put to Israel’s defiance of
the international community. Israel, thanks to the
condoning attitude of some, has been reassured with
respect to its impunity.

property in this town during a two-day curfew
imposed after the slaying of an alleged Israeli sympathizer, military authorities reported today.”
14. That is symptomatic of what goes on in the
Israeli-occupied West Bank today, and every day it
is getting worse. Our heart bleeds for the innocent
victims of that calculated terror; at the same time, we
pity the young conscripted perpetrators who are
taught disrespect for decency in human behaviour and
arrogance of power. Now peoples sometimes forget
the lessons of history!

7. At this stage, I should like to pay a tribute to you,
Mr. President, because I have seen the interest that
you have shown in this question and the efforts you
have undertaken, with your usual dispatch, regarding
both the consultations and the talks that you have
held in recent days as well as the steps taken with the
party concerned so that it might come to its senses.

15. In the eyes of the Council and of the world, Israel
stands condemned for its systematic breach of obligations incumbent on it as an occupying Power under
the terms of the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.

8. We also extend a tribute to the Secretary-General
for the determined action that he has undertaken in
this matter. Mr. President, I am convinced that you,
the Secretary-General and the Council as a whole will
spare no effort to. see to it that the illegal measures
which are still inflicted upon the Palestinian people
, are rescinded.

16. In the past, we expressed our position on the
Palestinian rights unequivocally, and have stoutly
maintained that no solution in the Middle East will be
possible until Israel withdraws all its forces from all
Arab territories occupied since the 1967war, including
Jerusalem, and grants the right of self-determination
to the Palestinians with the right to have a homeland
of their own and the participation of the PLO in any
negotiations on the Middle East crisis. Needless to
say that Israel’s continued and illegal occupation of
the Arab territories constitutes a blatant violation of
human rights and international law.

9. Mr. KAISER (Bangladesh): Once again the Council is meeting today to discuss a question of utmost
human poignance. It is a man-made problem of unsurpassed magnitude; a crisis which is potentially serious
enough to create further destabilization in an already
volatile region. The subject relates to the expulsion
qf the Mayors of Al-Khalil and Halhoul by the Israeli
occupying authorities. Needless to say, that arbitrary
and illegal action of Israel is an open flouting of resolution 465 (1980) and a callous breach of the fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949.

17. My delegation is moved by the human tragedy,
the suffering and the indignity to which the Palestinians are being subjected. The expulsion of the
mayors is not the solution, which lies elsewhere.

10. It was only in the month of May that two separate
Council debates were held on the expulsion of those
Mayors by the Israeli authorities. My delegation
cannot but express its grave concern over the latest
action of Israel which leads us to meet again.

18. We will vote in favour of the draft resolution.
But we would further urge you, Mr. President, to
stress to Israel that it should rescind all measures
relating to the expulsion of the Mayors and allow them
to return to their homeland and their families. That is
the least we can do now.

11. I have listened carefully to the statement made
by the Secretary-General and, Mr. President, we know
of your personal efforts with the Israeli authorities
concerning the illegal expulsion of the Mayors. While
we express our most sincere appreciation to .you and
to the Secretary-General for your timely action, we
note with deep concern the cavalier and callous manner in which the Israeli authorities have responded to
your calls for reason and restraint.

19. Mr. OVINNIKOV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Today the
Security Council is once again compelled to meet in
connection with the illegal activities of the Israeli
Government against the Mayors of Palestinian cities.
As is we11known, in its resolutions 468 (1980) and 469
(1980) the Council called upon the Government of
Israel, as the occupying Power, to rescind the illegal
measures taken by Israeli military occupation authorities in expelling the Mayors of the cities of Hebron and
Halhoul and the Sharia Judge of Hebron and to facilitate the immediate return of the expelled Palestinian
leaders so that they could resume the functions for
which they were elected and appointed. However, the
Government of Israel did not feel it necessary to
respond to those appeals of the Security Council.
Moreover, soon after that the whole world learned
with indignation of the invidious attack by Israeli
extremists on the Mayors of the Palestinian cities on
the West Bank of the Jordan and the terrible harm

12. Do we not recall the day when the Mayors of
Al-Khalil and Halhoul first appeared in the Council,
the poignance of the scene, the sense of outrage felt
by most of us? What do we see today? More of the
same, as there has been over the years-a display of
arrogance and aggrandizement .
13. The New York Times
report which stated in part:

yesterday published a

“Several Israeli soldiers have admitted beating
residents and vandalizing and stealing, personal
2

that was done to the Mayors of Nablus and Barnallah
as a result of that attack.

Palestine to self-determination, including its right to
set up its own independent State. That would in turn
allow for a just and lasting peace to be established in
that region.

20. ‘We have now witnessed a new act of high-handedness on the part of the Israeli authorities. Once again
they have decided forcibly to deport the Mayors of
the Palestinian cities of Hebron and Halhoul.

24. The delegation of the Soviet Union believes that
the Council should most resolutely demand that Israel
strictly comply with the provisions of the fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949, and that if Israel does not
comply with that demand, it should take appropriate
measures against it in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations.

21. In various bodies of the United Nations, the
Israeli representatives speak at great length about
principles of humanity and legality, while at the same
time in the occupied Arab territories Israel continues
to build military settlements and continues to carry out
a cruel policy of repression against the indigenous
Arab population. As has recently been affirmed, the
Israeli armies of occupation are plundering the population, and the terrorist activities of extremist circles
of Israel against Palestinians and their representatives
are being intensified. This was spoken of in great detail
by the Mayors of the cities of Hebron and Halhoul
when they spoke here in the Council in May [2223rd
meeting],
and we have heard them again today
[2259rh meeting].

25. One more point: the representative of Israel has
attempted here to teach the Council what it should
deal with and what it should not deal with. What he did
was to put up a smoke-screen or resort to diversionary
tactics. He attempted to divert attention from the
basic issue, an issue that has been before the Council
throughout its entire history. He tried to divert attention from the issue to which the Security Council has
devoted one fifth of all its meeting time. No other issue
has taken as much of the Council’s attention as the
situation in the Middle East, including the question
of Palestine. The source of this issue is Israel’s aggression against Arab countries and peoples. The Council
has devoted one fifth of its work to Israel, which has
been sitting in the pillory, as it did this morning. The
Council has adopted more resolutions in connection
with the aggressive activities of Israel than it has on
any other item. The only other country on a par with
Israel in this regard is South Africa.

22. Quite recently, the entire world witnessed a new
outrageous action by the Israeli Government against
an institution of learning in the occupied Palestinian
territory. More than 10 students attending Bir Zeit
University were wounded as a result of an armed
attack by Israeli armed forces while they were carrying
out a peaceful demonstration against the closing of the
University. As is well known, the decision to close
that University was taken by the Israeli authorities in
order to prevent the students holding a Palestine
Week. In resolution 35/122 F, adopted a few days ago,
the General Assembly condemned “the policy of
opening fire on defenceless students” and “the systematic Israeli campaign of repression against universities in the occupied Palestinian territories”. In this
regard, the Assembly demanded that Israel, as the
occupying Power,

26. I do not think the representative of Israel has
forgotten these facts, but I -believe it would be useful
today for him and for some of Israel’s protectors to
remember this.
27. It would also be useful to recall another thing:
however much the Israeli occupiers may try not to,
they will have to return the Arab lands involved; they
will have to reconcile themselves to the fact that the
Arab people of Palestine will have their own independent State. And to ensure this is the direct duty’of
the Council.

“comply with the provisions of the fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War’ and rescind all actions and
measures against all educational institutions and
ensure the freedom of these institutions”.

28. Mr. LUSAKA (Zambia): Mr. President; my delegation congratulates you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council during the month of
December. We do hope that your well-known qualities
of quiet diplomacy will be brought to bear to facilitate
our work before the end of this year. I wish also to
commend your predecessor, Sir Anthony Parsons,
representative of the United Kingdom, for his efliciency, co-operation and, indeed, diplomatic skill,
which were a great help to the business of the Council
last month.

The voting on that resolution once again demonstrated
that some are either supporting the aggressor outright
or are closing their eyes to its outrageous activities.
23. It has long been clear to all that the real sources
of tension in the Middle East are Israel’s occupation
of Arab lands, the expulsion from those lands of the
indigenous population, and the terror, violence and
intimidation that are constantly engaged in by the
Israeli occupiers. This situation can be corrected only
on the basis of the withdrawal of Israeli forces from
all Arab territories occupied in 1967 and the safeguarding of the inalienable right of the Arab people of

29; The Council has been forced.to convene again
this year to deliberate on yet another forcible expuision by the Israeli authorities of two Palestinian Mayors from their native land. It will be recalled that
3

diplomatic skill he displayed during his presidency in
the month of November.

Mr. Mohamed Milhem, Mayor of Halhoul, and
Mr. Fahd Qawasma, Mayor of Al-Khalil, addressed
this Council at its 2223rd meeting on 20 May on the
situation in the occupied Arab territories. In that
debate, the two Mayors furnished the Council with
firsthand accounts of the Israeli policy of kidnapping,
seizure and expulsions of Palestinians from the West
Bank. Today the Council is playing host to the two
Mayors, who have been forced to leave the occupied
West Bank against their will and for reasons that are
dubious, to say the least. The fact of the matter is that
Israel has no right, in law, to expel any Palestinian
from Palestine.

34. The Chinese delegation has listened attentively
to the convincing statements and complaints made by.
Mayor Fahd Qawasma of Hebron and Mayor Milhem
of Halhoul.
35. As is known to all, last May the Council successively adopted resolutions 468 (1980) and 469 (1980)
on the illegal expulsion by the Israeli authorities of the
Mayors of Hebron and Halhoul and the Sharia Judge
of Hebron. Those resolutions called upon Israel to’
rescind its illegal measures against the Mayors and the.
Judge and to facilitate their immediate return so that
they could resume the functions for which they were
elected and appointed. Thus far, however, Israel has
ignored and refused to comply with the aforementioned resolutions. Furthermore, the Begin -regime
recently. went so far as forcibly to deport, the two
Mayors again. Thereupon, the General Assembly
adopted resolution 351122 F condemning Israel for
its barbarous acts in ‘the occupied .territories and i’e-’
questing the Council to convene urgently to enjoin
Israel to rescind the illegal. measures it has taken
against
. the Palestinian Mayors and the Sharia Judge.

30.. To us in Zambia, Palestine belongs to the Palestinians. Israel has occupied vast Arab lands since 1967
by force. It is known also that the Israeli regime has,
over these years, engaged in a persistent and relentless
process of establishing Jewish settlements in the
occupied Arab territories. The indigenous people
have, in the process, been dispossessed of their land
and property. The majority of the Palestinians have
been expelled and forced to leave their motherland.
The objective facts of this matter have been ably
presented in the successive reports of the Security
Council Commission established under resolution
446 (1979). As we all .know, the final report of the
Commission [S//4268] is before the Council, and we
expect the Council to take up the issue of Israeli occuI.. .pation of Arab lands in its entirety.
.‘I’31. We understand that the only crime for which’the
Palestinians are suffering is their expressed wish to be
free from foreign domination and control. How could
this be a crime in this day and age, when the United
Nations itself fully endorses the right of all peoples to
self-determination and independence?

36. The Israeli authorities* illegal acts have aroused
strong condemnation from the international community and vigorous resistance on the part of the Palestinian people in the West Bank. For several days,
Palestinian students went on strike and took to the
streets to demonstrate their strong protest. The Israeli
occupation authorities, however, refused to change
course and sent troops and armed police to suppress
the demonstrators.. They arrested many innocent
students and, even detained journalists on the scene&
Thus the Israeli authorities attempted to silence the
protests of the West Bank Palestinians by brute force,
but the Palestinian and other Arab peoples will never
yield because they are fighting for ajust cause. Israel
can only make itself even more isolated, should it
persist in its aggression and expansion and the persecution of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples.
1.
37. The Chinese Government and people have always
firmly supported the Palestinian and other Arab peoples in their just struggle to regain their lost territories
and national rights. We hold that the Council should
condemn the Israeli authorities for their wanton suppression and persecution of the Palestinian and other
Arab peoples in the occupied territories. The Council
should also call on Israel to rescind forthwith the ille-.
gal measures taken against the Palestinian Mayors and
the Sharia Judge and to facilitate their immediate
return so that they can resume the performance of
their functions. Should the Israeli authorities again L
refuse to implement this and other relevant resolutions
of the Council and the General Assembly, the Council
will have to consider taking stronger and more effec-’
tive measures against them.

32. We appeal to all to ensure that the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people are fully respected.
This includes respect ,for their human rights, their
right to return to their homeland, their right to selfdetermination and independence, which must be freely
determined by them. Israel must be compelled to
realize that it has no right to deport anyone from his
homeland-least of all, two Mayors-in contravention of international law. The Council should prevail
on Israel, the occupier, to allow’the Mayors to return
to their homeland and to continue with the valuable
work of caring for the welfare of the Palestinians who
remain in the West Bank. In our view, urgent measures.‘are required by the Council to ensure Israeli
compliance with its decisions.
33. Mr. CHOU Nan (China) (interpretat& porn
Chinese):
Mr. President, at the outset, I wish in the
name of the Chinese delegation to extend my sincere
congratulations to you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month, believing
that the Council will achieve the expected results
under your able guidance. I wish also to congratulate
Sir Anthony Parsons heartily for the oustanding
4

congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council. We are pleased to see you,
an able and distinguished diplomat, presiding over the
Council meeting at this crucial time, and we shall miss
you. We are sure that the Council, under your wise
leadership, will be able to discharge its important
responsibilities.

38. Basing itself on the aforementioned position;.
the Chinese delegation will vote for draft resolution
s/14306.
39.. Mr. FLORIN

(German Democratic- ReDublicl
We listened with great
interest to the statements of the patriots of the Palestinian people, who gave us a clear and objective picture
of the consequences of Israel’s occupation policies.

(inrerpretation

from l&h):

46. I should like also to extend my delegation’s
heartfelt appreciation to Sir Anthony Parsons, representative of the United Kingdom, who presided over
the deliberations of the Council during the month of
November with great ability and dedication.

40. The expulsion of the heroic patriots fighting for
the freedom of the Palestinian people and the stubborn
refusal of the leading circles of Israel to carry out the
resolutions of the United Nations, in particuler resolution 468 (1980), clearly demonstrate the danger
which was pointed out by the majority of representatives during the discussion of the items on Palestine
and the Middle East at the thirty-fifth session of the
General Assembly. Together with those States, we
condemned the policy of separate deals pursued under
the, protection of the United States of America, since
that policy increases obstacles to a comprehensive,
and just peace settlement in the Middle East and since
it ,has already led to dangerous complications in that
area. Encouragement of Israel in continuing its settle-,
ments policy, which, under the slogan of so-called
autonomy, is aimed at the cold-blooded annexation
of Arab territories and, at undermining the political
will of the Palestinian people, was and remains the
result of that policy of separate deals.
’

47. The Council is meeting once again to consider
the situation in the occupied Arab territories. It is
common knowledge that conditions in those territories
are rapidly. deteriorating. The latest Israeli action in
expelling the Mayors of Hebron and Halhoul is yet
another arbitrary and inflammatory provocation by
the Israeli authorities. The events of the last few
weeks have clearly demonstrated that such actions
have grave detrimental effects, which undoubtedly
have inflamed a situation already aggravated and
fraught with danger as a result of more than 13 years
of. military occupation, Occupation is in itself illegal
and violent and it breeds hatred and resistance.
5.
48. It is highly regrettable that Israel chose to disregard resolution 468 .(1980), which called upon the.
Government of Israel, as the occupying Power, to
41.” The further disregard of Israel for United Nations
rescind its illegal measures and to facilitate the immedecision+ and for the political rights of the Palestinian
diate return of the expelled Palestinian leaders so that
people, which are recognized by the majority of peoa they might resume the functions for which they were
pies the world over, clearly demonstrates the delibelected. The General Assembly reiterated that posierate escalation of the policy of force against the tion in its resolutions 34/29 and 351122F,,and deplored
Palestinian people and shows that appeals alone are : Israel’s failure to implement those resolutions. I
not enough to put an end to the aggressive policy-of
the ruling circles in Tel Aviv.
2
-’ ’
49. The Government of Egypt has repeatedly stressed
-,
that such actions are illegal under the rules of con42. It is now finally time to pass from words to deeds. temporary international law. As the occupying Power,
World public opinion expects from the Security CounIsrael is under a binding legal obligation to observe
cil effective measures that would guarantee a com- scrupulously the provisions of the fourth Geneva
prehensive, lasting peace settlement ,of the Middle
Convention of 1949. The General Assembly and the
East conflict, the core of which is a political Solution Security Council have repeatedly reaffirmed the
of the Palestinian question. That is the only way to rule
applicability of that convention to the Palestinian’
outforever the use of force against the representatives
and other ,Arab territories occupied since June 1967:’
of the Palestinian people. As far as the German Demo-. The Assembly, as it does every year;has reaftirmed
cratic Republic is concerned, it is prepared to take that position-this time in resolution ,35/122 D. The
part in steps that might bring such a solution closer.,
Council has consistently endorsed that position since
it issued the statement of 11 November 1976 [I 969th
43-i.. We’are determined in future to support in every
meeting] in which it reaffirmed the applicability.of the
possible way the just struggle of the Palestinian peo- fourth Geneva Convention to the occupied territories.
ple, waged under the leadership of the PLO, for its On 5 June 1980, the Council reiterated that position
national liberation.
in its resolution 471 (1980), in which it strongly deI
plored the failure of Israel to abide by the Council’s
44. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the represolutions in this connection and called once .more
resentative of Egypt, whom I invite to take a place upon Israel, as the occupying Power, to abide scruat the Council table and to make his statement.
pulously by the fourth Geneva Convention.

45 Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): Allow me at the
outset to express to you, Sir, my delegation’s warmest

50. The Convention is very clear. Article 49 stipulates:
5

on the steady manner in which you have been conducting the proceedings of the Security Council. It
reflects the greatness of the country you represent,
as well as your inherent wisdom.
56. 1 feel compelled to speak today on behalf of the
League of Arab States because at stake are issues
transcending the question of the expulsion of the two
Mayors, of Al-Khalil and Halhoul. What is at stake
goes beyond the practices of Israel in the occupied
territories. What is at stake is more than theex curlredru
annexation of Jerusalem and the proliferation of
colonial settlements. It is the very credibility of the
United Nations that is at stake-not only its moral
and political and diplomatic authority, but its credibility as a vehicle and mechanism for the achievement
of peace and justice in the region and throughout the
world.

“Individual or mass forcible transfers, as well as
deportations of protected persons from occupied
territory to the territory of the Occupying Power
or to that of any other country, occupied or not,
are prohibited, regardless of their motive.”
I stress the words ‘*regardless of their motive”.
51. The fourth Geneva Convention was concluded
to ensure a minimum standard of humane treatment
for the innocent civilians under military occupation.
It is a cause of deep regret to see Israel reneging on
obligations which are binding under contemporary
international law and violating the basic norms that
the international community has agreed upon for
inter-State conduct.
52. Egypt’s position has consistently been to condemn all the violations of the Geneva Convention.
The deportation of the two Palestinian Mayors is a
grave violation which should be resolutely condemned. That position was made crystal clear when
Israel first deported the Mayors of Hebron and Halhoul, together with the Sharia Judge of Hebron, last
May. The Prime Minister of Egypt at that time clearly
stated that Egypt condemned all acts of violence and
reprisal. He expressed Egypt’s belief that the only way
to achieve security is through the establishment of
a just and lasting peace, and not military occupation.
The Palestinian people are entitled to exercise their
inalienable right to express their views freely and to
oppose the Israeli military occupation. The policy of
oppression against the population of the occupied
Arab territories and of deporting Palestinians, in particular their elected representatives, can only lead to
further deterioration of the grave situation in the
occupied Arab territories, and constitutes a most
serious obstacle on the road to peace.

57. Inasmuch as “credibility” is the operative word
at this historic moment, we are faced with a challenge:
Israel is trying to undermine the United Nations as
a vehicle and to project itself as a countervailing force
to inte~mational legitimacy. It is trying to do so by
torpedoing every resolution that this body adopts,
every resolution that the General Assembly adopts.
Israel is trying to project us as perpetual supplicants.
It feels that it can violate the rights of the Palestinians,
usurp the territories of the various Arab States, violate
the various laws applicable under international conventions such as the Geneva Convention-and try to
get away with it. It tries to get away with it by preemptive strikes against the moral authority of the
Council; that is what the representative of Israel did
this morning. The violence of these pre-emptive
strikes is matched only by Israel’s pre-emptive
strikes against the Palestinian students demonstrating
in favour of the Mayors and its pre-emptive strikes
against the Palestinian refugees, Lebanese villages
and towns. We have had an indication of this in the
statement made this morning by the SecretaryGeneral. We have seen that Israel’s onslaught against
the authority of the United Nations is matched only
by its onslaught against the people in the occupied
territories and the people of Lebanon.
58. Because of these pre-emptive strikes simultaneously undertaken here and in the occupied territories we are finding that Israel is seeking by the exercise of a form of intellectual and diplomatic terrorism
to silence any kind of opposition to its obvious violations of United Nations resolutions. At stake, therefore, is something that far transcends the matter of the
return of the Mayors. The return of the Mayors is
only a signal that carries with it the ultimate credibility
of the United Nations. That is why the representative
of Israel today so contemptuously lectured the Council about its functions, in order to cover up Israel’s
own violations and its contempt for international consensusesand resolutions. We find that at this moment
it is important that we in the Arab world not succumb
to a moment of exasperation. We should not be on the
verge of losing our faith in the United Nations.

53. The re-expulsion of the Mayors of Hebron and
Halhoul is grave and ominous. The situation in the
occupied Arab territories has become explosive. We
earnestly call upon Israel to rescind the latest decision
and enable the Palestinian dignitaries to return to
their homeland and resume the functions to which
they were elected by the Palestinian people. It is the
responsibility of the Security Council to ensure their
safe and prompt return.
54. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is Mr. Clovis
Maksoud, Permanent Observer for the League of
Arab States to the United Nations, to whom the Council has extended an invitation [2259th meeting] under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
55. Mr. MAKSOUD: I should like to take this opportunity to thank you, Mr. President, and, through
you, the other members of the Security Council for
extending this invitation to me. I would take this
opportunity also to congratulate you, Mr. President,
6

59. We know that many people say that the Arab
States, the Palestinians and the Lebanese keep coming
to the United Nations with one resolution after the
other, unfolding and building upon an absolutely indisputable legal base; yet on the other hand, resolutions
are deliberately being drafted so as not to be implemented. This is the impression that Israel seeks-that
while resolutions are being proliferated, they are
intrinsically without any prospect of being made
effective. This puts a very historic responsibility on
us all as we come to the close of the year 1980,
namely, that resolutions must be meaningful, significant and capable of being implemented and effective,
and that the outlaw in the United Nations must not
be allowed to remain unanswerable to the intemational consensus and to the representatives of international legitimacy.

64. In more than one way, this is Christmas eve,
and our desire was that, instead of coming to a debate
on atrocities, we should come to a gathering to sing
“Glory be to God in the highest and goodwill to people of good faith”. Unfortunately, what we are dealing
with are some people who have no good faith whatsoever.
65. In addressing you, Mr. President, only two days
ago, referring to his country and to yours, the representative of Israel said:
“Despite the tremendous disparity between our
two nations in terms of physical size and military
and economic power, we stand together in the
struggle for the preservation of the fundamental
human freedoms in our world, for the equality and
dignity of .nian, for social justice.” [2258th meeting,

60. The Israeli representative has attempted throughout the past session of the General Assembly and in
the Security Council to imply that anybody. who questions Israeli practices, anybody who challenges Israeli
violations, anybody who ciiticizes Israeli policies,
anybody who indicates a scepticism about Israel’s
racial practices is entertaining lingering anti-Semitism.
It is this type of innuendo and this stamp of intellectual
terrorism-such as linking isolated instances that
have taken place in certain cities in Europe with the
support lent by the Governments of those countries
which have been responsive to Palestinian aspirations
-that create a permissiveness towards anti-Semitism.
This intellectual terroristic activity on the part of
Israel and of those who are professional apologists for
it is an insult to human intelligence, besides being a
total cover-up for Israel’s expansion and aggression.
w
61. That is why, in the matter of the resolution that
the Council is about to adopt on the subject of the
return of the two Mayors to their rightful place as
officials in the villages and towns to which they have
been elected, we are faced today with the fact that
this resolution and its potential for being implemented
constitute something far more important, more historical and more significant than the mere return of the
two Mayors. It signals to Israel in particular and to
the world community in general that the United Nations is determined not to allow the collective will of
humanity represented in this body to be flouted as a
matter of course by the Israeli authorities. That is
why we in the League of Arab States and in the Arab
world consider this Council’s deliberations and resulting resolution to be not routine but a harbinger of
credibility for this body.

para. 39.1

What we are dealing with here is exactly the opposite,
and I am sure, Mr. President, that your country does
not share his opinion.
66. Mr. President, again I wish to thank you and also
to extend my thanks to the Secretary-General for the
prompt action that you both took on the day we heard
of the news that Begin insisted on the re-expulsion of
the Mayors.
67. What we are dealing with is a corollary of the
occupation, an occupation that engenders resistance.
At times that resistance also takes the form of armed
violence, and this will continue until that occupation
is terminated and the occupying forces completely
withdrawn from the totality of the areas occupied.
68. We are meeting here today-and the Council is
forced to meet-simply because a Member State,
Israel, entirely ignores and defies resolutions and
decisions and persists in its policy and practices
against the Palestinian people. The aim of such policy
and practices remains the same: the “spiriting of the
indigenous population”-meaning
the Palestinian
people-“across the frontier”, as was described by
Herzl, the founder of the Zionist movement.
69. The expulsion of the Mayors and the atrocities’
committed by the forces of occupation are based on
some emergency regulations applied in 1945 by the
United Kingdom as the Mandatory Power. Of those
atrocious emergency defence laws of 1945, a Zionist
lawyer in 1948, a certain Yaacov Shimshon Shapiro
-who later became the Attorney-General and Minister of Justice in Israel-said,

62, The PRESIDENT’: The next speaker is the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization,
on whom I now call.

“The system established in Palestine since the
issue of the defence laws is unparalleled in any
civilized country. There were no such laws even
in Nazi Germany.‘*

63. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
Mr. President, at the outset I should like through you
to thank the representatives who joined in extending
an invitation to the PLO to participate in this debate.

Yet these laws still remain in force in the so-called
democratic State of Israel and are still being applied,
7

70. The High Court met and on Thursday, 4 Decem-.
ber, upheld the legality of the expulsion orders but
recommended that the decision to re-expel Mayors
Fahd Qawasma and Mohamed Milhem be reconsidered at the political level. That was the decision of
the High Court. It said it very clearly: this is not a
legal matter, this is a political issue. That is exactly
what they should deal with, and that is what we are
dealing with.

all books are controlled. The military governor
constantly publishes lists of forbidden books. Newspapers and other publications which are openly sold
in Israel are forbidden in the territories. Pictures of
flowers are forbidden if they are painted in the four
colours of the Palestinian flag-white, black, red
and green. Another example: a picture of a dove
standing in a window was forbidden because the
dove was painted with the petals of the KatXyeh”that is the head-dress we use. “In the last year the
military government has tried to eradicate anything
that symbolizes Palestine.

71. ‘The Minister ‘of Justice in Tel Aviv declared that
security and public-welfare considerations had been
taken into account. It should not be possible to deprive
a citizen or a human being of his fundamental freedoms on any considerations, and least of all on the
basis of security considerations.

“Even worse than this is the absolute power of
the military governor. His regulations have the force
of law. He can issue any regulations he wants,
without any consultation with the Knesset.
6‘. . .

and it is as a result of their application that this Council is meeting this afternoon.

“The military governor can (and does) forbid I
72. As we are talking about the “exemplary” legal
system we heard of this morning, let us recall that on
Palestinians to move from their own villages or
towns without permission. Thousands of Pales29 July last the Knesset amended the Israeli Nation-,
tinians are now limited to their own villages. I tried
ality Law and gave the State the right to abolish the i
to get a man in Ramallah, whose brother-in-law
citizenship of any person who had committed an act
died in Bethlehem, to visit the funeral. Forbidden.
that constituted abrogation of loyalty to the State of’
Israel. Unfortunately, in that law “disloyalty’? is not
None can say this three-hour daytime visit is a
matter of security . . .”
_
.detined. Consequently, one will realize that disloyalty
would be applicable on a racist basis to the non-Jewish
citizens of the State of Israel who hold passports. The distance between Ramallah and Bethlehem is not
more than 25 kilometres. When I was in Jerusalem
I am not aware of any other State in the world where
the State has the right to abolish the citizenship of any my Sunday walks sometimes took me to Ramallah and
then I. drove back; or. I travelled to Bethlehem and
person-and, as it appears, in an arbitrary manner,
back on foot. It is good exercise with clean air-somenot sub judice.
thing we have been denied so far.
73. :.Another law was passed in July, which
,l’
, , : ‘-.
75: -Since Mr. Shahak speaks about the. military, iet
:“forbids the performance of any act in a public place us see.what The Jerusalem Post says about .who .runs
which demonstrates identification with or sympathy the show in Tel Aviv. On Human Rights Day, that is
10 December 1980, an editorial in The Jerusalem Ptwt
for a terrorist organization, such as flying a flag,
displaying a symbol, uttering an anthem or slogan”.
read as follows. I shall quote only a few excerpts:
,.
:.
In plain: language, that means any Palestinian living
“The troubled West Bank is still seething: this much,
in Nazareth, Tiberias or Jaffa, for example, who feels
is certain despite strenuous efforts to keep the area
like singing one of those old nostalgic songs about
out of bounds to the press, both local and foreign.” ..
I
beautiful Palestine would be considered as committing
an .act directed against the State and showing sym- Some who spoke before me this morning referred’ to ,
pathy for a terrorist organization.
the censorship imposed on the press in the “free”
country of Israel. Yet the military government--which
74. I ‘shall quote from an interview in New York,
in these days calls all the shots there, and I underline
published, in The Village Voice of 19-25 November
**all”-is trying to assure all and sundry that this is
1980, with Israel Shahak, an Israeli citizen, a survivor
but a passing wave of unrest. The editorial continues:
of the extermination camps in Europe, who is now
“What is not in any doubt is that their civilian su:.
head ,of a’ human rights group. Let us listen to the
following .description by him of the behaviour of the
periors, notably Defence Minister Begin, see their
own legitimate role as nothing but rubber-stamps
Israelis in the occupied territories;
for the generals. . . .
“In the occupied territories the worst thing, to
-my mind, is the complete lack of democracy and
“Mr. Begin is content to allow his military administrators . . . to act like foreign tyrants larding it over
freedom of expression . . . What happened in 1967
was that Israel decided to establish a permanent
a native population. This is malignant neglect at its
colony. Because of this, in the occupied territories
worst.”
8

76. But those acts are not incidental; they are the
result of a proclamation made in June 1967 when the
Israeli military commander on the West Bank issued
military proclamation No. 2 concerning the assumption of government by the Israel Defence Forces,
section III of which states:

78. But to tell the truth, I am a Palestinian and my
country is basically agricultural. If we cannot have
an agricultural school or an agricultural experimental
station-we do not have atomic bombs or Ford
plants-we have oranges, olives and figs-not permitting us to have agricultural schools represents a;
systematic effort by the Israeli military Government
to hamper the development of Palestinian community
organizations. There is something even worse. ;

“Every governmental, legislative, appointive and
administrative power in respect of the region or
its inhabitants shall henceforth be vested in me”
-namely, the Israeli military commander-“alone,
and shall only be exercised by me”-the despot“or by persons appointed by me for that purpose
or acting on my behalf.”

79. The statement says that those

‘-

“universities must seek approval from the Israeli
military government for purchase .df laboratory
‘equipment. They suffer, ‘in addition, from a tax.
status under which they, unlike Israeli universities”
-and that, again, is’ racist discrimination--“pay
onerous customs duties on laboratory equipment,
sometimes at 100 per cent of its value.”

And who cares about the Government, the Cabinet
or the Knesset? That was what the military governor
assigned to himself in a proclamation.
77. Again, early in December, a number of university
professors&nd I am sure that you, Mr. President,
know some of them owing ‘to your career-visited
the area and came out with a shocking statement. I do
not want to read the entire statement, but they referred
to a military order, No. 854, issued on 6 July 1980,
concerning education:
,,
._
“These regulations include an extensive censorship of teaching materials (more than 1,100 books
are forbidden for use in classrooms and for possession by individuals), and onerous restrictions on
formal lectures and extracurricular programmes : . .
faculty work permits which formerly were’ renewable annually have gradually been reduced to.
periods of six months and for some professors one
month or two weeks . . . a professor of cultural
studies, who left North Carolina State’ University
at Raleigh to teach -at Bir Zeit University; found
his .work permit denied, effective immediately,
after he had begun to teach.”
i
.’
.‘.
I am sure, Mr. President, as a result of your career
and personal experience you would not think of going
to a university for two weeks or to: one where ,you
would find when you arrived that the authorities have
denied you a permit to teach. The statement continues:

80. The names of .lO professors are listed. They are
from Brandeis University; American,’ University;‘.
Rutgers University; Yale .University; University of
California, Santa Cruz; University of. California,
Berkeley; and Ohio State University. ‘Those professors were there and had personal experience. They
also. had cameras with them. I think people thought
they were tourists. But they saw the Israeli army shoot’
at the students, and perhaps some of those -students a
had gone to the streets because the Mayors had been.
expelled. What happened to the cameras. of those
American university. professors?. They were taken
away and the film was tom up. That, again, was not
incidental. The military government issues orders to
its troops when they go out in the streets, and I should
like to quote one of those orders from the military
government to the Israeli army. conscripts on the
West Bank. This was quoted in the Knesset:, .
“Anyone you catch outside, you first beat with
clubs all over his body, except the head. Have no
mercy, break all his bones, give no explanations. ’
First of all, beat, and when you ‘are finished, you’
can explain why you have -done so:‘If ,you catch
a small child,‘ order his whole family out. Make’\
them stand in a row and beat the father in front of,;
his children. Do not read this beating ‘as a privilege;
it is a duty. They understand no other way. There
is no point is arresting those who just wander.around
outside. Beat, them and. send them home; ‘:But if
someone causes trouble, throws stones. or asome-’
thing, first break his bones and then put him’on’the
vehicle that will take him to military headquarters.
But remember, that is the order: from the .minute
he is on the vehicle he is an arrested man and must ;
not be beaten any more. Off to your duties.” *

“The continued existence of West Bank universities
must be reapproved annually by the Israeli military’
Government.”
But, of course, they go beyond that-they prohibit
programmes. For example, according to these American university professors:
‘.
“At Al-Najah University”-in
Nablus-*‘for example, a request for permission to open an agricultural school has been denied for several years without explanation. Agriculture is a sensitive topic
in the West Bank, since the Begin settlement policy
has resulted in confiscation of Palestinian farmland
and pre-emption of Palestinian water resources.”

That is not Nazi Germany,’ that is not France’ under
Nazi occupation-that
is Palestine under IiraeliZionist occupation, and that is what we are dealing
with.
9

81. But of course, Mr. President, your Government
is responsible, and I shall tell you why. The late Senator Adlai Stevenson addressed the United States
Senate on 17 June and stated, in regard to a bill for
international security and development assistance,
“This bill authorizes $4,8 13,921,000 in security and
development assistance in the world. Of this,
$2,185,000,000, or about 43 per cent, is earmarked
for Israel as military sales-financing and economic
support.“*

vading Lebanon, were shelling Lebanon, were killing
,people in Lebanon, and I understand that the representative of Lebanon sent a letter or a couple of letters
to you, Mr. President, or to the Secretary-General,
concerning an invasion by 300 or 500 Israeli soldiers
to demolish, destroy and devastate Lebanon, to kill
Lebanese and Palestinian citizens.
85. Mr. President, in wishing you a merry Christmas, I hope you and the rest of the members of the
Council will ponder: will the Council effectively secure
the full implementation of its resolutions and restore
and strengthen our confidence in the United Nations?

So it can be seen who are the accessories to the fact
that are participating in financing the aggression
against my people. So your Government, Mr. President, is equally responsible for the expulsion of these
Mayors and for the crimes against my people. Senator Stevenson went on to describe what happens
around the world, about misery and about refugees,
and stated:

86. The PRESIDENT: I shall now make a statement
in my capacity as representative of the UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA.
87. The United States will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before the Council. The views of the United
States on the issue of the deportation of the West
Bank Mayors are well known to all. To put it succinctly, the Geneva Convention applies to the West
Bank, and the Geneva Convention prohibits deportations, whatever the motive of the occupying Power.
We deeply regret the fact that the Government of
Israel re-expelled Mayors Milhem and Qawasma after
they had voluntarily submitted their appeal to Israeli
judicial authorities.

“And yet Israel, with a high standard of living,
is to receive almost as much military and economic
assistance from the U.S. Government as all the
other 99.9 per cent of the world’s people combined.
‘1
.

.

.

“This preference for Israel diverts funds from the
support of human life and vital American interests
elsewhere in an interdependent and unstable world.
If it could produce stability in the Middle East or
enhance Israel’s security, it could be justified, but
it reflects continued U.S. acquiescence in an Israeli
policy which threatens more Middle East instability, more Israeli insecurity and a continued
decline of United States authority in the world.“*

88. The United States supports the draft resolution
in full knowledge of the complexity of the situation in
the Middle East. We continue to believe that the Council should take the entire situation in the occupied
territories into account. We also continue to hope that
any future incidents of violence against any party will
be brought to the attention of the Council, which we
believe should be as prompt in condemning violence
against Israelis as it is to criticize Israeli actions.

82. This is a serious meeting. At stake, as was stated
by my brother the representative of the League of
Arab States, is the credibility of the United Nations.
At stake is not just the future of two Mayors and a
She&h but the future of the Palestinian people. At
stake is war or peace in the Middle East, in which the
entire world might be engulfed.

89. Finally, it remains the view of the United States
that the settlement of the broader issues surrounding
the problem now before us can be achieved only
through negotiations on the basis of Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

83. Two days ago, the Council adopted a resolution
concerning the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon [resolution 483 (1980)] and hoped that somehow the Israelis would cease their aggression against
Lebanon. As a matter of fact, Ambassador Blum said:

90. I now resume my functions as PRESIDENT of
the Council.
91. It is my understanding that the Council is now
ready to proceed to vote on the draft resolution before
it [S/14306]. Unless I hear any objection, I shall now
put the draft resolution to the vote.

“As indicated once again in our vote in the General
Assembly yesterday evening, Israel continues to
support the independence, sovereignty, territorial
integrity .and unity of Lebanon within its intemationally recognized boundaries. Israel wants peace
in and with Lebanon. Israel has no territorial claims
on Lebanon.” [2258th meeting, pat-a. 47.1

A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution
lution 484 (1980)).

was adopted unanimously

(reso-

92. The PRESIDENT: Mr. Mohamed Milhem,
to whom the Council has extended an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure

84. Yet, while those words were being spoken here
by a hypocrite and a liar, the Israeli forces were in10

ization to express our conviction and belief and trust
in this Organization and to give it more credibility in
implementing the resolutions adopted so far.

[2259fh meeting], wishes to make a further statement.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
93. Mr. MILHEM: I should like to thank all the
members for the unanimity in the vote taken on this
third resolution of the Council on this subject.
94. On behalf of my colleague and myself, I wish to
stress that we have more trust and more confidence
in this establishment, and that, because we have no
homes to go back to and we cannot go home, and we
consider that this building belongs to everybody,
especially those who are oppressed, especially those
who cannot find justice anywhere except in this
building, we have decided to stay in trust of the Organ-

The meeting

rose at 4.45 p.m.

NOTES
I United Nations, Treuty Series, vol. 75. p. 287.
2 United States of America, Congressional Record, Proceedings
and Debates of the 96th Congress, Second Session, vol. 126-part 12
(Washington, D.C.. U.S. Government Printing Oflice. 1980).
p. 15046.

11

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS,
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER LES PURLICATIONS

DES NA-ITONS UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente darts Ies libairies et la agences d+ositaires du
monde mtier. Informez-vous auprb de votre librai= ou adrcsscz-vous h : Nations Units. Section
des ventes. New York ou Gcnhte.
KAK

HOlIYPHTh

H3JllAHHR

OPrAHHtAIfHH

OD-bEAHHEHHhIX

HAIIHH

SWta5ixa OpraHH3aurui CMae~e~esn3brx
HasHR momc~o Kynmb
B ICHHxHblX
nara3uHax x areiwcmax
no ncex paRoitax urnpa. Ham&me
cnpaaxrr ot%.H3ztaHn~1x n
nazuex rcxnfl(~ou uara3Irne HJ~X nmmf~e no aapecy : Oprana3auna ObaeAmieHabrx
HarruR. Cexqna no npOAa%e a3naxHR. Hbio-Hopa unn Xeiresa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en lib&as y casas distribuidotas en
todas partcs dcl mundo. Consultc a su iibrcro o dirijasc a: Naciones Unidas. Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

83-614624ctobe.r 1987-2.050
