S/PRST/2013/14

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 August 2013
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7022nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 23 August 2013, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Reports of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses its continued support for the African
Union’s (AU’s) efforts to facilitate Sudan’s and South Sudan’s implementation
of their bilateral agreements and compliance with the requirements of the AU
Roadmap and of Resolution 2046. The Council recalls in this regard the
Communiqué adopted by the AU Peace and Security Council’s (AUPSC’s)
Ministerial Meeting on July 29, the Communiqué adopted by the AU and the
Intergovernmental Authority for Development (IGAD) on July 22, and the
mechanisms outlined by the AU High-level Implementation Panel (AUHIP)
Chair, President Thabo Mbeki, in his June 9 letter to President Omar al-Bashir
and President Salva Kiir. It also welcomes the extension of the AUHIP’s
mandate.
“The Security Council expresses grave concern about continued
challenges to implementation of the September 27, 2012 Cooperation
Agreements, and calls on all parties to urgently: 1) implement fully and
immediately the September 27 Cooperation Agreements and all other relevant
agreements; 2) make effective use of the joint and other mechanisms that have
been established to do so; 3) cooperate with the AUHIP, African Union and
IGAD; and 4) refrain from pursuing any actions that run counter to these
objectives.
“The Security Council recalls that Resolution 2046, inter alia, prohibits
both states from supporting any rebel groups operating against the other State
and further recalls relevant agreements between Sudan and South Sudan to that
end. The Council welcomes the establishment and the commencement of work
of the Ad Hoc Investigative Mechanism (AIM) to look into allegations of such
support and the commitment by both governments to accept the AIM’s
findings.
“The Security Council welcomes the creation of the AU Border
Programme Technical Team (AUBP TT) to determine conclusively the Safe
Demilitarized Border Zone (SDBZ) centerline on the ground, and reiterates
that the centerline of the SDBZ in no way prejudices the current or future legal
status of the border, ongoing negotiations on the disputed and claimed areas,
13-43935 (E) 230813

*1343935*

S/PRST/2013/14

and demarcation of the border. The Council welcomes both governments’
commitments to accept the AUBP TT’s findings.
“The Security Council urges the Governments of Sudan and South Sudan
to maintain dialogue to ensure continued transportation of oil from South
Sudan, and the Government of Sudan to suspend any actions to halt the
transportation of oil from South Sudan to allow these mechanisms to complete
their work.
“The Security Council supports the AUPSC’s calls for full cooperation
with the Abyei Area Joint Investigation and Inquiry Committee’s (AAJIIC’s)
investigation into the killing of a UNISFA peacekeeper and the Ngok Dinka
paramount chief.
“The Security Council reiterates its grave concern about the highly
volatile situation in Abyei area, and stresses that the parties must immediately
implement pending aspects of the June 20, 2011 Agreement on Temporary
Security and Administrative Arrangements for the Abyei Area, in particular to
resolve the dispute over the Abyei Area Council and immediately establish the
Abyei Area Administration and Abyei Police Service. The Council recalls their
decision in Resolution 2046 that the parties must resume immediately
negotiations to reach agreement on Abyei final status under the auspices of the
AUHIP. In this regard, the Council calls for swift action to disarm
communities in Abyei in accordance with the decision of the Abyei Joint
Oversight Committee (AJOC) to turn Abyei into a weapons-free zone which it
welcomed in Resolution 2104.
“The Security Council calls upon the Government of Sudan and SPLM-N
to cease hostilities and engage in direct talks to end the conflict in Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile. The Council also calls on all parties to refrain from
any acts of violence against civilians, to expedite safe and unhindered
humanitarian access for the timely and full delivery of humanitarian aid to all
civilians in urgent need of assistance in accordance with relevant provisions of
international law, including international humanitarian law and the United
Nations guiding principles of humanitarian assistance, and to fully respect
international human rights law and international humanitarian law. In this
regard, it emphasizes that those responsible for violations of international
humanitarian law and violations and abuses of international human rights law
must be held accountable.”

2

13-43935
