S/PV.7764

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7764th meeting

Tuesday, 30 August 2016, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ibrahim. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malaysia)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Taula
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Ilnytskyi
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Toro-Carnevali

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (S/2016/675)
Report of the Secretary-General on the progress made with regard to the
stabilization of and restoration of constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau
(S/2016/720)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-27351 (E)
*1627351*

S/PV.7764

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (S/2016/675)
Report of the Secretary-General on the progress
made with regard to stabilization and restoration of
constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau (S/2016/720)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Guinea-Bissau and Timor-Leste to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Modibo
Touré, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, and His
Excellency Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of Brazil.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/675, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau.
I also wish to draw members attention to
document S/2016/720, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the progress made with regard to
stabilization and restoration of constitutional order in
Guinea-Bissau
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Modibo Touré, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, His
Excellency Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of
Brazil, and His Excellency Mr. Luis Bermúdez,
2/8

30/08/2016

Deputy Permanent Representative of Uruguay and
representative of the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2048
(2012), concerning Guinea-Bissau.
I now give the floor to Mr. Touré.
Mr. Touré (spoke in French): I have the honour to
speak before the Security Council to present the report
(S/2016/675) of the Secretary-General on developments
in Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (UNOGBIS). Today’s meeting marks the second
since the Security Council visited Bissau. As if there
were a need to, that shows the particular and sustained
attention that the Council accords to Guinea-Bissau.
As I address the Council, ongoing consultations are
being pursued in order to break the deadlock prevailing
in the People’s National Assembly. The Assembly has
yet to consider the Government’s programme, although
it has been in place for nearly three months. The normal
legislative process, which should lead to the convening
of a plenary session to discuss the programme, appears
to be paralysed. Since its first unsuccessful meeting,
on 28 July, the Standing Committee of the National
Assembly, an organ that is designed to prepare, inter
alia, the agenda of the plenary session, has been unable
to meet owing to the decision of the majority party,
the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and
Cabo Verde (PAIGC), to suspend its participation in
those efforts. Among the reasons that the PAIGC has
given for that is the arrest of a member of Parliament
with parliamentary immunity and the need to clarify
the status of members of Parliament who were expelled
by the party in January.
Faced by this impasse, the President of the National
Assembly launched a mediation initiative between the
parliamentary groups of the two main political parties,
namely the PAIGC and the Party for Social Renewal
(PRS). On 16 August, the President of the Assembly
invited the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), the European Union
and the United Nations to a meeting during which he
shared the results of this initiative, his analysis of the
situation and his proposal to end the crisis. He asked
the organizations to convey his proposal.
The next day, representatives of those organizations
and I met with President José Mário Vaz to discuss the
opportunity of a dialogue that would be carried out with
our support. The President of the welcomed the initiative
16-27351

30/08/2016

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

and assured us of his willingness to explore solutions
that could help resolve the crisis. Subsequently, we
conducted a series of consultations with all the political
parties represented in Parliament, the Prime Minister,
the Supreme Court, the group of 15 expelled PAIGC
members of the Assembly, as well as civil society and
religious and traditional leaders. The consultations
sought to gather the views of national stakeholders on
the current situation and explore solutions for a way out
of the crisis.
Other steps have also been taken, which include
compiling of a list of 57 signatures of members of
Parliament, including those of the PRS, that was sent
to the Speaker of the National Assembly on 22 August,
to convoke a plenary session. Since 26 August, the
PAIGC and PRS have started negotiations to reach
consensus in order to end the political deadlock. We
strongly welcome that initiative and count on the sense
of responsibility of the leaders of both parties as well
as that of the entire political class of Guinea-Bissau
for a definitive way out of the crisis in the very near
future. It is important to underscore that, in the absence
of a programme bearing the imprimatur of those
elected by the people, accompanied by a corresponding
budget, it will be difficult for the Government to
undertake essential reforms for the sustainable return
to institutional stability and implement policies and
strategies to boost inclusive economic growth and
address the real problems of Guinea-Bissau, namely,
combating poverty and improving the living conditions
of the people.
(spoke in English)
As part of the efforts of UNIOGBIS to assist
in resolving the political crisis, I have continued to
engage with multiple stakeholders in furtherance of the
Secretary-General’s good offices, including through
meetings with regional Heads of State to advocate
for support to Guinea-Bissau. I also convened several
meetings with ECOWAS, the African Union, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and the
European Union, as well as with key bilateral partners
and national stakeholders, to promote the coordination
of mediation efforts to break the political gridlock. I
have been greatly encouraged by the commitment of all
international partners to remain engaged in the country.
I am pleased to note the collective commitment
by national stakeholders to engage in dialogue. The
ongoing political impasse can, and must be, resolved.

S/PV.7764

The parties to the crisis should be urged to honour
their commitment to make the necessary sacrifices
and concessions needed to end the parliamentary
stand-off and put the Government machinery back on
track. In that regard, I call upon the political leaders
to put aside partisan considerations and focus on
the national interests, as well as the welfare of the
suffering population.
I am also pleased that the military continues to
demonstrate restraint and neutrality in the face of
the political stalemate. Many of them look forward
to receiving pledged support for their demobilization
and socioeconomic reintegration. For the sake of the
stability of Guinea-Bissau, we must not fail them.
While addressing the current impasse remains
the immediate priority, breaking the stalemate should
also provide an opportunity for the political actors of
Guinea-Bissau to reflect on ways of ending the recurrent
cycle of institutional paralysis and ensuring sustainable
stability. That can be achieved only through genuine
and inclusive dialogue among the citizenry. Such an
exercise has the potential to stabilize institutions and
pave the way for tackling related priorities, including
justice and reconciliation, the reform of the defence and
security sectors and the fight against drug trafficking
and other forms of transnational organized crime.
In that connection, it is heartening to note that
preparations for the National Conference are on course.
Earlier this month, a delegation of the Organizing
Commission for the National Conference, with funding
from the Peacebuilding Fund, visited Timor-Leste to
learn from that country’s experiences in national dialogue
and transitional justice processes. That experience will
no doubt feed into the impending dialogue.
As we all know, there is no development without
stability. The path to stability in Guinea-Bissau will
require a pragmatic and integrated approach. That
means that, in addition to the current focus on achieving
stability from the top down, we should also invest
energy and resources to foster stability from the bottom
up. To that end, I call upon the donor community to
consider allocating more resources to the social sectors,
including health and education, and to programmes that
empower women and create opportunities for our youth.
The people of Guinea-Bissau are resilient, peaceful,
decent and hard-working. All they aspire to is to improve
their daily lot and overcome the harshness of poverty.
Those aspirations should not be held back or constrained

16-273513/8

S/PV.7764

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

by political contingencies. While we continue to work
with the Bissau-Guineans for the return to full stability,
we should design resilient policies and programmes for
their benefit that would be impervious to fragility and
instability. The people of Guinea-Bissau are counting
on the support of the Security Council and that of the
international community at large.
The President: I thank Mr. Touré for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. De Aguiar Patriota.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota: At the outset of this
briefing, I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for the
invitation to address the Security Council today in my
capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
I am grateful for, and welcome the comprehensive
briefing delivered by, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau,
Mr. Modibo Touré, as it is most timely under the
current circumstances. In addition to the information
presented by Mr. Touré in his briefing, I wish to add a
few elements on the basis of the discussions held in the
PBC on 22 August, which we hope will be helpful for
the Council’s deliberations.
Guinea-Bissau has come a long ways since the coup
d’état in 2012. The country has made important strides
in regaining its footing towards democratization,
and the progress achieved is now acknowledged by
many, even amidst the situation in which the country
remains trapped in a political impasse. Despite an
undeniably fragile stability, national actors seem to
understand that they must position themselves within
the context of respect for the rule of law, the country’s
international legal obligations and the Constitution.
We were reminded last week by Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman, when he
briefed the Guinea-Bissau configuration on his recent
trip to Bissau, that the authorities in that country
today no longer faced the dilemma they confronted
in the wake of the 2012 coup d’état, when there was
disagreement on who would legitimately represent the
country’s Government during that year’s session of the
General Assembly.
In equal measure, regional and international
observers who were then divided on matters related to
Guinea-Bissau are now aligned in supporting a strong
development and stability agenda for the country.
4/8

30/08/2016

The consensus that today characterizes the oversight
of the ongoing challenges in Guinea-Bissau, both in
the PBC and in the Security Council, is something
worth highlighting.
At the same time, the precarious political situation
in Guinea-Bissau remains a source of concern to many
in West Africa and beyond. In a region that has seen
great progress in consolidating peace and stability
through democratic means, Guinea-Bissau remains
a weak link. I wish to use this opportunity to make a
strong plea for collective efforts to help the national
authorities of Guinea-Bissau find solutions to their
governance problems. Options must be discussed as
a matter of urgency. The longer the crisis is allowed
to last, the more the progress achieved thus far risks
being undermined, and perhaps even erased. We have
well-founded worries that it would become harder to
steer the country back on track if viable solutions are
not found in the short term to render the governance of
the country truly effective.
The PBC supports an inclusive and fruitful political
dialogue, as stated in the press statement issued on
26 August by the PBC Guinea-Bissau country-specific
configuration. That would be a positive step in paving
the way for longer-term policies that the country
requires, including a possible constitutional review.
The PBC could assist those and other efforts — for
example, by mobilizing constitutional experts who
may be able to provide adequate advice, as required
and in full respect for national sovereignty. In order to
tackle longer-term issues, it would be up to the BissauGuineans to show wisdom and creativity to make their
political constitutional model workable and adapted to
their own specificities.
The PBC believes that every effort must be made
by international partners to support the continuation
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB). We
cannot afford to send the wrong signals regarding the
importance of maintaining a safe and stable environment
as remaining challenges are tackled. In that connection,
I wish to acknowledge the role of the European Union’s
financial support to ensure the renewal of the mandate
of ECOMIB in June of this year.
In conclusion, the PBC believes that the lack of
genuine political will to overcome current impasses
is preventing the enactment of Government measures
that would lead to concrete peace dividends. The
16-27351

30/08/2016

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

PBC urges the political parties and, through them, all
legislative actors to work together and urgently resume
a constructive and cooperative dialogue in order to
approve the Government’s programme and the State
budget. Without a national road map for policy and a
budget to sustain a functional State, the country will be
ill-positioned to receive support from the international
community, despite the professed intentions to provide
support. The PBC believes that the international
community, including the Council, must strongly
encourage regional diplomatic efforts, such as those
agreed to at the forty-nineth ordinary meeting of the
ECOWAS Heads of State gathering in Dakar in June. I
look forward to an early dispatch of a high-level mission
composed of the Presidents of Senegal, Sierra Leone
and Guinea. President Johnson-Sirleaf of Liberia, as
acting Chair of ECOWAS, has a leadership role to play
in that regard. The PBC also encourages consultations
aimed at organizing a meeting of the International
Contact Group for Guinea-Bissau.
Finally, the PBC will continue impressing upon all
actors the importance of upholding their commitments
made at the Brussels donor round table in March
2015. That applies equally to the respective pledges
from national and international stakeholders. A clear
commitment to place the national interests above other
agendas will be conducive to stronger partnerships
between the Government and its international
supporters. We therefore urge the national authorities
to seek a path towards sustainable, constructive
governance where dissent is channelled without holding
hostage the country’s institutional, social and economic
development perspectives.
The President: I thank Mr. De Aguiar Patriota for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Bermúdez.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I am pleased to address the members of the Security
Council in my capacity as representative of the Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2048 (2012), concerning Guinea-Bissau.
I would like to sum up the main aspects of the debate
on the Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/720) on the
progress made with regard to the stabilization and
restoration of constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau,
held during the informal consultations of the Committee
on 19 August.

S/PV.7764

This year’s assessment was less encouraging than
the one set out in the previous report (S/2015/619)
of the Secretary-General, especially with regard
to the political situation that has paralysed State
institutions and led to the frustration felt among a
number of international donors. The crisis impeded the
Government from implementing significant reforms
and weakened its ability to deal with issues such as
crime, illicit trafficking and terrorism. Moreover,
the situation also dissuaded international donors
from fulfilling their pledges. However, the economic
growth forecast for the country for 2016, the renewal
of the mandate of the Economic Community of African
States (ECOWAS) Mission in Guinea-Bissau and the
uninterrupted efforts by regional and international
actors were all positive factors that could contribute to
putting an end to the crisis.
According to the report of the Secretary-General,
United Nations sanctions continued to have a deterrent
effect on the military, which did not become directly
involved in the political life of the country. Nevertheless,
the risk of intevervention on the part of military forces
could increase if the political crisis were to persist,
reforms of the relevant sectors were not undertaken
and, in particular, if the precarious budgetary situation
were to prevent the payment of the soldiers’ salaries.
With regard to the sanctions imposed on
11 individuals, it was reported that at least four of them
had travelled abroad — supposedly to receive medical
treatment. Those trips, which took place in breach of
the prohibition on travel, could have been justified on
humanitarian grounds, which is one of the possible
reasons for exemption that the Committee can grant.
However, no such application was made.
The deep-rooted causes of Guinea-Bissau’s
problems continued to exist, and therefore the
possibility of the country slipping back into instability
and unconstitutional crisis could not be excluded.
In that regard, the Secretary-General reiterated his
recommendations of last year to maintain the sanctions
regime and its criteria, send a firm message that
sanctions would be imposed on all elements causing
unrest, and, finally, adopt additional measures with
an increase in designations. He also recommended
considering the establishment of a group of experts
and defining the parameters for the lifting of sanctions.
The report also recommended that the Committee
should consider the possibility of charging its Chair
with visiting Guinea-Bissau and revisiting the issue of

16-273515/8

S/PV.7764

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

the sanctions list, including updating it. A number of
the members of the Committee felt that the assessment
presented in the report was balanced and sound;
however, some members expressed their deep concern
about the deterioration in the political and econmic
situation in Guinea-Bissau.
With regard to sanctions, some Committee members
made positive comments in that the measures continued
to be useful and effective. They also supported the
continuation of the sanctions regime. Members also
highlighted that sanctions were a means and not an end
onto themselves.Therefore, they had to be adapted to
the situation on the ground. Some members expressed
concern about an expansive interpretation of the criteria
for inclusion on the sanctions list and questioned
its relevance.
With regard to the Secretary-General’s recommendation
of considering the possibility of establishing a group of
experts, some members indicated that experts could help
gather timely and useful information for the Committee’s
use, especially with regard to process for listing and
delisting from the sanctions list. The Committee
had already taken steps with regard to the potential
revision of the sanctions list, including approving the
sending of a letter to the Permanent Representative of
Guinea-Bissau requesting proof concerning the death
of Mr. Sanha Clussé, who apparently died in April.
Some members also urged that Guinea-Bissau be sent
the message that the Council remained vigilant and was
closely following the development of the situation in
the country.
In addressing the questions and observations
of members, Mr. Kelvin Ong, Chief of the Security
Council Subsidiary Organs Branch, who presented
the report of the Secretary-General, and Mr. Antero
Lopes, Acting Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs in the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS), who joined the meeting from Bissau via
video tele-conference, stated that the existing sanctions
regime and criteria had already had a positive impact on
the situation in Guinea-Bissau and that continuing the
regime was already a strong message to the military to
remain neutral. Moreover, the people of Guinea-Bissau
viewed the continuation of the sanctions regime as a sign
of interest and commitment on the part of the Council.
With regard to the possible revision of the sanctions
regime, they clarified that the criteria were sufficiently
broad to include all possible elements of disruption to
6/8

30/08/2016

the constitutional order, independent of their affiliation.
In that regard, a group of experts could provide timely,
accurate and useful information and could help to
increase awareness about Guinea-Bissau’s problems.
With regard to terrorism, the Secretary-General
reported that there were indications of recent terrorist
activities involving recruitment by persons associated
with Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, Boko Haram
and the Movement for Unity and Jihad in Western
Africa, and that there was a risk for an increase in
terrorist activities in Guinea-Bissau. Nevertheless, for
the time being, there was not sufficient information to
provide a clear picture of the situation.
There was also a recognition of the positive role
played to date by the armed forces and its leaders.
Nevertheless, concern was expressed about the fact that
the military was gaining increasing popularity among
the population owing to a visible lack of ability by the
current Government to provide basic services, pay
salaries and establish conditions for the international
community to meet its pledges of financial contributions.
Lastly, with regard to mediation efforts by
UNIOGBIS, it was confirmed that the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative was fully determined
to meet with all interested national and international
stakeholders to consider the situation, including with
a view to facilitate the high-level presidential visit
proposed by ECOWAS.
The President: I thank Mr. Bermúdez for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Guinea-Bissau.
Ms. Lopes D’Alva (Guinea-Bissau): I thank you,
Mr. President, for inviting my delegation to the Security
Council table and for giving me floor. I would like to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of August 2016.
On behalf of Ambassador Joáo Soares da Gama,
Permanent Representative of Guinea-Bissau to the
United Nations, and on behalf of my entire delegation,
allow me to thank Mr. Modibo Touré, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for GuineaBissau, for the briefing just presented and for his steadfast
diligence on the political situation in my country since
his arrival in Bissau. His efforts to bring all the relevant
parties together for a common understanding as to the
way forward in resolving the present crisis are very
much appreciated. We also extend our gratitude to His
16-27351

30/08/2016

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Excellency Ambassador António de Aguiar Patriota,
Permanent Representative of Brazil to the United
Nations and Chair of Guinea-Bissau configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), for his briefing
and for his personal engagement, through PBC, for the
cause of peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau. I would like
also to thank the Deputy Permanent Representative of
Uruguay, in his capacity as the representative of the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012), for his briefing on
the status of the sanctions regime in Guinea-Bissau.
And I would like to thank the representative of TimorLeste, who will speak in his capacity as Chair of the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP),
for his statement and for all the support by the CPLP to
Guinea-Bissau.
After the very comprehensive report and everything
that has been said about the situation in Guinea-Bissau,
I do not have much to add, but to request all the members
of the Security Council to continue their support to our
country and its people. The latest developments in the
country in the past few days show that, finally, the main
actors from the two major parties are engaged in an
open dialogue towards reaching the needed consensus
to restore the normal functioning of the national
Parliament, which is an essential step to passing the
national budget and to move the country ahead.
The latest visit by the Council to Guinea-Bissau, the
visit of Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman and
the recent diplomatic efforts led by the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau and
other international organizations in the country have
served to reassure Bissau-Guineans that they are not
forgotten and that the international community remains
engaged in helping us to bring peace and stability to
our country.
Our people are aware that the major work towards
peace and stability remains the primary responsibility
of Bissau-Guineans. However, as the political crises
persists and the socioeconomic situation in the country
can no longer be sustained, the Council’s presence,
input and concrete actions vis-à-vis the people are
urgently needed. We know that the full realization
of the results and the pledges made at the Brussels
round table conference on Guinea-Bissau, on which
Bissau Guineans count so much, counting, are still
pending — perhaps waiting for an enabling political
environment in the country — but the suffering
population cannot wait.

S/PV.7764

The renewal of the mandate of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Mission
in Guinea-Bissau for one more year, with the support of
our partners to ECOWAS, is very much appreciated.
However, we are very concerned about the news that
after this year the Mission will be leaving Bissau. We
hope that by then the country will find a way to walk by
itself in terms of securing peace and that the military,
which at the moment is out of the political scene in the
country, will remain the same. Their attitude so far has
been very professional, and we commend them for it.
The international community’s financial support to
alleviate the immediate socioeconomic difficulties on
the population is very important and much-needed at
this moment.
In conclusion, I would like to express our sincere
gratitude to our immediate neighbours, specially
Senegal, which is a member of the Council, for their
engagement through ECOWAS, as well as all partners
and friends of Guinea-Bissau, for the continued support
and assistance for peace and stability in our country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Timor-Leste.
Mr. Da Costa Freitas (Timor-Leste): I would like
to express our congratulations to you, Mr. President, on
your presidency of the Security Council for the month
of August, as well as to thank you for convening this
meeting. I would also like to thank His Excellency
Mr. Modibo Ibrahim Touré, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau, for his
briefing and for his efforts in assisting the country’s
authorities to resolve the crisis.
I am honoured to address the Security Council
on behalf of the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP), whose members include Angola,
Brazil, Cabo Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Equatorial Guinea,
Mozambique, Portugal, Sáo Tomé and Principe and my
own country, Timor-Leste.
We welcome the two latest reports (S/2016/675
and S/2016/720) of the Secretary-General on GuineaBissau, whose recommendations we fully endorse.
The member States of the CPLP remain deeply
concerned about the continuing political impasse and
the overall situation in Guinea-Bissau. Of particular
concern are the impacts on the provision of basic
services to the population and the suspension of crucial
reforms. The strains are already being felt, particularly

16-273517/8

S/PV.7764

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

in the health and education systems and in the economic
deprivation of Bissau-Guineans. We are deeply
concerned that this could escalate into social tensions.
We call on all the parties to engage in constructive
dialogue and to create the conditions for the approval
of the Government programme and a national budget,
thereby exhibiting the necessary commitment towards
long-term development in the country. That would
lead to the much-needed lifting of the suspension on
international cooperation aid.
The CPLP commends the concerted action of the
international community and, in that regard, welcomes
the decision by the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Summit to renew the
mandate of its Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB).
Its role in contributing to stability in Guinea-Bissau
cannot be overstated. In that regard, we congratulate
the European Union on its decision to provide funding
assistance to ECOWAS. We are deeply concerned about
the detrimental effects of an eventual withdrawal of
ECOMIB before the security situation is guaranteed,
and we urge international partners to consider ways
by which we can continue to support peace and
development in Guinea-Bissau.

8/8

30/08/2016

We very much appreciate the briefing by UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman
on his recent visit to Guinea-Bissau, given during
a meeting of the Guinea-Bissau country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. For
that and for his continued efforts, we also thank His
Excellency Ambassador De Aguiar Patriota, Chair of
the configuration.
We reiterate our call to all national stakeholders,
namely, the organs of sovereignty, the political parties
and civil society, to commit to constructive and
inclusive dialogue, with respect for the Constitution,
democratic principles and the rule of law. Statesmanship
is required to resolve the political impasse and to move
towards greater political stability and socioeconomic
development, as well as for the protection and promotion
of the civil, political, economic, social and cultural
rights of all Bissau-Guineans.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

16-27351
