General Assembly-Fifth Session

28

3. Recommends to the governments of the underdeveloped countries concerned that they avail themselves of the facilities available to them through the
United Nations expanded programme of technical assistance, in order that they may obtain expert advice in the
planning of such measures as those listed in the preceding paragraph, for the purpose of improving agrarian
conditions.
312th plenary meeting,
20 November 1950.

402 (V).

Development of arid land

The General Assembly,
Considering that:
(a) One of the basic reasons for the low standard
of living in certain under-developed countries is the
inadequate extent of the areas at present under cultivation,
( b) The continual increase in the populations of
these countries requires the adoption of appropriate
and urgent measures for the development of their resources,
( c) It is essential in the above circumstances, if the
equitable distribution of land is to be promoted and the
standard of thing raised, that, among other measures,
the areas at present under cultivation be increased by
the development of arid zones,
( d) The Economic and Social Council, in resolution 324 D (XI) of 9 August 1950, has recommended
an intensification of scientific research to promote the
economic and social progress of mankind and has
rec()gnized the necessity for co-ordinating the efforts
of the various competent bodies of the United Nations
and the specialized agencies in order to study the
problems of the arid zones both in their scientific and
in their practical aspects,
l. Recommends that the Secretary-General prepare,
in collaboration with the competent specialized agencies, a report on the practical measures adopted for the
study of the problems of arid zones and on the technical and financial means employed by the specialized
agencies for this purpose ;
2. Invites the Secretary-General to submit his report
on this matter not later than to the fourteenth session
of the Economic and Social Council ;
3. Calls upon the Economic and Social Council to
examine the report and., with a view to facilitating and
encouraging the development of arid land, to consider
such measures as:
(a) Devoting sufficient technical and financial means
to the study of the relevant scientific and practical
problems;
( b) Promoting and co-ordinating the activities of
the United Nations and the specialized agencies to that
end;
( c) Furnishing appropriate technical assistance to
the governments concerned.

312th plenary meeting,
20 November 1950.

403 (V). Volume and distribution of national
income in under-developed countries

The General Assembly,
Considering that, in order to mobilize better their
resources with a view to accelerating their economic
development, it is desirable that the under-developed
countries should have knowledge of their national income and its distribution,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 299
E (XI) of 12 July 1950 concerning national income
and social accounts,
1. Recommends that the under-developed countries
should devote special attention to studies directed
towards the calculation of their national income and
its distribution;
2. Requests the Secretary-General and the specialized agencies concerned to give the most favourable
consideration possible to requests for technical assistance made for the above purpose ;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
study and report on the volume and distribution of
national income in the under-developed countries, with
special reference to :
( i) The various income groups and the respective
proportions between them ;
(ii) The amounts used by these countries to meet
their foreign commitments arising from loans and investments, public and private, and the payment of
services;
4. Directs the Secretary-General to prepare and submit to the Economic and Social Council a report to
enable it to carry out the request made in paragraph
3 above;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in carrying out
studies relating to the present resolution, to avoid any
duplication with the study recommended in paragraph
16 of Economic and Social Council resolution 294 D
(XI) of 12 August 1950.
312th plenary meeting,
20 November 1950.

404 (V). Economic development and international economic and commercial policy

The General Assembly,
Considering that the economic welfare of most countries depends on their imports and exports, and that
these imports and exports are directly affected by prevailing commercial policies,
Considering further that the United Nations and its
specialized agencies must thoroughly and continuously
study the extent to which prevailing commercial policies influence the plans for economic development of
under-developed countries,
Reaffirms General Assembly resolution 307 (IV) of
16 November 1949 concerning economic development
and international economic and commercial policy, and
requests that the group of experts, to be appointed by
the Secretary-General under Economic and Social

Resolutions adopted on reports of the Second Committee

Council resolution 290 (XI), paragraph 13, after c<-:nsultation with the Executive Secretary of the Interim
Commission for the International Trade Organization,
pay due attention to the influence that prevailing con:mercial policies have on national plans for the economic
development of under-developed countries.
312th plenary meeting,
20 November 1950.
405 (V).

Full employment

The General Assembly,
Considering that the Economic and Social Council,
in its resolution 290 (XI) of 15 August 1950 concerning full employment_, has formulated recommen~ations
to governments designed to strengthen t~e res1st_ance
of their national economies and of the mternattonal
economic structure against the danger of recession,
Considering that the additional studies which the
Secretary-General and the various groups of experts
are requested to undertake by that resolution are designed to provide a sound basis for th~ adoption of
national and international measures tendmg to ensure
full employment, both in economically advanced and in
under-developed countries,
1. N ates with satisfaction the vigorous action taken
by the Economic and Social Council in connexion with
full employment ;
2. Invites governments to co-operate with the Secretary-General in carrying out the tasks entrusted to him.
320th plenary meeting,
12 December 1950.
406 (V).

Current world economic situation

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that, as a result of the international
events of the last few months, new economic factors
have appeared which may unbalance and dislocate the
general economic stability and the economic progress
of many countries,
Recognizing that, under Articles 55 and 56 of the
Charter, the United Nations is under an obligation to
use all the means at its disposal to ensure the steady
growth of the world economy and to prevent the emergence of those factors of economic disequilibrium which
impair general economic stability and disturb the economic development of the under-developed countrie~,
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council, when
examining the world economic situation during its
twelfth session, to pay special attention to changes currently taking place in the international economic situation, with a view to recommending to governments and
to the General Assembly measures designed to make
possible the uninterrupted progress of programmes of
economic stability and development ;
2. Invites all the members of the Economic and
Social Council to submit to the twelfth session of the
Council their views concerning the way in which the
current world situation has affected their economic
progress and the prospects of continuing world eco-

29

nomic expansion, and, if possible, to communicate thes_e
views, through the Secretary-General, to the Council
!Jeiore the opening of its twelfth session;
3. Invites all the other Members of the United Nations similarlv to submit their views to the Council,
with the object of assisting the Council in its task of
recommending measures referred to in paragraph 1
above to the governments and to the General Assembly.
320th plenary meeting,
12 December 1950.
407 (V). Guides for organization and collection
of economic data in under-developed countries

The General Assembly,
Noting that the Economic and Social Council, in
resolution 290 ( XI) of 15 August 1950, inter alia,
(a) Recommended that governments should furnish
the Secretary-General with a wide range of economic
and statistical information relating to the implementation of that resolution,
( b) Stated that "Having regard to the fact that, in
some predominantly agricultural countries, figures for
unemployment and under-employment may not be
easily ascertainable and full employment goals may, if
related only to industrial labour, lead to misleading conclusions, and that, consequently, it may not be possible
for such countries to implement certain provisions of
this resolution",
( c) Invited the International Labour Organisation
to take all feasible further steps towards the practical
implementation of the recommendations in order to
facilitate international comparability of employment and
unemployment data with special reference to their use
in the formulation of full employment standards and
annual employment goals, policies and programmes,
Being aware that the Economic and Social Council,
in part E of the above-mentioned resolution, recommended that the Secretary-General and the specialized
agencies should provide, within their capacities, technical assistance to governments, on their request, for
the purpose of assisting under-developed countries in
this respect,
Recommends that the Secretary-General and the
specialized agencies, taking into account the different
institutional circumstances in the under-developed
countries, prepare material which may serve to guide
governments wishing to make use thereof and which
should set forth :
(a) The types of data considered necessary to prr,vide up-to-date information regarding the level of economic activity, employment, unemployment and underemployment ;

( b) Procedures and methods suitable for obtaining
and presenting such data ;
( c) Other suggestions relating to the organization
of adequate government machinery necessary for obtaining the said data.
320th plenary meeting,
12 December 1950.
