S/PV.9183

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9183rd meeting

Friday, 4 November 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Agyeman/Ms. Oppong-Ntiri. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ghana)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Koumba Pambo
Mrs. Kamboj
Ms. Moran
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-67381 (E)
*2267381*

S/PV.9183

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Japan and the Republic of Korea to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Khaled
Khiari, Assistant Secretary-General for the Middle
East, Asia and the Pacific in the Departments of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Khiari.
Mr. Khiari: According to various Government
sources, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
launched an unprecedented number of ballistic missiles
and other types of systems on 2 and 3 November. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has yet to
publicly provide details of those launches.
One of the missiles launched on 3 November was
assessed to be an intercontinental ballistic missile.
It reportedly covered a range of 760 kilometres
and reached an apogee of around 1,920 kilometres,
indicating that the launch may not have been successful.
One of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
ballistic missiles launched on 2 November reportedly
impacted in waters in proximity of the territorial sea of
the Republic of Korea.
The Secretary-General strongly condemns the
launch of a ballistic missile of reported intercontinental
range by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, as
well as the barrage of various missiles over recent days.
He calls on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to immediately cease any further reckless acts and to
comply fully with its international obligations under
relevant Security Council resolutions.
It is troubling that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has consistently disregarded any consideration
for international flight or maritime safety. While
2/14

04/11/2022

the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea National
Aviation Administration stated on 8 October that its
missile launch did not pose a risk to civil aviation or
the region, aircraft operators are required to assess
safety of their own flight operations. To meet that
obligation, operators rely on coordination among air
traffic services authorities, as well as the promulgation
of timely information on hazards.
The Secretary-General is deeply concerned about
the tension on the Korean Peninsula and the increase
in confrontational rhetoric, including the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s messaging related to
nuclear-weapon use. This is the ninth time the Council
has met to discuss the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea in 2022. Following our previous briefing on
5 October (see S/PV.9146), the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea claimed that its seven earlier missile
launch events were all part of “tactical nuclear operation
units” end quote.
While all concerned seek to avoid an unintended
escalation, the spate of missile launches and military
exercises contributes to a negative action-reaction cycle.
In order to lower the risk of miscalculation and reduce
tensions in the region, it is critical to immediately
strengthen communication channels, including
inter-Korean and military-to-military communications.
The Secretariat remains in close contact with all
parties, including the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. Given the potential risks associated with any
military confrontation, in the exercise of its primary
responsibility, the Security Council needs to do all
it can to prevent an escalation. Unity in the Security
Council is critical. Security Council unity also creates
an opportunity to seek off-ramps and sustained
diplomatic engagement.
The Secretary-General urges the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to immediately return to
the negotiating table. He also urges the key parties
to resume their diplomatic efforts, with a view to
achieving sustainable peace and the complete and
verifiable denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
Separately,
the
Secretary-General
remains
concerned about the humanitarian situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The United
Nations system, in coordination with international
and humanitarian partners, is ready to send staff and
assistance to help the Government of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea address medical and
22-67381

04/11/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

humanitarian needs, including those related to the
coronavirus disease pandemic. In order to allow for
a timely and effective response, we reiterate our call
for the unimpeded entry of international staff and
humanitarian supplies.
Let me conclude by reiterating that the unity of
the Security Council in this matter is essential to ease
tensions and overcome the diplomatic impasse and the
negative action-reaction cycle.
The President: I thank Mr. Khiari for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari
for his informative briefing.
Over the past week and a half, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has exacerbated an
extremely worrisome trend that we have seen all year:
an increased number of launches in flagrant violation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions, destabilizing
and threatening rhetoric and continued escalations.
The United States condemns in the strongest possible
terms all 13 recent ballistic missile launches by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea since
27 October. But the latest test of an intercontinental
ballistic missile (ICBM) by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea — the seventh ICBM this year — is
particularly concerning, as is the unprecedented impact
of a ballistic missile just about 50 kilometres, or 30
miles, from the Republic of Korea’s shoreline. This is
about more than just advancing the unlawful military
capabilities of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and undermining the global non-proliferation
regime. This is also about the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea trying to purposely raise tensions
and stoke fear in its neighbours.
Let me therefore be clear. These actions are not the
actions of a responsible State. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has now launched a staggering 59
ballistic missiles this year. That is right: 59. For a
United Nations Member State to so flagrantly violate
the relevant Security Council resolutions and all that the
Charter of the United Nations stands for is appalling.
Equally appalling is the Council’s deafening silence
on this issue. Thirteen Council members have joined
in condemning the unlawful actions of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea since the beginning of the

S/PV.9183

year. And 13 Council members have joined in voting to
impose costs on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea that would impede its unlawful weapons of mass
destruction and ballistic missile pursuits, while seeking
new avenues to improve humanitarian assistance to the
country’s people.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
however, has enjoyed blanket protection from two
members of the Council. Those members have bent
over backwards to justify the repeated violations by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. And, in turn,
they have enabled the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and made a mockery of the Council. This
cannot stand. The risks to the region and the world
are simply too great. I want to remind the Council of
our responsibility to protect global peace and security,
defend the global non-proliferation regime and uphold
Security Council resolutions. You do not get to
abandon Security Council responsibilities because the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea might sell you
weapons to fuel your war of aggression in Ukraine, or
because you think they make a good regional buffer to
the United States.
We have heard those two Council members claim
that the United States and the Republic of Korea
have stoked tensions on the Korean peninsula with
military exercises. That is nothing but a regurgitation
of propaganda by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and a misleading narrative. The United States
and the Republic of Korea are engaging in longstanding defensive military exercises that pose no
threat to anyone, never mind the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
In contrast, just last month, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea said that its flurry of recent
launches were the simulated use of tactical battlefield
nuclear weapons to “hit and wipe out” potential
United States and Republic of Korea targets. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is simply using
that as an excuse to continue to advance its unlawful
programmes. Even in the face of the escalations of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, the United
States remains committed to a diplomatic solution. We
have conveyed to the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea our request to engage in talks at all levels of
our Government. Despite the lack of engagement from
Pyongyang, we will continue to pursue meaningful
dialogue. We call on the Democratic People’s Republic

22-673813/14

S/PV.9183

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

04/11/2022

of Korea to abandon its provocative behaviour and at
long last turn to diplomacy.

was vetoed — indeed, doubly vetoed. What was the
response? It was more missiles, launches and risks.

The credibility of the Council is at risk. The
security of every United Nations Member State is at
risk. We must fully implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions necessary to impede the weapons
of mass destruction and ballistic missile advancements
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Full
implementation includes holding the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea accountable for its violations
of the resolutions, as we unanimously committed to
doing in resolution 2397 (2017), following an ICBM
launch. I urge all Council members to condemn and
address the dangerous and unlawful behaviour of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. This moment
demands Council unity.

It continues to send the wrong message to the regime
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which it
reads as permission to continue to break the law, with
impunity. Albania condemns in the strongest terms
the reckless and unlawful actions of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, which pose a threat to its
peaceful neighbours and to international peace and
security. We call on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to immediately cease such dangerous and
intolerable escalation.

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khiari for insightful briefing.
It is clear for everyone, here and outside the Security
Council, that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
continues undeterred in its path of blatant violations of
Security Council resolutions and escalation of tensions
in the peninsula and beyond. The 23 missiles launched
in less than two hours on Wednesday were not just the
largest deployment on a single day, but also a dramatic
escalation and completely reckless behaviour by the
Pyongyang regime. They are part of exactly 59 ballistic
missiles launched by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea in less than a year in a totally unlawful,
unjustified, unprovoked and unprecedented manner.
They demonstrate that the totalitarian regime
in Pyongyang is growing into a persistent threat to
international peace and security in open defiance,
disregard and contempt for international law, the
Security Council and its resolutions. Each and every
one of those launches represents flagrant and alarming
violations of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
The Security Council has a duty to take a unified and
firm stance, as it has done before, against such persistent
violations by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea if it wants to be relevant and remain credible.
We have warned before that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea will read the patience and the silence
of the Council as a licence to do more of the same,
and here we are lamentably. It is time to once again
regret the fact that a draft resolution (S/2022/431) with
a strong message to show the limits of rogue behaviour
4/14

We find deeply disturbing and distressing the
steps taken by the regime and its leadership to escalate
further and make preparations for another nuclear
test, with unknown consequences. Those actions
compromise the security of South Korean people, the
Korean peninsula and the whole region. We cannot
afford to allow such actions to continue and not hold the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea accountable for
such blatant violations. The acceleration of escalation
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, its
proliferation policies and nuclear threats should be
countered by an immediate, unified and effective
response by the Security Council.
The failure to respond decisively is tantamount
to dereliction of duty by the Council and will further
erode its credibility and relevance. The world does not
want, and neither does it need, a sleepy Council when
a country threatens peace and security. The world does
not need a muted Council that is unable to perform its
core mandate. Member States and international public
opinion do not want a Council that is self-paralysed,
when it should be ready to take action and deliver on its
mandate. It will serve only to embolden the Kim Jong
Un regime to continue with its escalation and threats.
That is why it is imperative that the Council send
an unambiguous and strong message to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea that it will never condone
or reward its reckless behaviour. It cannot be done by
hiding; it must be done by standing up for international
law. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea regime
does not want to listen to reason. That is why sanctions
are part of the necessary means that the international
community is left with. They are the only means
left. The international community expects them to be
fully implemented.
22-67381

04/11/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Let me conclude by reiterating our call on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to comply
with Security Council resolutions, stop its reckless
provocations and put an end to its weapons of mass
destruction, ballistic missile and nuclear programmes
in a comprehensive, verifiable and irreversible manner.
The return to meaningful dialogue and diplomacy
is the only way forward, and the Security Council
should make that very clear to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for his briefing.
France condemns in the strongest terms the
launching of 29 missiles, including several ballistic
missiles, by North Korea over the past three days.
The current escalation is unprecedented, and the new
provocations are unacceptable.
France is particularly concerned about the fact that
a ballistic missile landed on the South Korean side of the
maritime border, only a few kilometres from the coast.
Similarly, France was also dismayed to learn of the
firing of a ballistic missile said to be of intercontinental
range on 3 November. France would like to assure South
Korean and Japanese authorities of its full solidarity in
the light of Pyongyang’s destabilizing actions.
The increase in the number of ballistic tests since
the beginning of the year should be cause for concern
for everyone. Each of those launches is a violation of
resolutions that were adopted unanimously by the
Council. This year, North Korea improved its ballistic
capabilities with the stated aim of developing a tactical
nuclear programme. It uses increasingly aggressive
nuclear rhetoric, as evidenced by the September
update of its nuclear doctrine. Inevitably, its uranium
enrichment activities are ongoing. On the ground, at
Yongbyon and Punggye-ri, the International Atomic
Energy Agency has observed constant activity and
preparations for a seventh nuclear test.
North Korea evades sanctions daily at sea, but also
through its cyberattacks, which provide direct funding
for its programmes. It is therefore important to maintain
the pressure and adapt it in certain areas. Rewarding
violations of the resolutions by easing sanctions would
be irresponsible.
Let us recall that last month North Korea fired a
ballistic missile as the Security Council met, following
a serious violation of Japan’s territorial integrity. Let us

S/PV.9183

face it — division in the Council provides North Korea
with cover to continue its provocations. The Council has
a historic responsibility in the area of non-proliferation,
and North Korea is a threat to all its members.
France will therefore continue to call for North
Korea to return to the negotiating table quickly and in
good faith in order to achieve complete, verifiable and
irreversible denuclearization. France will encourage the
necessary dialogue among all parties in the region and
spare no effort to ensure that the Council speaks with
one voice in response to this unprecedented escalation.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khiari for his very useful briefing.
Ireland condemns the recent missile launches
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, in
violation of Security Council resolutions. The 25
missiles launched in less than 24 hours, including the
seventh intercontinental ballistic missile launch this
year, demonstrates the dangerous path the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is taking, with serious
potential risks to maritime and air traffic, its neighbours
and the civilian population.
Those launches show the continuing, unprecedented
escalation of the illegal missile activities of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea over the past
year. Coupled with the threat to neighbouring countries,
the escalation continues to represent a serious threat
to peace and security in the region and beyond. It is
deeply worrisome that, for the first time, such launches
have landed within the Republic of Korea’s exclusive
economic zone.
Rather than taking up genuine offers of talks by the
United States and South Korea, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has sought to raise tensions through
those launches. It has sought to advance its illegal
missile and nuclear programmes, with the declared aim
of developing tactical nuclear weapons. That represents
a serious threat to international peace and security and
seeks to undermine the Security Council’s authority.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea can
never, and will never, be accepted as a nuclear-weapon
State. We call on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to immediately end its destabilizing actions and
ballistic missile programme and to meet its obligations on
complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization.
We repeat the Council’s call on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to return to compliance

22-673815/14

S/PV.9183

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, meet its safeguards obligations with the
International Atomic Energy Agency and adhere to the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty without delay.
Genuine dialogue is the only way to lasting peace,
security and stability on the Korean peninsula. United
States and South Korean offers are on the table, and
it is only the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
that continues to reject that path. In the meantime, the
missile launches of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea underline the need for the full and effective
implementation of United Nations sanctions. We urge
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to engage
with the United Nations on the humanitarian situation
in the country and allow the immediate return of United
Nations and other humanitarian actors to assess needs
and ensure that necessary assistance can be provided.
The choices and actions of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea have created a deeply troubling
situation for the people of that country and the region
as a whole. We urge the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to join the international community in seeking
a peaceful diplomatic solution.
Ms. Juul (Norway): First, let me thank Assistant
Secretary-General Khaled Khiari for his briefing.
Norway condemns in the strongest terms the launch
of a record number of missiles over the past few days.
Among the numerous missiles, one ballistic missile
landed in the exclusive economic zone of the Republic
of Korea, closer to South Korean soil than ever before.
Another, assessed to be an intercontinental ballistic
missile system, was launched in the direction of Japan.

04/11/2022

resolutions. We reiterate our call for the Council to
show unity in responding to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s escalatory behaviour. Norway
believes that diplomacy is the right — and only — way
forward for sustained peace and stability on the Korean
peninsula. For that to happen, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea must choose the path of dialogue.
Members of the Council have continued to show that
they take the humanitarian situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea seriously. Sanctions are an
essential part of our efforts to slow the development
of and to counter North Korea’s prohibited weapons
programmes. The sanctions measures are not intended to
have adverse humanitarian consequences on the civilian
population; they are an essential part of our efforts to
slow the development of and to counter North Korea’s
prohibited weapons programmes. Indeed, requests for
humanitarian exemptions are swiftly processed in the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006), while the provisions contained
in the draft resolution discussed on 26 May (S/2022/431)
would have broadened the humanitarian exemption
mechanism considerably.
Norway remains worried about the humanitarian
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
We call on the Government of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to cooperate with the international
community and enable humanitarian support to reach the
North Korean people, including access for the Resident
Coordinator and United Nation and other international
agencies. We further call on all Member States to fully
implement existing Security Council resolutions on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.

Since the beginning of this year, the Democratic
Republic of Korea has carried out an unprecedented
number of ballistic missile tests, increasing in frequency
and intensity. We are deeply disturbed by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s continued development of
its nuclear and ballistic missile programmes. The recent
launches raise tensions, threaten peace and stability
in the region and beyond and make diplomatic efforts
more difficult. Those launches also endanger civil
aviation and maritime traffic in the region. That pattern
of behaviour is unacceptable and cannot continue.

Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for
his briefing.

It is also regrettable that the Council has been
silent lately, even as the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea continues its destabilizing activities and
intensifies its violations of the relevant Council

First, we should condemn those actions clearly for
what they are — an unacceptable threat to international
peace and security — and reinforce the importance of
implementing the Council’s sanctions in full.

6/14

This week’s salvo of missile launches by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including an
intercontinental ballistic missile, is a further serious
escalation. I join the Secretary-General in condemning
those launches unequivocally.
I propose that the Council should respond by taking
three steps.

22-67381

04/11/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Secondly, we should recall that the cost of those
illicit launches is being borne directly by the North
Korean people. The millions of dollars expended on
this week’s launches alone could feed North Korea’s
population for weeks. We echo calls on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to allow aid to flow freely
into the country, and we note that sanctions exemptions
remain in place to support expedited humanitarian
assistance to the North Korean people.
Thirdly, we should renew our call for North Korea to
engage meaningfully with offers from the United States
and the Republic of Korea for dialogue. Diplomacy is
the only route to sustained peace on the peninsula.
We may hear one or two members of the Council
seeking to equate lawful defensive military exercises
with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
escalatory actions this week. Defensive exercises are
safe when they are notified to other States in advance
and when they operate within defined areas, as South
Korean and United States exercises have done. What is
not safe is the launch of missiles that all members of the
Council have agreed many times that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea must not possess. It is not
safe when those missiles threaten to overfly other
States, causing alerts and alarm in those countries.
It is not safe when missiles land approximately 60
kilometres from the Republic of Korea’s coastline.
We urge the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to end those provocations.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): At the outset, I would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for
his briefing.
We find ourselves in this Chamber again, almost
exactly a month after having discussed a long-range
missile launch by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, among a series of other unlawful launches. Since
our previous meeting (see S/PV.9146), the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has launched over 30
missiles, including an intensive 23-missile salvo a few
days ago, as well as an intended intercontinental test on
2 November. Brazil condemns, in the strongest terms,
all of those ballistic missile launches, which violate the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
It is hard to overstate the gravity of the situation.
Beyond the threat posed by the continued expansion of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s arsenal,

S/PV.9183

we see two classes of risks in the recent missile activity
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
First, there is the risk from the test of experimental
systems, especially over populated areas. We take
note, with great concern, of reports that the latest
intercontinental ballistic missile launch may have failed
after the separation of the second missile stage. Missile
failure during overflight of populated areas presents
a grave and unacceptable risk to the civilians in the
region, as well as to ships and aircraft. Once again, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea did not issue
any notice to airmen mission prior to the launches. Any
missile overflight of Japan is a danger to millions of
people living in that country, including our community
of 200,000 Brazilians.
Furthermore, we see a second class of risk in the
repeated and intensive testing of established systems,
such as short-range ballistic missiles. Even though
those systems may be less prone to failure, the volume
of testing and quantity of launches in 2022 scale up to a
significant chance of technical or human error. We take
note with alarm of reports that a short-range ballistic
missile may have landed 57 kilometres from the coastal
city of Sokcho, in the Republic of Korea. The smallest
miscalculation in that launch could have been fatal.
The situation calls for urgent action. The immediate
priority must be to bring down tensions on the peninsula
so as to reduce the risk of a fatal accident with
unforeseeable consequences. We urge the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to not only comply with all
relevant Security Council resolutions, but also to abide
by the 2018 comprehensive military agreement with the
Republic of Korea, which has acted as an important
buffer against military escalation. We further urge
restraint by all parties in the region in order to avoid a
dangerous spiral of escalation.
While Brazil condemns all of the illegal launches
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, we
believe that responses should be measured and should
seek to avoid tit-for-tat military action that could further
contribute to elevating risks on the peninsula.
We understand the concerns of those who say that
one should not reward bad behaviour by diplomatic
outreach. Yet diplomacy is not a reward. It is the fabric
of international society and our best tool for avoiding
the traps of misperception and miscalculation. It is
the reason that the Organization was created. And it
is the reason we are in this Chamber today. We are

22-673817/14

S/PV.9183

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

here because we believe that it is in our own interest
to engage in diplomacy, including — or perhaps
especially — with possible rivals or competitors.
The Council should do more — not only to
condemn, where appropriate, but also to de-escalate
and establish channels of engagement. It may seem like
there are two incompatible approaches being proposed
in this Chamber: one, to condemn and, another, to
engage. Yet these are not opposites. Engagement is
not an alternative path. It is complementary, essential
and part of the tool set entrusted to us by the Charter
of the United Nations. If we are to have any hope of
establishing a lasting and stable peace on the peninsula,
we must be able to do both.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
listened carefully to Assistant Secretary-General
Khiari’s briefing.
China has been following closely the developments
on the Korean peninsula and is deeply concerned about
the escalating tensions. Against the backdrop of the
current complex and volatile international situation,
we hope that all parties concerned will remain calm,
exercise restraint, be cautious in their words and deeds
and refrain from taking any action that may exacerbate
tensions and lead to miscalculation.
The turn of events and the root causes that have
led to the current situation on the peninsula are clear
to all. The recent launch activities of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea do not exist in isolation and
are directly related to the words and deeds of relevant
parties. After a five-year hiatus, the United States
and relevant countries relaunched their large-scale
joint military air exercises, with hundreds of military
aircraft involved. In its 2022 Nuclear Posture Review,
the United States Department of Defence envisaged the
use of nuclear weapons by the Democratic Republic of
Korea, claiming that ending that regime was one of the
main goals of its nuclear strategy. The United States
has also promoted cooperation with relevant countries
on nuclear submarines, claiming that it would deploy
strategic weapons in the region.
The United States and others claim that the
military exercises are defensive in nature, while the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea emphasizes
that its development of national defence capabilities
is necessary for self-defence. If each side continues
to stick to its position and refuses to give way to one
another, the situation on the peninsula will fall into
8/14

04/11/2022

a vicious circle and be trapped in a predicament. The
evolution of the situation there since 2018 shows that
only by resuming dialogue and consultation can we
ease tensions on the peninsula, break the vicious circle
and build mutual trust among all parties to fully resolve
the predicament. We call on the United States side to
stop unilaterally playing up tensions and confrontation,
take responsibility through action and demonstrate
sincerity by earnestly responding to the legitimate
and reasonable concerns of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea so as to create conditions for the
resumption of meaningful dialogue.
The Security Council should play a constructive
role on the Korean peninsula issue rather than always
focusing on pressure. Discussions in the Council should
promote stability and prevent chaos on the peninsula,
help restart dialogue and negotiation and resolve the
humanitarian and livelihood difficulties faced by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, rather than
create obstacles for it. Under the current circumstances,
the Council should in particular make concrete efforts
to ease the atmosphere of confrontation, ease tensions
and promote a political settlement. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea draft resolution jointly
submitted by China and Russia in the Council seeks to
ease the humanitarian situation and livelihood problem
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, create an
atmosphere for all parties to enhance mutual trust and
resume dialogue and inject impetus into the political
settlement of the Korean peninsula issue. The draft
resolution remains on the table, and we hope all parties
will actively consider it.
As a close neighbour of the peninsula, China is
greatly concerned about the situation there and remains
committed to maintaining peace and stability on the
peninsula, denuclearizing it and addressing issues
through dialogue and consultation. We once again call
on all parties concerned to squarely face the root cause
of the prolonged impasse on the peninsula, follow the
dual-track approach and the principle of phased and
synchronized action, keep moving in the direction of
political settlement and resolve each other’s concerns
in a balanced manner through dialogue and negotiation,
meet each other halfway and work hard to prevent the
situation from escalating. China is willing to continue
to play a constructive role to that end.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari
22-67381

04/11/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

for his briefing and welcome the delegations of Japan
and the Republic of Korea to this meeting.
Less than a month ago, the Security Council met
(see S/PV.9146) for a similar situation in the face of
the launch of a long-range ballistic missile. We note
with great concern the information confirming that
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea launched a
ballistic missile that landed in the exclusive economic
zone of the Republic of Korea and carried out an
additional failed launch of a missile assessed as an
intercontinental missile. It also launched a score of
other missiles of varying range. There has not been
a situation this serious, with regard to the number
of launches, although we recall that last October, a
launched missile did overfly Japanese territory.
It is alarming that Security Council resolutions
are being violated systematically without any
consequences imposed by the Council. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea continues to strengthen and
develop its nuclear and ballistic programme, including
through its new nuclear legislation, to the detriment of
the disarmament and non-proliferation architecture.
The sanctions regime is likewise not being respected,
and its evasion has allowed resources to continue to be
channelled to such programmes.
If the Security Council is unable to condemn the
challenges to its authority in a united voice, we believe
that it should at least pronounce itself in favour of an
urgent diplomatic dialogue towards a comprehensive
and negotiated solution. We believe that perhaps there
we will find some needed convergence and agreement
so that the united voice of the Council can be expressed,
which is sorely needed at this time.
Mexico will continue to reiterate its call to exercise
maximum restraint, to not carry out actions that will
result in further resolution violations of the resolutions
or further confrontation, and we insist therefore on the
holding of a dialogue with the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea that will lead to the complete,
verifiable and irreversible denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khaled Khiari for his briefing and welcome
the participation of representatives of Japan and the
Republic of Korea in today’s meeting.
Kenya once again expresses its profound concern
about the now perilously escalating situation in the

S/PV.9183

Korean peninsula. This year alone, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has launched 59 ballistic
missiles, in flagrant violation of multiple Security
Council resolutions. In addition, there are disconcerting
indications that the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea is developing its nuclear-weapons capabilities,
with the prospect of a nuclear test in the coming
days. Those relentless and provocative actions are,
unfortunately, driving the region to an unnecessary
arms race that presents a grave threat to international
peace and security.
Given the prevailing situation, a slight miscalculation
could plunge the Korean peninsula into unprecedented
turmoil, and the resultant global socioeconomic and
security repercussions would be catastrophic for all
countries near and far. Consequently, Kenya reiterates
its call for the halting of any further provocative acts in
the Korean peninsula, in compliance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions. We further reiterate that
unconditional and genuine dialogue that considers the
concerns of all the parties in the region is the only
viable path out of that fragile situation. In that regard,
Kenya urges the international community, particularly
the States with influence on both sides, to help restart
diplomatic negotiations.
It is disturbing that the provocations are happening
against the backdrop of the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
We once again call on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to prioritize the needs of its people over
costly military ventures. Meanwhile, all other parties
concerned should consider the humanitarian plight of
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea citizens in all
their actions and protect them from unnecessary harm.
Mrs. Koumba Pambo (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I thank Mr. Khaled Khiari for his briefing and welcome
the participation of the Permanent Representatives of
Korea and Japan in today’s meeting.
The situation on the Korean peninsula is very
worrisome. On 2 November, North Korea once again
launched a number of ballistic missiles, one of which
landed near the coast of South Korea. Gabon condemns
those missile launches, which constitute a violation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions and
exacerbate tensions throughout the entire region. The
new missile launch, the latest in a long list of launches
since the beginning of this year, is an obvious threat
that is eliciting strong reactions, especially as it comes

22-673819/14

S/PV.9183

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

at a time when military manoeuvres, particularly aerial
manoeuvres, are taking place in the region. The increase
in tensions and the scale of the threat to the security of
the Korean peninsula has mobilized the attention of the
international community and requires an urgent and
concerted response from the Council. Gabon is firmly
committed to the non-proliferation regime and to peace
on the Korean peninsula.
As we have said before, using missile strikes and
shows of force as diplomacy is not a solution. It is
neither constructive nor viable. It fuels tensions and
reignites the concerns of the peoples affected. It brings
significant risks and dangers, including the nuclear
risk. My country calls for de-escalation and dialogue
without conditions in order to reach a solution that
guarantees peace and the elimination of the nuclear
threat on the Korean peninsula. Gabon opposes the use
of or threat of use of nuclear weapons. Our view is that
such weapons should not be manufactured or produced
because of their horrible potential for destruction.
We cannot stress enough that a solution to the crisis
on the Korean peninsula can be achieved only through
dialogue and negotiations. We continue to call on the
parties to engage in diplomatic negotiations and to
resume talks on the basis of the paths laid out in 2017
in order to reach a negotiated security solution for the
Korean peninsula.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for his briefing and
welcome the participation of Japan and the Republic of
Korea in today’s meeting.
We are once again meeting at a moment of
heightened tensions on the Korean peninsula. Over
the past few days, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has continued its provocative and dangerous
behaviour by launching a further series of ballistic
missiles, in violation of multiple Security Council
resolutions. The launch on 3 November of what is
assessed to be another intercontinental ballistic missile
would be the seventh such launch in 2022 alone. We
must not look at those latest launches in isolation.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s reckless
and irresponsible behaviour has continued undeterred
for too long. The Security Council must not treat this
situation as business as usual while the people of Japan,
the Republic of Korea and the region live under the
constant threat of imminent danger.
10/14

04/11/2022

It is now more important than ever for us to come
together to address the threat posed by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea must respect international law,
particularly the Security Council resolutions that
prohibit it from ballistic missile launches and nuclear
tests. We condemn those unlawful missile launches
and any other actions that undermine the global
non-proliferation architecture. We urge the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to choose diplomacy and
dialogue over provocation and escalation. In that context,
we remain deeply concerned about the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s apparent plans to conduct
a nuclear test. We call on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to refrain from conducting further
illegal tests, return to compliance with the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, abandon all
of its nuclear-weapon and related missile programmes,
implement the International Atomic Energy Agency
safeguards and fulfil its denuclearization obligations.
The Security Council must redouble its efforts to
maintain peace and security on the Korean peninsula
and safeguard the global non-proliferation regime.
While the Council’s sanctions have evidently not
prevented the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
from developing its nuclear and ballistic capabilities,
they have undoubtedly helped slow the pace of such
development. We urge all Member States to uphold the
sanctions regime pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006)
and to take all reasonable measures to prevent the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea from continuing
to evade sanctions. To that end, we are ready to work
with all Council members and to address any concerns
that may arise from measures taken by the Council.
The humanitarian situation of the people of North
Korea remains deeply troubling. It is regrettable that the
country’s very limited resources continue to be directed
towards its military capabilities rather than the urgent
humanitarian and development needs of the North
Korean people. We once again call on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to cooperate with the
United Nations and the international community to
alleviate the humanitarian situation of its people by
facilitating the entry of humanitarian aid and allowing
relief organizations and the Resident Coordinator of the
United Nations to carry out their vital activities within
the country.
Finally, the United Arab Emirates believes that
the Security Council should not be idle in the face of
22-67381

04/11/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

the nuclear threat posed by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s actions.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We carefully listened to the briefing delivered
by Assistant Secretary-General Khaled Khiari.
However, we note with regret that, as in the past, the
United Nations representative did not give a full picture
of the situation. The risks in the region today are too
high for us focus solely on one-sided information.
Russia opposes any military activity that
threatens the security of the Korean peninsula and
the countries of North-East Asia. We note with regret
that the situation on the Korean peninsula has recently
deteriorated significantly, the reason for which is clear:
Washington’s desire to force Pyongyang into unilateral
disarmament by implementing sanctions and exerting
force.
On 31 October, the United States and the Republic
of Korea began an exercise of an unprecedented scale
that involved approximately 240 modern military
aircraft. That was essentially a rehearsal for conducting
massive strikes on the territory of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, and neither was it a one-off.
Large-scale military training activities by the United
States began there in August. At the end of September,
exercises by the United States, the Republic of Korea
and Japan were conducted in the Sea of Japan using a
nuclear missile carrier and providing training to target
critical infrastructure on the territory of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
There are irresponsible discussions under way
at the leadership level of those countries about the
deployment of American means of deterrence, including
of a nuclear nature, on the Korean peninsula and in
the region. In that regard, it is clear that Pyongyang’s
missile launches are a consequence of the United States
short-sighted confrontational military activity around
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, harming
both its partners in the region and the situation in
North-East Asia as a whole.
Moreover, the situation on the Korean peninsula
cannot be considered in isolation from the complex
processes that are currently taking place in that part
of the world. We cannot help but note the increasingly
pushy promotion by Washington of its unilateral
security doctrine in the Asia-Pacific region, which
serves only to create new risks for the countries of
the region and seeks to divide them according to the

S/PV.9183

principle of “whoever is not with us is against us.” Part
of those activities involve the establishment of new
military blocs, such as the alliance among the United
States, the United Kingdom and Australia, which raises
serious doubts about the good intentions of those States.
Pyongyang shares those doubts, as such actions do not
contribute to the establishment of dialogue.
We deeply regret that our Western colleagues have
consistently ignored Pyongyang’s repeated calls for
the United States to cease its hostile activities in order
to open up opportunities for dialogue. Pyongyang’s
concessions made in 2018 and 2019 and the positive
signals it sent were not taken into account. It is precisely
because of the United States position that the Council
was unable find the strength to respond appropriately
and to promote the process of détente.
We are convinced that United Nations and,
specifically, Security Council mechanisms should
be harnessed to support inter-Korean dialogue and
multilateral negotiations, rather than becoming an
impediment to them. Only then will it be possible to
discuss effective solutions to the problems accumulated
in the region, including the nuclear question, on the
basis of mutually acceptable agreements.
The further escalation of sanctions against the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea already goes
beyond measures to counter the prohibited missile
and nuclear programmes, threatening North Korean
citizens with unacceptable socioeconomic and
humanitarian upheaval.
This is not the first time that the Council has
discussed the need for preventive diplomacy, the
importance of finding a politico-diplomatic solution
and real steps by Washington that go beyond just
promises to establish a substantive dialogue with
Pyongyang. Our Western colleagues do not seem
prepared to do any of those things. In that regard, we
must not expect a miracle. The build-up of military
measures by the United States and its allies threatens to
further heighten tensions on the Peninsula, which could
lead to unpredictable and dangerous consequences for
the entire North-East Asia region.
What, then, are our options? In our opinion, our
objective today is to ensure that all parties demonstrate
restraint and reaffirm, in practice, their readiness to
renew dialogue in line with the agreements previously
reached and commitments undertaken. The RussianChinese political and humanitarian draft resolution

22-6738111/14

S/PV.9183

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

remains on the table, as do other initiatives of our
countries, which could really encourage the parties to
step up negotiation efforts.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): Allow me to begin by
thanking Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for his
briefing and welcoming the Ambassadors of Japan and
the Republic of Korea to our meeting today.
In the past, we have expressed our concern at
recent ballistic missile launches by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, and we now note reports
of yet another launch of an intercontinental ballistic
missile by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
on 2 November. Those follow other launches that
took place last month, on which the Security Council
also met (see S/PV.9146). Those launches constitute
a violation of the resolutions of the Security Council
relating to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
They affect the peace and security of the region and
beyond. India calls for the full implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions relating to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
At the same time, we would like to reiterate the
importance of addressing the proliferation of nuclear and
missile technologies related to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in our region. The proliferation of
nuclear and missile technologies is a matter of concern,
as they have an adverse impact on peace and security in
the region, including on India.
We reiterate our continued support for
denuclearization towards peace and security on the
Korean peninsula. Ensuring peace and security on the
Korean peninsula is in our collective interest. Going
forward, we will continue to support dialogue and
diplomacy as the means to resolve the issues on the
Korean peninsula.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ghana.
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for his
briefing and welcome the representatives of Japan and
the Republic of Korea to our meeting.
This week alone, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has launched over 20 missiles, bringing the total
since the beginning of the year to more than 50. Those
missile launches, which are unprecedented in scale,
frequency, diversity and, in some cases, trajectory, are
in clear breach of several Security Council resolutions.
Reports that one of the missiles launched this week was
12/14

04/11/2022

an intercontinental ballistic missile, coupled with the
fact that a missile landed very close to South Korean
territorial waters, marks a new and dangerous phase of
escalation of tensions, with adverse consequences for
the peace and security of the Korean peninsula, the
region and the world.
Ghana is gravely concerned about the current
launches and others before it, which it firmly deplores.
Present trends holding, we are just one misunderstanding
or one miscalculation away from open confrontation on
the peninsula. Surely the Council can no longer turn
a blind eye to the possibility of open confrontation on
the Korean peninsula. The world is already fragile, and
we must ensure that we avert any such possibility. We
stand at a critical juncture.
During the Council’s previous meeting on the
situation last month (see S/PV.9146), many members
expressed concern that urgent action was needed to
de-escalate tensions on the peninsula and in the wider
region. Although the Council could not agree on an
acceptable path forward, our future actions should not
be divergent. Inaction is not an option. A united and
purposeful Security Council is therefore needed.
As a Council, we must call on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to take concrete, immediate
and urgent steps to refrain from further missile tests
and call on all parties to de-escalate the tensions
in the region. We must also reiterate our call on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to adhere to
the relevant Security Council resolutions and resume
constructive and credible dialogue with the relevant
parties in a manner that recognizes the regional and
global security concerns.
We hope that the Council and other relevant parties
will be able to act in a swift manner to disperse the
gathering clouds of open confrontation on the Korean
peninsula and usher in a climate that preserves the
peace, while at the same time ensuring that the
humanitarian needs of the people of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea are addressed.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Republic
of Korea.
Mr. Hwang (Republic of Korea): Let me begin by
thanking you, Sir, for convening this urgent meeting of
22-67381

04/11/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

the Security Council. I also thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khiari for his briefing.
At the previous public meeting of the Security
Council on the matter, held just a month ago (see
S/PV.9146), almost every member of the Council urged
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to cease its
ongoing provocative actions and to fully abide by the
relevant Security Council resolutions. However, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has chosen to
completely disregard its obligations and to continue its
unlawful provocations.
The Republic of Korea condemns, in the strongest
terms, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
record number of missile launches over the past couple
of days. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
fired more than seven ballistic missiles and more than
10 other missiles, as well as over 100 rounds of artillery,
during half a day alone on 2 November. Among them,
there was one extraordinary ballistic missile that flew
over the de facto inter-Korean maritime border, the socalled Northern Limit Line, for the first time since the
division on the Korean peninsula. That missile fell into
the sea just 57 kilometres from the busy Korean city
of Sokcho. That was particularly reckless, dangerous
and ill-advised behaviour. Pyongyang then launched an
ICBM on 3 November. It is especially alarming that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s recent missile
launches are directly related to its leader’s announced
plan to enhance its tactical nuclear warfare capability.
This series of North Korea’s provocative acts
flagrantly violates multiple Security Council
resolutions. It not only poses a significant threat to
the Korean peninsula and beyond, but also a serious
challenge to the global non-proliferation regime. It is
especially deplorable that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is repeating its serious provocations
in complete disregard of the Republic of Korea’s
national mourning period.
Witnessing how the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea squanders its scarce resources by blowing
up over 50 ballistic missiles in the sky just this year
alone, I cannot help asking one question. What are all
those launches for, at the expense of the well-being and
livelihood of its own people? Some estimates indicate
that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea spent
tens of millions of dollars on missile launches in a single
day, on 2 November, which may have been enough to
cover its annual rice imports from China. The Republic

S/PV.9183

of Korea remains seriously concerned about the dire
humanitarian situation and abysmal human rights
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
I believe that the continued provocations by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea have proved
that it is high time to close loopholes and ensure the
full implementation of all relevant Security Council
resolutions. Our united action is essential to lead the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to engage in
serious dialogue. As such, we call on all Members
of the United Nations, especially Security Council
members, to fully implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Pyongyang’s escalatory behaviour must finally
come to an end, and it must be held accountable for
its continued breach of international obligations. In that
vein, it is most regrettable that the Security Council,
for the first time in responding to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s nuclear and ballistic
missile provocations since 2006, failed to adopt a draft
resolution (S/2022/431) in May because of the opposition
by two permanent members. The Council’s deafening
silence on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s countless provocations only further emboldens
Pyongyang’s reckless behaviour. Sadly, that is exactly
what we are witnessing today. The Council must stop
sitting idly by and fulfil its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
As you, Mr. President, acknowledged at the press
conference on 1 November, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea apparently stands on the verge of
its seventh nuclear test. With that in mind, I strongly
urge the Council and the international community to
raise its united voice and send a clear warning to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea that another
nuclear test is simply intolerable and will inevitably
met with a very firm response.
Let me be clear: there should be no excuses for
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s recent
unlawful provocations. We vividly witnessed a series
of ballistic missile launches, including multiple
ICBMs, by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
in the first half of this year, in the absence of Republic
of Korea-United States joint military exercises. That
is a clear demonstration that the false equivalency
between the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
reckless behaviour and Republic of Korea-United
States annual joint exercises, which is occasionally

22-6738113/14

S/PV.9183

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

mentioned by two permanent members, simply does
not hold water. We strongly believe that our defensive
endeavours in response to the direct military threat
from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea are a
duty of any responsible Government.
The Republic of Korea would like to reiterate that the
door for dialogue remains open despite the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s unprecedented escalatory
provocations and threats, and calls on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to return to diplomacy
on denuclearization.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I also thank Mr. Khaled
Khiari for his briefing.
I must begin by expressing my great regret that
once again the Security Council must convene in
response to North Korea’s unlawful actions. The
repeated and persistent provocations by North Korea
are unprecedented in both their frequency and their
manner. They pose a grave and imminent threat to
the security of the region, including to Japan and the
Republic of Korea, and pose a clear and serious challenge
to the international community. We strongly condemn
North Korea’s repeated provocations and violations of
Council resolutions. The Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2397 (2017) in 2017. The Council decided to
take action if North Korea launched an intercontinental
ballistic missile (ICBM).
Yet the Council has failed to act. We all remember
the vetoes cast that blocked the Council from taking
action in May. What came after that? A record-high
number of missile launches in a short period of time,
including a ballistic missile flying over Japan for the
first time in five years. In response to those actions, the
Council met on 5 October, but it could not even issue a
press statement, failing again to send a clear message.
What came after that? We witnessed a historical array
of missile launches, including a possible ICBM launch

14/14

04/11/2022

this week. One of the ballistic missiles launched on
2 November crossed the Northern Limit Line and
landed near the Republic of Korea’s territorial waters,
which had never happened before.
We must admit that those wilful and repeated
violations of Council resolutions followed the Council’s
long inaction due to the negative attitude of some
Council members, which has not allowed the Council
to issue a united message and respond effectively. We
are facing escalation after the Council’s regrettable
self-restraint due to its dysfunction. It is the duty of
the Council to end this vicious cycle. It is high time
to send a united and determined message. The Council
should not be just a follower of international affairs, but
it should actively shape them through concrete actions.
In its statement at the general debate of the General
Assembly this year (see A/77/PV.14), the representative
of North Korea clearly stated that it has never
recognized such resolutions of the United Nations and
would not accept them in the future either. How can
the Council turn a blind eye to that blatant challenge
to its authority? The Council’s own resolutions, which
were unanimously adopted, are being disparaged. Are
restraints of Council actions an appropriate answer to
that? Definitely not.
Let us face the simple facts. Who is violating the
rules made by the Council? There is only one factual
answer. It is North Korea. Any attempts to justify the
reckless and unlawful deeds of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea are not convincing. The Council
should abide by its own decisions, even if North Korea
refuses to do so. The Council’s members should fulfil
their responsibilities. Let us make crystal-clear the
determination of the Council in demanding that North
Korea not to conduct any further launches, nuclear
tests or any other provocation and that it abide by all
relevant resolutions. We should not let the credibility of
the Council be eroded by inaction.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

22-67381
