S/2020/1084

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 November 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 31 October 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by His
Excellency the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, as well as the statements
delivered by Their Excellencies Mr. James Cleverly, Minister of State for the Middle
East and North Africa of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland;
Ms. Michelle Müntefering, Minister of State in the Federal Foreign Office of
Germany; and by the representatives of Belgium, China, the Dominican Republic,
Estonia, France, Indonesia, the Niger, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, South Africa, Tunisia, the United States of America and Viet Nam,
in connection with the video-teleconference on “Women and peace and security”
convened on Thursday, 29 October 2020.
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for
this video-teleconference, the following delegations and entities submitted written
statements, copies of which are also enclosed: Afghanistan, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, the
European Union, Fiji, Georgia, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iraq, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Latvia, the League of Arab States, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, the Netherlands, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
the Republic of Korea, Romania, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Switzerland, Timor-Leste, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates and Uruguay.
Pursuant to the letter by the President of the Security Council addressed to
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council dated 7 May
2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of the extraordinary circumstances
caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the enclosed briefing and statements
will be issued as an official document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Vassily Nebenzia
President of the Security Council

20-14734 (E) 051120 091220

*2014734*

S/2020/1084

Annex 1
Statement by the Secretary-General
I thank representatives for this opportunity to brief them on women and peace
and security, 20 years after the adoption of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000).
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is the greatest test the
international community has faced since the Second World War. In March, I
appealed for an immediate global ceasefire so that we could focus on our common
enemy, namely, the COVID-19 virus. I built on this call in my address to the General
Assembly last month (see A/75/PV.3).
In resolution 2532 (2020), supporting a global ceasefire, the Security Council
made a strong and valuable link to the women and peace and security agenda.
First, the Council said that the pandemic will have a disproportionate negative
impact on women and girls. This is proving to be true both in conflict zones and
around the world. Women are already suffering from rising gender-based violence.
There are clear signs that resources are being diverted from women’s health, including
sexual and reproductive health. The pandemic could have a long-term impact on
girls’ participation in education and on women’s employment. This will contribute to
the continued marginalization of women from political decision-making and peace
processes, which damages everyone.
Secondly, the Council noted that women are playing a crucial role in the
response to the pandemic. Women at all levels are on the front lines of the COVID-19
response, dominating sectors of the economy that are critical to daily life. Women
caregivers, nurses, teachers, farmers, food vendors and other essential workers are
providing the services that keep communities, economies and societies running. We
must recognize these women as the peacebuilders they are, at the local level, in
communities around the world. We must also recognize women who step up every
day in conflict zones to help those at risk, mediating between groups to enable access
by civilians and to humanitarian aid, building trust and strengthening social bonds.
Thirdly, the Council’s resolution called for women to be in positions of
leadership and decision-making everywhere. We have seen the remarkable success
that many women leaders have had in containing the pandemic while supporting
people’s livelihoods. This confirms an obvious truth, that is, that institutions,
organizations, companies and, yes, Governments work better when they include half
of society, rather than ignoring it. Women’s leadership and decision-making is not a
favour to women; it is essential to peace and progress for all. We cannot hope to turn
the climate crisis around, reduce social divisions or make sustained peace without
the full contributions of all of society. Women’s leadership in all spheres will be
critical to finding the fastest, safest route through the pandemic and to building a
more peaceful and stable future.
Twenty years since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), there have been
important changes to the ways in which the United Nations works on international
peace and security, the resources we invest and the expertise we deploy. The women’s
movement and its allies in Governments and international institutions have changed
discriminatory laws, reached milestones in political representation and international
jurisprudence and made a difference in peace processes. But gender equality is
first and foremost a question of power, and wherever we look power structures are
dominated by men. Women lead only 7 per cent of countries. Three quarters of
the members of COVID-19 task forces and committees are men. Decisions about
international peace and security are still overwhelmingly made by men. Even as

2/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

we improve the representation of women in United Nations mediation teams, they
remain largely excluded from delegations to peace talks and negotiations.
Let us take some recent examples. Are women fairly represented in the rooms
where the future of Afghanistan is being discussed between the Taliban and the
Government, or in Mali as it embarks on a political transition? Is the Sudan on track
to meet the 40 per cent quota for women’s representation in parliament, set out in
the new Constitutional Declaration? Will South Sudan meet the 35 per cent quota
for women’s representation across the executive arm, included in the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution to the Conflict? Are political actors and conflict
parties in Yemen including women at the negotiating table? If the answer to these
questions is no, then clearly we face serious obstacles in the task before us.
Women’s meaningful and effective participation in mediation matters. It
broadens the prospects for peace, stability, social cohesion and economic advancement.
Ensuring that women play their full part in peace processes also requires
stronger partnerships among the United Nations, regional organizations, Member
States and civil society. We must use the full range of tools at our disposal and find
innovative solutions that have a rapid and decisive impact on women’s representation.
Temporary special measures, including quotas, can make a huge difference. I
witnessed this myself as a politician in my own country.
And it is time that we, the United Nations and Member States, consider how
we can best use our political influence, funding and support to incentivize and create
conditions for women’s equal representation and participation in peace talks. Women
must be included as a priority from the outset. And as peace processes move online
during the pandemic, efforts to promote women’s participation must keep pace.
When I became Secretary-General, ending discrimination against women
within the United Nations was one of my first priorities. We achieved gender parity
in the leadership of the United Nations at the beginning of 2020, with 90 women
and 90 men as full-time senior leaders. We also have parity among our Resident
Coordinators, including in countries affected by conflict. In field missions, women’s
leadership leapt from 21 per cent to 41 per cent in just three years; in our special
political missions, 52 per cent of heads or deputy heads of those missions are now
women. I am determined to push for parity at all levels, well ahead of deadlines.
Women’s full participation is also relevant for uniformed personnel. I
commend the Council for adopting the first resolution this year focused on women
in peacekeeping. The number of women deployed are still too low, but they
increased significantly in the past five years. This is important not just because the
United Nations must reflect the people it serves, but also because women bring their
own perspectives and expertise to every issue — including peace and security.
One of the foundational tenets of the women and peace and security agenda is
that weapons do not make us safer. This has been proven once again by the COVID-19
pandemic. In 2019, global military expenditure reached $1.9 trillion, following
the largest annual increase in a decade. Meanwhile, women in some countries are
at greatest physical risk where they should be safest: in their own homes. Their
chances of suffering violence may be equivalent to or higher than in a war zone.
The COVID-19 pandemic has only increased this threat. The women and peace and
security agenda challenges the relentless focus on inter-State conflict at the expense
of measures to protect women.
In the past 20 years, academic research and practice have demonstrated the
close links between gender equality, conflict prevention and peace. The women
and peace and security agenda calls for broader consideration of ways to prevent
20-147343/161

S/2020/1084

conflict, prevent gender-based violence and create peaceful, inclusive communities
and societies.
As we recover from the pandemic, we face a choice, namely, to continue down
the path of increasing militarization, conflict and intergenerational losses or to work
towards greater inclusion, equality and prevention of conflicts and crises of all kinds.
For Governments and international institutions everywhere, gender equality is one
of the surest ways of building social cohesion and trust, and inspiring people to be
responsible, participating citizens. For the women mediators, peacebuilders, human
rights defenders and essential workers who risk their lives to build peace, and for
the millions of women, men, girls and boys whose hopes for peace and security rest
on more equal and just societies, we cannot wait another 20 years to implement the
women and peace and security agenda. Let us start that work together today.

4/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 2
Statement by the Minister of State for the Middle East and North
Africa of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, James Cleverly
Today we mark a great achievement, the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). Twenty years ago, that resolution recognized that
sustainable peace relied on inclusive peace. It provided a framework to address the
disproportionate impact that fell on women and girls on the ground. And it advocated
for their meaningful inclusion as agents of change.
As a global force for good, the United Kingdom has been proud to lead the
way on the women and peace and security agenda as penholder for resolution 1325
(2000). We work with Governments and non-governmental organizations around the
world to share good practices and expertise, such as supporting those brave women
who are resolving conflict, countering violent extremism and building peace at the
grass-roots level.
As proud champions of the women and peace and security agenda, we will not
accept any rollback of the progress made on women’s rights over the past 20 years.
There are 10 Security Council resolutions dedicated to advancing this agenda. We
must ensure that those resolutions are taken seriously and implemented fully. We
are not prepared to un-pick the framework that has been so hard-fought. That is only
right. We owe it not only to women but also to global peace. Women’s rights are
human rights, and it is not a matter up for discussion.
As we look ahead to the next 20 years, we must reflect on the challenges
before us. Because the truth is that, despite our best intentions, we face a widening
implementation gap. But the United Kingdom is working hard to bridge the gap and
welcomes others to join us in doing so.
We fully support women’s meaningful participation in peace processes.
And that is why I am proud to announce that the United Kingdom is dedicating
£1 million of funding to the Women Mediators across the Commonwealth network.
Their vital work increases the recognition of the role of women mediators in peace
processes, from local to global, ensuring they get the acknowledgment, respect and
support they deserve. We also continue to support the Elsie Initiative for women in
peace operations.
The voices of women peacebuilders must be heard and amplified. But for
many, speaking up and carrying out their vital work comes at great personal risk.
No woman should have to risk her safety to heal her community. That is why I am
proud that the United Kingdom has supported the International Civil Society Action
Network in developing the protection framework for women peacebuilders. This
vital piece of work provides guidance to States and multilateral organizations on
how best to prevent and respond to reprisals. And I am pleased to announce that
the United Kingdom will formally commit to supporting this framework and its
recommendations. I urge others to do the same.
It is not only the voices of women but ethnic, religious, sexual and disabled
minorities who are silenced. The deadline for the Sustainable Development Goals is
only 10 years away — we must hear diverse voices at all levels.
We also face additional threat from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). It
has laid bare many inequalities, but the most disproportionate impact is on women
and girls. The impact will be felt for years to come and threaten hard-won progress
on gender equality. That is why I am proud to announce that, along with Gender
20-147345/161

S/2020/1084

Action for Peace and Security and partners, the United Kingdom is committing
£250,000 in funding to undertake research on the gendered impacts of COVID-19
in fragile and conflict-affected States. This vital research will help ensure that the
needs of women and girls are considered in any future crisis response — because,
ultimately, peace is not a finished product or a final result; it is a continuous effort.
So I call on all our partners to continue to push for real progress on this vital agenda.
It is time to turn intentions into actions — for the next 20 years and, indeed,
for future decades to come.

6/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 3
Statement by the Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office of
Germany, Michelle Müntefering
Twenty years ago resolution 1325 (2000) was a small revolution. For the first
time, a united Security Council made it crystal clear that women’s full, equal and
meaningful participation is required to maintain world peace and security; gender
equality is not only about fairness and human rights but also about security and
conflict prevention; and sexual and gender-based violence is not an inevitable byproduct of war but a crime that must be punished and abolished.
The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) was the result of an exceptional wave
of civil society engagement. Hopes were high. And the pledge was clear: women’s
voices were to be heard, and their seat at the peace table was no longer rejected.
It is clear who is accountable to these expectations: us, the States Members of the
United Nations.
Twenty years and nine hard-won Security Council resolutions later, the
implementation of the women and peace and security agenda continues to be too
weak. Women are still excluded from peace processes. Their rights and interests
continue to be ignored in building post-conflict societies. So let me be frank, as
a global community we have not lived up to our commitment. Too often, conflictrelated sexual and gender-based violence remains unpunished. Even worse, in the
past years we have seen a global pushback on women’s rights. Principles and rights
that we agreed upon decades ago are once again questioned.
Let us pause for a second and think about this. Twenty years ago all members
of the Security Council agreed to the principles that are enshrined in the agenda. I
doubt that today we would still be able to achieve such a milestone.
Germany is determined to advance the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Over the past two years as a Security Council member, we have made women
and peace and security a key priority of our work. We initiated resolution 2467 (2019)
to strengthen the rights of all survivors of sexual violence and to hold perpetrators
accountable. Survivors’ human rights, including sexual and reproductive health and
rights, must be guaranteed.
We are convinced that including civil society in our debates is vital. Many of
them, such as Ilwad Elman, who just won the Africa Prize in Berlin, were quoted
today. Civil society plays an essential role in filling the women and peace and security
agenda with life. We gave them a voice in the Security Council during our Council
presidencies. In April 2019 and July 2020 alone, 26 civil society speakers addressed
the Council. Now the Council must follow up on their recommendations. And we
pushed hard to include the women and peace and security agenda in all Council
products. Our aim is to make the women and peace and security mainstreaming
approach the norm. That also means that mandate renewals and sanction regimes
need to be gender responsive.
Let me be clear: we have a joint responsibility to implement what we have
agreed upon. And that is without watering down any of the commitments that we
have signed up for. We have all the necessary instruments at hand. What is needed is
the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and all subsequent resolutions on
women and peace and security.
Last year, Foreign Minister Heiko Maas called for specific commitments to
implement the agenda before the twentieth anniversary. Seventy-five Members States
and United Nations entities came forward with concrete proposals, the majority of
which have been implemented.
20-147347/161

S/2020/1084

Let me emphasize our deep respect to all the activists outside, the women
peacebuilders. They do a fantastic job on the ground. We can and should support
these women. Support, funding and protection are the three keywords here. We will
continue to support civil society and protect women peacebuilders and women’s
human rights’ defenders inside and outside of the Security Council. As board
members of the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund, we are planning to further
step up our support in addition to the €4 million that we have already contributed in
the past two years.

8/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 4
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the
United Nations, Philippe Kridelka
[Original: French]
As we celebrated the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations last
month, we were reminded that on the day the Charter was signed in 1945, only four
of the 850 delegates present were women, namely, Bertha Lutz of Brazil, Minerva
Bernardino of the Dominican Republic, Virginia Gildersleeve of the United States
and Wu Yi-Fang of China. We have come a long way since then.
On 31 October 2000, the Security Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security. A true milestone, this text recognizes the importance
of integrating the gender aspect in peace and security initiatives. This resulted in
a series of resolutions on women’s rights in conflict situations, making a clear
contribution to the four pillars of the women and peace and security agenda, that is,
prevention, protection, participation and relief and rehabilitation.
It has also paved the way for the creation of a solid set of implementation
tools — the establishment of the Office of the Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security. To date, nearly 90 countries have adopted national action plans for the
implementation of the objectives of the women and peace and security strategy, and
several regions have adopted regional frameworks, such as the 2019 European Union
Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security.
Belgium is currently implementing its third national action plan. The
realization of women’s rights and gender equality, the full and equal participation
of women in all decision-making processes, combating violence against women and
girls and promoting sexual and reproductive health and rights are long-standing
priorities in Belgium’s domestic and foreign policies.
This year, Belgium has committed to increasing its annual contributions
to projects specifically aimed at combating gender-based violence and — in the
light of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic — to allocating a special
budget for preventing and addressing gender-based violence. Work within the local
context is essential in this regard, and we are prioritizing women and women-led
organizations. Belgium supports the essential efforts of its partners in these areas,
such as UN-Women, the Oxford Famine Relief Organization, Plan International, the
International Committee of the Red Cross, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and others.
For example, in the Democratic Republic of Congo, one of the three target
countries of the Belgian national action plan, Belgium supports projects in the
east of the country to strengthen grass-roots organizations that tackle issues
of gender-based violence, sexual and reproductive rights and the training and
empowerment of rural women, such as Mamas for Africa in South Kivu. As a result,
considerable progress has been made. But, as the Secretary-General has said, many
challenges remain.
Women are still underrepresented in many global decision-making bodies and
peace processes. This is particularly the case in some peace and security processes,
such as counter-terrorism and disarmament. We must learn from, and be inspired
by, good examples. For instance, in the Central African Republic, the Peacebuilding
Fund financed a project on women’s political participation. With the support of
Belgium, the United Nations Development Programme and UN-Women set up a
20-147349/161

S/2020/1084

working group to influence discussions on the electoral code and make the text
gender-sensitive.
We must push for minimum standards, while ensuring that women are fully
involved as equal partners and from the earliest stages of every political and peace
process. The peace agreement on Colombia signed in Havana is exemplary in this
regard. We stress the importance of the meaningful participation of women in the
peace negotiations on Afghanistan in Doha.
We must give civil society the means to act. In this regard, we are concerned
about the increasing threats to women human rights defenders and the difficulties
faced by women peacemakers. By empowering civil society leaders and women
human rights defenders and combating the negative stereotypes and structural
obstacles they face, we can ensure that women can participate fully in peacebuilding.
We must have a zero-tolerance policy towards reprisals against civil society activists.
In Libya, for example, civil society activists and women politicians face
increasing reprisals. In July, it had been a year since a member of parliament, Siham
Sergewa, was abducted from her home. Calls to investigate her abduction and
ensure accountability for her abduction have not been heeded. These attacks were an
attempt to intimidate other women, journalists, and human rights activists involved
in political life. We must intensify our efforts to prevent violations of women’s
rights and hold the perpetrators of such acts accountable. The Council can apply
sanctions against perpetrators of conflict-related sexual violence — for example, in
South Sudan.
In order to improve our implementation strategies, we need to fill the gaps in
data collection and increase our knowledge on the most pressing issues for women
and girls.
Donors must commit to conditioning their contributions to the implementation
of gender-responsive planning, including by providing sustained and robust funding
to women’s organizations.
Throughout its 20 years of working to advance the women and peace and
security agenda, the Council has shown remarkable unity. Let us continue on this
path. We must take action to advance gender equality and leave no one behind.

10/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 5
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
[Original: English and Chinese]
I thank Secretary-General Guterres and Executive Director Mlambo-Ngcuka
for their briefings. I also thank all other briefers for their statements.
This year marks the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the fourth World Conference on Women, held in Beijing,
and the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security. It is also the fifth anniversary of the adoption of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. These anniversaries are meaningful reminders of the
interconnectedness of promoting gender equality, maintaining international peace
and security and achieving sustainable development. The international community
should capitalize on these anniversaries to reaffirm its commitment, increase
input and inject new impetus into the women and peace and security agenda and
women’s development.
First, we must continue to support women in playing an important role in
peace and security. Twenty years ago, the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 1325 (2000), which re-examined and defined the relationship between
women and peace. As Secretary-General Guterres put it, it was the first time women
were recognized not only as victims of war but also as people with their own agency
and expertise in finding peaceful solutions to conflict.
Progress has been made in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in
recent years, and women are playing an increasingly important role in the field
of peace and security. As we speak, female Special Representatives and Special
Envoys are working tirelessly for the political settlement of hotspot issues, taking
on risks and difficulties, and countless women peacekeepers and volunteers are
promoting reconciliation and reconstruction, helping the needy in conflict zones.
We should continue to uphold the spirit of resolution 1325 (2000) and support women
in participating on an equal footing in the peace process in a comprehensive and
effective manner and in making greater contributions.
When it comes to maintaining international peace and security, Chinese
women have never been absent. Over the past 30 years, more than 1,000 Chinese
women have participated in United Nations peacekeeping operations. They are found
patrolling in the infantry battalion of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan,
clearing minefields in the engineering company of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and treating patients in the peacekeeping hospitals of the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. In May, Ms. Xin Yuan, a senior demining staff officer of UNIFIL and
an outstanding representative of Chinese female peacekeepers, was awarded the
United Nations Certificate of Recognition for her work advocating gender equality in
the military.
Secondly, we must advance the women and peace and security agenda in
a holistic and balanced manner. Prevention, protection, participation, relief and
recovery are the four pillars of the women and peace and security agenda. Only
by promoting the work in these four areas in a balanced manner can we continue
to achieve steady progress. We should make every effort to prevent conflicts, give
special attention to eliminating the root causes of conflicts and create a peaceful
environment for the development of women. The Security Council should fulfil its
20-1473411/161

S/2020/1084

primary responsibility of maintaining international peace and security, promote
the political settlement of hotspot issues and encourage all parties to respond to
the Secretary-General’s appeal for global ceasefire by committing themselves to
resolving disputes through dialogue and consultation.
We should also strengthen the protection of women, resolutely oppose any
violence against women and girls, reject sexual violence as a tactic of war, vigorously
combat terrorism and protect women from terrorist and extremist forces. We should
respect women’s right to speak and to decision-making, ensure their representation
in peace negotiations and support the participation of more women in mediation and
national governance. We need to protect the legitimate rights and interests of women
during and after conflict, provide timely humanitarian assistance to women affected
by conflict and give full consideration to their actual difficulties and needs. China
will participate in the work of the Council’s Informal Expert Group on Women and
Peace and Security and, together with other members of the Council, contribute to
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions.
Thirdly, we must promote gender equality and women’s empowerment.
The issue of women and armed conflict is one of the 12 priorities in the Beijing
Declaration and the Platform for Action. The women and peace and security agenda
should be advanced within the overall framework of women’s empowerment and
development, in concert with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
We should reaffirm our commitment to the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action and capitalize on the Decade of Action and delivery of the Sustainable
Development Goals, so that women’s empowerment becomes the early harvest in
our efforts to achieve the 2030 Agenda. In doing so, we can promote development
through women’s empowerment and promote peace through development.
We should elevate the protection of women’s rights and interests, respond
to such challenges as gender-based violence and discrimination, increase women’s
voice in political, economic, cultural and social affairs, promote social stability and
eliminate the root causes of conflict. We should also increase investment in women’s
education, medical care, employment and so forth, improve women’s livelihoods,
eradicate poverty among women and promote women’s development in tandem
with social and economic progress, so as to remove obstacles and create favourable
conditions for women’s effective participation in the peace process.
As the coronavirus disease rages across the world, it has had a severe impact
on the economy, employment and people’s lives, and has brought about greater
challenges for women. In fighting the pandemic and promoting economic and social
recovery, special attention should be paid to vulnerable groups, such as women and
children, so that they can overcome the negative impact of the pandemic faster.
Fourthly, we must strengthen global cooperation for women’s development.
The women and peace and security agenda is an integral part of the global cause of
women’s development and requires the joint efforts of all countries, international
organizations such as the United Nations, regional and subregional organizations,
and all sectors of society. We should promote multilateralism and uphold the authority
of the United Nations. The Security Council, the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and UN-Women should work
in accordance with their respective mandates and make their due contributions.
We should take seriously and give full play to the unique strengths of regional and
subregional organizations such as the African Union and the League of Arab States,
and encourage regional initiatives and practices based on the actual conditions
prevailing in those regions. We should fully respect the sovereignty and ownership
of the countries concerned, support them in advancing the women and peace and
12/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

security agenda in line with their national conditions, and guide women’s groups and
civil society to play a constructive role.
China has been actively promoting global cooperation in women’s development,
implementing the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the relevant
United Nations and Security Council resolutions through concrete action. Five years
ago, President Xi Jinping announced a series of initiatives at the Global Leaders’
Meeting on Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment, including the building of
100 health projects for women and children and 100 “happy campus projects”, and
providing vocational training for 130,000 women in developing countries. As of now
these projects have been fully implemented.
At the high-level Meeting on the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Fourth
World Conference on Women, held earlier this month, President Xi put forward
the important initiative of convening another Global Leaders’ Meeting on Gender
Equality and Women’s Empowerment in 2025, announced another $10 million
donation to UN-Women in the next five years, and pledged to continue funding the
UNESCO Prize for Girls’ and Women’s Education.
China stands ready to continue to work with the international community in
advancing the women and peace and security agenda, promoting the greater role of
women in peace and security, accelerating the realization of gender equality and
women’s empowerment, and contributing to women’s development around the world.

20-1473413/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 6
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic to
the United Nations
[Original: English and Spanish]
The Dominican Republic condemns the cowardly act of terrorism that took
place in France. We express our condolences to the families of the victims.
I thank the presidency for having convened this meeting on women and peace
and security, and recognize the leadership of the Secretary-General and Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka in this area. Our appreciation goes also to the briefers for bringing
their experience and recommendations to the Council.
Without a doubt, gender equality is a predictor of peace. This year marks a
historic milestone for the women and peace and security agenda, with not only the
twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) but also the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the United Nations. This juncture increases our determination to step up efforts
towards the full implementation of the women and peace and security agenda.
Regrettably, as we have heard today, we are still falling short of our goals.
This calls for not only ongoing political support and determination but also
concerted action.
In speaking of full implementation, we would underscore the need to
recognize the interrelated, inseparable and mutually reinforcing nature of all its
elements. In our view, full implementation involves addressing the intersecting
forms of discrimination many women face, as well as the removal of the structural
barriers that prevent the inclusive participation of women in conflict prevention
and peacebuilding.
We may agree or disagree on certain policies, but it is unacceptable that in the
twenty-first century, in the name of cultural, traditional or religious norms, women’s
rights continue to be undermined.
In too many contexts, women’s rights violations are deeply rooted in inequality
and widespread discrimination against women, and yet they are often swept under
the rug. The interconnections with the commitments made under the Convention
on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women and its general
recommendation no. 30 cannot be ignored.
Civil society and women human rights defenders, as well as their civic space,
must be protected by States and supported without reserve by the Council and the
United Nations so that they can carry out their critical work without fear of reprisal.
Many peace agreements do not include gender provisions that would adequately
address women’s security and peacebuilding needs — another reason why the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women and young women in peace processes
and in decision-making is not negotiable. It has to be at the core of any peace process
for it to be credible and sustainable.
For example, women organizations’ repeated calls for disarmament and arms
control remain unanswered. The Council should not lose sight of the gendered
impacts of small arms and light weapons. Decisions, planning and efforts aimed
at preventing their illicit trafficking must involve the participation of women.
Conflict prevention also requires converting a culture of impunity into one of
accountability, including redress for victims of conflict-related sexual violence and
gender-based violence.
14/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

The coronavirus disease is disproportionately impacting women and girls,
particularly in fragile and conflict-affected areas, threatening decades of progress
towards women’s rights and equality. Nevertheless, against all odds, women have
become critical figures in responding to the virus in their communities and countries.
We continue to encourage the inclusion of gender provisions in the design,
planning, implementation and evaluation of peace operations. An increase in the
number of women peacekeepers is key, as is the inclusion of gender-disaggregated
data in mission reports and the deployment of gender advisers and women’s protection
advisers with the necessary level of seniority.
The Dominican Republic is honoured to co-chair the Informal Expert Group on
Women and Peace and Security this year. The Group is a key platform for improving
the implementation of that agenda on the ground. We encourage the effective use
of the information and recommendations derived from it, which would enable us to
better monitor and coordinate implementation activities.
As we continue to face challenges in implementing the women and peace and
security agenda, it is clear that the focus must be on delivering on the ambitious goals
of its full normative framework. All root causes of conflict need to be addressed,
including gender inequality and discrimination against women and girls, violations
of international law and emerging threats to international peace and security such as
climate change. Our resolve to fulfil those commitments has not waned; rather, the
sense of urgency has increased.
Let us ensure that the gains achieved in these past 20 years are not derailed
and work together to strengthen them as we move forward.
Finally, Danai Gurira just told us that the Security Council has repeatedly
invited women to share their experiences and serve as an inspiration; it is the turn of
the Council to show that we are listening. The message is clear.

20-1473415/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 7
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
We thank all briefers for their interventions.
The objective of today’s debate is to address the main achievements and
challenges in the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. I
would focus on the following points.
The foundation of the women and peace and security agenda is built on
human rights. Violations of human rights are recognized as one of the triggers of
conflict. Restrictions on women’s full enjoyment of human rights and the absence
of gender equality increase the risks they face in conflict and undermine their full,
equal and meaningful participation in peace processes. Women’s access to sexual
and reproductive health care and rights is equally relevant in conflict and can be lifesaving for survivors of sexual violence. Pushback on the human rights of women also
weakens the women and peace and security agenda. We cannot accept that.
Turning to implementation and accountability, all of us have undertaken
concrete commitments on women and peace and security — nationally, regionally,
at the United Nations and as the Security Council. Our record of fulfilling them is
mixed. We welcome the steps to increase accountability for the implementation of
actions related to the women and peace and security agenda. That was one of the
reasons for Estonia’s decision to join the Generation Equality Compact on Women,
Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action as a catalytic member. We are also
preparing Estonia’s third national action plan on women, peace and security. We
welcome the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/946) and its recommendations.
Making women and peace and security an integral part of each Council
discussion and outcome is vital. The Council has taken a clear decision in that
regard. Yet often it is not able to agree to live up to its decision in mandate renewals
and country-specific resolutions. We also need to improve our follow-up on the
deliberations and recommendations arising from the Informal Expert Group on
Women, Peace and Security.
With respect to participation, the data is clear: the inclusion of women
increases the chances for sustainable peace and thus the effectiveness of Council
action. Yet women constituted, on average, no more than 13 per cent of negotiators
and 6 per cent of signatories in major peace processes between 1992 and 2019, and
this proportion remains low. Given the shrinking political, civic, and physical space
for women’s participation, the Council needs to speak up for this clearly.
Cooperation by various stakeholders, in particular the key role of civil-society
organizations and women peacebuilders, is important. The women and peace and
security agenda would not have come into being and it would not have been possible
to make it a reality without them. The cooperation of diverse women civil-society
representatives with the Council needs to be broader and more meaningful. We need
political will and joint action to stand up to threats and reprisals against women
human rights defenders. The United Nations has verified that in the four years leading
up to 2019, 102 women human rights defenders, journalists and trade unionists were
killed for their work; in reality, this is an undercount.
In terms of resources, we need to back up commitments with funding. For
United Nations peacekeeping and political missions, that includes supporting
women protection advisers, gender advisers and human rights officers. It also
means adequate resourcing and gender expertise in all sanctions expert groups.
Furthermore, it entails support for women’s organizations and initiatives.
16/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Each of those challenges has been magnified by the coronavirus
disease epidemic.
The Secretary-General pointed out that there have been notable achievements
on the women and peace and security agenda, but that progress has been too slow,
too narrow, with setbacks and easy to reverse. As a member of the Security Council,
which adopted resolution 1325 (2000) 20 years ago, we reaffirm our conviction that
we need to do better and that we cannot take a step back from the clear commitments
that we have made.

20-1473417/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 8
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: English and French]
I thank the Secretary-General and all the other speakers for their presentations.
I would like to commend Russia for making women’s rights a priority of its presidency
of the Security Council.
Twenty years after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we are still far from
having achieved the goals set. This is no time for celebration.
Progress in this area has been undermined by a succession of crises of
which women are systematically the victims. Backtracking is a constant threat in
every conflict or crisis, including the current pandemic. The time has passed from
acknowledgement to action. The Security Council must not tolerate any regression.
That is why it is essential to preserve each and every one of our resolutions and,
above all, to work together to implement them.
Although women are often key players in crisis response, they are still
insufficiently present in all peace and post-crisis processes. Progress has been made
in Afghanistan, Yemen, Libya, Mali and the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
particular. But negotiators and mediators do not have the place they deserve. Let
us be honest. The conditions for this exist; it is simply a matter of making the most
of them. That is why France finances training for civilian and military women,
in conjunction with the Department of Peace Operations, UN-Women and the
International Organization of la Francophonie.
At the same time, we must pursue determined action against the scourge of
sexual and gender-based violence. The prevention of such violence is not a choice but
a requirement. Such violence must be suppressed.
Access to sexual and reproductive rights and health care is being hampered,
and the coronavirus disease pandemic has exacerbated the difficulties in that
respect. We regret the politicization of these issues, which leads to losing sight of
the best interests of women and girls. France condemns all sexist, misogynistic
or homophobic discourse and supports actions in favour of victims through a
significant contribution to the Global Fund for Survivors of Sexual Violence created
by Dr. Mukwege and Ms. Murad.
The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) requires an effort on the part
of everyone. That is why national action plans are so important, and France is
finalizing its third plan. It has strengthened the integration of gender issues into its
humanitarian and development aid in order to provide targeted support to women
in conflict and post-conflict situations. France will launch a €120 million fund this
year to support women’s organizations, particularly in developing countries.
Finally, I would like to recall that France will host, in partnership with Mexico
and UN-Women, the Generation Equality Forum in June 2021. On that occasion, a
women and peace and security compact will be launched in order to build on existing
commitments and raise new funding.
France pays tribute to all feminists and human rights defenders around the
world and will continue to make the full implementation of the women and peace and
security resolutions a major focus of its action in the Security Council.

18/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 9
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
Let me begin by thanking Russia for having organized this important debate
as we commemorate 20 years of the women and peace and security agenda.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and the Executive
Director of UN-Women for their statements as well as all briefers for their
compelling presentations.
Twenty years ago, the Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000), which amplifies
our voice on women’s full, equal and meaningful participation in peace processes.
The women and peace and security agenda is an important platform for elevating
women’s voices and leadership. By investing in women, we invest in peace.
Today the role of women in conflict situation remains crucial amid the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and complex tensions around the
world. Against that backdrop, I would like to focus my statement on three
fundamental points.
First, women’s participation needs to be further enhanced with regard to
peace and security. We should not be complacent about what we have achieved over
the past 20 years.
As mentioned by Secretary-General, the percentage of women involved in
major peace processes worldwide remains low — only 13 per cent of negotiators and
6 per cent of mediators.
We need more women in decision-making positions and more women as
negotiators and mediators. Indonesia therefore continues to support the involvement
of more women mediators and negotiators. The goal is not only to bring greater
legitimacy to peace processes but also to ensure the sustainability of peace itself.
Last March, our Minister for Foreign Affairs initiated the AfghanistanIndonesia Women Solidarity Network during her visit to Afghanistan. The network
aims to increase the role of the women of Afghanistan in peace processes.
Indonesia is also developing the Southeast Asia Network of Women Peace
Negotiators and Mediators. That network will encourage more women in the region
to actively participate in the process of the mediation of conflict.
Secondly, the role of women peacekeepers should be continually strengthened,
not by merely increasing the numbers but also by ensuring an enabling environment
for them in the field and enhancing their capacity through training. Their broad skill
sets are valuable assets for ensuring peace, including to protect victims of sexual
violence in conflict.
Hence, Indonesia initiated resolution 2538 (2020), adopted last August,
as the first resolution that specifically emphasizes the valuable role of women
in peacekeeping efforts. Women peacekeepers have proved themselves in the
maintenance of peace as well as in community engagement, as has also been alluded
by the briefer Ms. Natalia Emelianova and others. We hope that as a result of that
resolution there will be more women peacekeepers in the field.
Today, 157 Indonesian military and police women are serving in various
missions. During the COVID-19 pandemic, our women peacekeepers have been
actively promoting health education in local communities and assisting the local
population in creating a healthy environment.
20-1473419/161

S/2020/1084

Thirdly, a multi-stakeholder approach is central to women’s participation in
sustaining peace.
The partnership of national authorities with local communities and civil
society is essential to ensure the implementation of women’s participation in peace
and security processes. Since 2014, Indonesia has integrated that approach into our
national action plan on strengthening women’s empowerment and gender equality
in social conflict. This approach has also been greatly beneficial to preventing
radicalization and counter-terrorism by engaging local communities. Now, Indonesia
has approximately 30 Peace Villages, which promote the role and participation of
women in order to reduce the potential for violent extremism and terrorism in society.
Looking to the future, Indonesia envisions the women and peace and security
agenda as a transformative force leading to greater effectiveness in peacebuilding
and the sustaining of peace itself.
We strongly support the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Indonesia will not stop at this time. Rather, we will continue to be actively involved
in the initiatives of Member States and multi-stakeholder initiatives to complement
the advancement of women and peace and security agenda.
I would like to echo the Secretary-General in that we cannot wait another
20 years. We have to start now. I reiterate the message of our Foreign Minister,
Madame Retno Marsudi, that by investing in women, we invest in peace.

20/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 10
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Niger to
the United Nations, Niandou Aougi
[Original: French]
Each of today’s speakers has reminded us, in their outstanding statements, of
the need to continue to challenge the status quo. Indeed, too few women participate
meaningfully in peace processes, and women and girls continue to be the primary
victims of the consequences of conflicts around the world. For a country like mine,
in a region plagued by multiple crises, the women and peace and security agenda is
not just a concept; it is fundamental to maintaining peace and preventing conflict.
Twenty years have passed since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and,
although progress has been made, there is still a long way to go. Women remain
largely underrepresented in decision-making. My country, the Niger, is working to
change those trends. Last October, the Niger increased the quota of women in elected
positions from 15 per cent to 25 per cent and appointments to high-level positions
within the State from 25 per cent to 30 per cent.
Here in the Security Council, we, too, must do more. Consultations with civilsociety organizations are important and must be followed up appropriately. Five years
after the peace and security reviews in 2015, only half of the recommendations made
to the United Nations on the women and peace and security agenda have progressed.
It is clear that there is a need for more systematic follow-up and more effective
implementation of those recommendations. The Niger remains determined to
support women peacebuilders, whose role we consider essential in our work. That is
why during our presidency last month we invited several members of civil society,
including four young women, to make presentations to the Council.
The gap between our ambition, our commitments and reality cannot be bridged
if we do not adequately support the vital work of women peacebuilders. Women’s
organizations remain underfunded. It is deeply unfortunate that only 0.2 per cent of
total bilateral aid for interventions in vulnerable and conflict areas has gone directly
to women’s organizations. We all agree that there is a need to allocate more funds
to women’s organizations working in peacebuilding, especially those working at the
grass-roots level in communities.
My delegation stresses the need to address the gender-related factors that
amplify conflict and how they intersect with existing vulnerabilities, for instance in
the situation in the Sahel countries, where it is clear that further analysis and work
on the intersection of the women and peace and security agenda and climate issues is
crucial. That is just one example. We believe that monitoring the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda and carrying out regular analyses is one
of the most important steps we could take towards more effective policy formulation
and implementation.
We welcome in that regard the development of the African Union’s Continental
Results Framework for monitoring the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda. That framework, which is a major step towards implementation,
must be supported and reproduced in other contexts.
Let me add that tackling some of the structural inequalities and the existing
discrimination against women and girls remains paramount for conflict prevention.
Access to education is one of the surest ways to tackle it. During the open debate
held last month under our presidency, the Security Council adopted a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2020/8) recognizing the gendered nature of attacks on schools
20-1473421/161

S/2020/1084

and demanding greater protection for all children, girls in particular. We called for
more attention to be paid to how conflict affects young women and girls, especially
given the increased incidence of sexual and gender-based violence. Measures
must take into account the gender dimensions of conflict and how they amplify
existing inequalities.
While women are often the primary victims in conflict situations, they are
also the impetus for major changes. We have seen the role played by young women in
the Sudan and, more recently, in other parts of the African continent. Young women
peacebuilders have greatly expanded the civic space. It is essential that greater
protection be afforded women human rights defenders, who face serious reprisals
for their vital work. In that regard, the Niger supports the United Kingdom-funded
Women Peacebuilders Protection Framework and is committed to strengthening our
national legal and political safety net for women peacebuilders.
Like 30 other African countries, the Niger has started to implement a national
action plan for peace and security for women, which was developed following a
consultation process involving both women and men from all parts of the country.
This is an important instrument, and we urge other countries that have not yet
adopted one to do so.
Finally, the gender vulnerabilities that the coronavirus disease has highlighted
only underscore the systemic exclusion that women face in many areas. It is in that
context that my delegation would make the following recommendations.
First, there is a need to allocate more resources to local organizations of
women peacebuilders working in the area of peace and security.
Secondly, my delegation, as a troop-contributing country, calls for the
more effective participation of women in peacekeeping operations and missions.
The Niger is particularly keen to see a strengthening of the trend towards the
participation of women in the police force. We also call for the strengthening of
early-warning systems.
In the same vein, the relatively low number of women in high-level positions
in political and peace and security institutions, as well as the unbalanced geographic
representation of women in leadership positions, must be addressed. We therefore
call for the full participation of women, on an equal and meaningful basis, in all
processes mandated by the United Nations.
Thirdly, it is crucial that peace agreements continue to include special
provisions for women. We recognize the key role of women in peace processes, but
we regret that only 20 per cent of the peace agreements signed between 1990 and
2018 contain special provisions for women.
Finally, allow me to make a few remarks on the existing normative framework
on the women and peace and security agenda. It is a robust agenda, but, as has
been underlined in many past and ongoing discussions, what is lacking is its
effective implementation.
To conclude, I would pay tribute to the thousands of women who led to
the creation of this agenda. We owe the women and peace and security agenda to
those women defenders and builders of peace, in particular from the South, who
demanded change and sometimes even risked their lives for peace, reconstruction
and social justice — and, to put it simply, to have their human rights upheld. It is our
responsibility to ensure that the hard-won gains made since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) are not only maintained but also strengthened and fully implemented as
a matter of urgency.

22/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 11
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
[Original: Russian]
We express our appreciation to the Secretary-General, António Guterres, for
his assessment of the progress made on the women and peace and security agenda.
We also listened very attentively to the statements made by the Under-SecretaryGeneral and Executive Director of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka;
UN-Women Goodwill Ambassador Danai Gurira; a woman peacekeeper in the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei, Ms. Natalia Emelianova; and civilsociety representative Zarqa Yaftali. Their joint efforts contribute to the achievement
of peace and security and to promoting the role of women in peacekeeping processes.
This month marks 20 years since the holding of the Security Council’s first
open debate on women and peace and security and the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000). This year also marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, which is in fact a road map for achieving
gender equality and improving the status of women.
Open debates on this issue have become a tradition for the Security Council
and give rise to great interest among States, as they serve as a platform for discussing
the progress made in the implementation of its resolutions and ways of enhancing the
effectiveness of efforts made in this area at the national, regional and international
levels. We regret that this year it was not possible to hold face-to-face meetings
owing to pandemic-related restrictions.
In the 20 years since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the Security
Council has elaborated common approaches to the implementation of this and
other documents on the issue of women and peace and security. They focus on four
elements: prevention, protection, participation and sustaining peace in situations
of armed conflict. The necessary regulatory framework has been developed, and
international cooperation has been established.
The involvement and direct participation of women in the prevention
and settlement of armed conflicts, as we heard first-hand today, allows for more
sustainable and trust-based relations with the local population, helps prevent and
investigate cases of violence against women and children, and contributes to the
effectiveness of follow-up measures for the rehabilitation and reintegration of victims.
Russia partners with the United Nations in training foreign women peacekeepers
at certified training centres, including the one in Domodedovo, which is part of
the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Today, the proportion of women among Russian
peacekeepers in United Nations peacekeeping operations stands at about 17 per cent.
As noted in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/946), the percentage
of women participating in peacekeeping, including in negotiations, is steadily
increasing. That dynamic is very encouraging.
Important areas in which efforts must be made include ensuring women’s
access to resources, technology and the banking sector in the context of the sustainable
post-conflict recovery of States. We believe that increased attention should be paid
to issues related to the development of women, overcoming poverty, women’s access
to education in armed-conflict-affected countries. Family is of particular value and
must be protected.

20-1473423/161

S/2020/1084

To effectively promote the women and peace and security agenda, we must
focus on concrete tasks and avoid any duplication of the efforts of the General
Assembly, the Human Rights Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
In that context, I would like to inform the Council about Russia’s intention to
join in the work of the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security,
established in 2015. Our goal is to contribute constructively to the work of the Group
on the basis of non-politicized, transparent and democratic decision-making, which
is required to establish a mutually respectful inter-State dialogue on this vital topic.
The Security Council must work collectively. We hope that in the year of
the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) it will be able to demonstrate
its unity.

24/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 12
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines to the United Nations, Halimah DeShong
I would like to thank the Russian Federation for convening this important
annual open debate. We also thank the briefers for their valuable contributions.
The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), 20 years ago, marked a reassertion of
the long-held demands to eradicate gender inequality as a prerequisite for inclusive
development and sustainable peace. From its inception, the women and peace and
security agenda has existed in alignment with the central purpose for which the
Security Council was established — to maintain international peace and security
by ensuring justice, promoting the rule of law and safeguarding fundamental
freedoms for all without distinction. On the occasion of the twentieth anniversary,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is proud to join Member States in recognizing
and celebrating the robust framework established by resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent Council outcomes on women and peace and security. We pay tribute
to women civil society, the early architects of that agenda, and call attention to the
wider guiding framework established under general recommendation No. 30 of the
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action.
Today, however, with the underrepresentation of women in peacekeeping
operations and peacebuilding, escalating levels of sexual and gender-based violence
in many situations of conflict, significantly underfunded regional and national
gender policies and action plans, women civil society under increased threats of
violence, increasing numbers of displaced women and children and the gendered
impact of the coronavirus disease in conflict-affected countries and regions, we
must urgently address the significant gaps in translating the existing normative
framework into action.
To do that the Security Council must ensure that gender analysis and
a commitment to gender justice guide all deliberations, outcome documents,
operations and actions. Gender equality, partly expressed through the full, equal
and meaningful participation and leadership of diverse women in peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, is attainable only with the elimination of all
forms of gendered violence and discrimination. Indeed, the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2020/946) points to an urgent need to remove the structural barriers and
intersecting discrimination experienced by women, in support of gender parity in
participation and leadership.
The sustained advocacy of women’s organizations and the political will that
have led to the significant participation of Colombian women in formal mechanisms
to monitor the peace agreement and to trace the implementation of its gender
provisions must become the norm, rather than the exception, across all conflictaffected countries and regions. Similarly, we applaud the efforts of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti as it works with the Government of Haiti on issues such as
gender-responsive policing and the scourge of sexual and gender-based violence. We
expect to hear more with regard to that issue at the briefing by Police Commissioners
next Wednesday.
The current funding model for advancing gender equality remains unpredictable
and insufficient. We acknowledge the Secretary-General’s call for compliance
with the recommendations of the High-level Task Force on Financing for Gender
Equality, specifically as it relates to increasing funding to women’s organizations,
the funding of gender action plans, the widespread promotion of gender budgeting
and the role of the Peacebuilding Fund in promoting gender and age-responsive
20-1473425/161

S/2020/1084

peacebuilding initiatives. In that regard, we urge the donor community to comply
with its minimum official development assistance commitments to conflict-affected
countries, including for the advancement of gender equality.
There can be no pursuit of global peace that ignores the gendered forms of
insecurity threatening half the world’s population. We must equally insist that there
can be no pursuit of development without the equal leadership and participation of
diverse women.

26/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 13
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Jerry Matjila
We thank Secretary-General António Guterres for his statement, and we
welcome the briefings by Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Under-Secretary-General
and Executive Director of UN-Women; Ms. Danai Gurira, UN-Women Goodwill
Ambassador; Ms. Nataliia Emelianova, Sexual and Gender-Based Violence Adviser
in the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei; and Ms. Zarqa Yaftali, Head
of the Women and Children Legal Research Foundation.
We join others in highlighting that 2020 is a significant year as we
commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action,
the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, the tenth anniversary of the
establishment of UN-Women and the fifth anniversary of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, among other things. It is also the review year for Silencing
the Guns by 2020 on the African continent. All those anniversaries are intertwined
and pertinent to the advancement of the women and peace and security agenda.
We also wish to take this opportunity to welcome and acknowledge the clear
priorities announced by the UN-Women Executive Director that will dominate the
decade of action. That will further drive the momentum to fully implement the
10 Security Council resolutions on women and peace and security.
We also welcome the progress that has been made in the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
20 years ago, under the excellent leadership of Namibia (see S/PV.4213), which will
also launch its International Women’s Peace Centre on 31 October 2020. That will
be a valuable regional and international institution towards consolidating our efforts
for the full implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. However,
we also recognize the need to accelerate the full implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda, especially by addressing impediments to achieving
its objectives.
South Africa regrets the negative impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic
on advancing the women and peace and security agenda, particularly with regard to
refugees and internally displaced women. In that context, we take this opportunity
to commend the work that has been undertaken by humanitarian and health-care
workers, as well as other front-line workers, in mitigating the pandemic, the majority
of whom are women. We also recognize that the impact of the pandemic on the
women and peace and security agenda has not yet been fully discerned.
However, at this stage, it is imperative that we also take note of the fact
that the coronavirus disease pandemic has not only presented challenges but also
opportunities in terms of how the women and peace and security agenda can be
pursued, particularly in advancing the participation and representation pillars. That
relates to utilizing virtual means to expand women’s participation in the various
peace processes. While virtual engagement has illustrated to us that the inclusion of
women is possible, it should not be used to exclude women from physical interaction.
My country views the women and peace and security agenda as an
empowerment tool for women to actively immerse themselves in various peace
processes, particularly in prevention, peacemaking and peacebuilding. In that
regard, South Africa is committed to contributing to reducing the gap in women’s
underrepresentation in mediation, negotiations and leadership positions. We
will continue to build the capacity of women negotiators and mediators by
20-1473427/161

S/2020/1084

providing annual training to women mediators and negotiators at the local and
continental levels.
We are proud that many women who benefited from such training programmes
are actively involved in peace processes in their respective countries. They include
women from the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of Congo and
South Sudan, to name just a few.
South Africa also wishes to reiterate its support for the Secretary-General’s
system-wide strategy on gender parity and the uniformed gender parity strategy
2018-2028 of the Department of Peace Operations, which have had a significant
impact on increasing the number of women represented within the United Nations
leadership, as well as in peace operations. We are pleased that the recently adopted
resolution 2538 (2020), the first-ever Security Council resolution on women in
peacekeeping, adds to the growing number of normative frameworks on women in
peacekeeping. That is important to us, as South Africa remains the leading femaletroop-contributing country in United Nations peacekeeping operations, with 15.1 per
cent of South Africa’s deployed troops being female.
We continue to recognize the pivotal role that civil society actors play in
furthering the women and peace and security agenda at the local and national levels,
which is why we encourage strengthened collaboration between Governments and
civil society in advancing the agenda.
In line with resolution 2493 (2019), which was unanimously adopted a year
ago, we continue to urge Member States to create safe and enabling environments
for civil society, community women leaders, women peacebuilders and human
rights defenders to carry out their work in advancing the women and peace and
security agenda without threats, intimidation and physical harm. We continue to be
alarmed by the persisting sexual violence against women and children in conflict
and post-conflict countries. It goes without saying that there is a need for increased
accountability for cases of sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict societies.
In that respect, South Africa reiterates its support for the work of the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
South Africa wishes to underline the pivotal role of regional organizations
in advancing the women and peace and security agenda, and therefore requests that
future reports of the Secretary-General provide details on the efforts of regional
organizations, such as the African Union and its subregional organizations, in
promoting the agenda.
Let me conclude by reaffirming South Africa’s commitment to advancing
the women and peace and security agenda. We are pleased to announce that we
recently adopted our first national action pan. That is an essential step for us in
continuing to ensure the meaningful participation of women at all levels of peace
processes in a manner that is structured, monitored and regularly assessed by all
relevant stakeholders.

28/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 14
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Tunisia

to

the

I would like to thank the Russian Federation for organizing this open debate
in commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General and all the briefers for their insightful comments.
In its resolution 1325 (2000), the Security Council recognized the importance
of women’s full participation in conflict prevention and peacebuilding, while
highlighting the particular vulnerabilities of women and girls in conflict and
post-conflict settings and the importance of addressing their specific needs in
such situations.
For the past 20 years, significant progress has been made in the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions on women and peace and
security. Countless efforts have been deployed by Member States and international
and regional organizations, as well as by civil society and grass-roots movements.
However, as we celebrate the twentieth anniversary amid a global pandemic
that has exacerbated gender inequality, we have seen first-hand how the ambitions
and objectives set two decades ago are still far from being reached today.
This commemoration should serve not only as an opportunity to take stock
of past achievements but also as a reminder that, despite the progress made, the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) was not the end of women’s long march towards
equality. Rather, it set the bedrock for further efforts to achieve women’s rights
and their empowerment, which now requires scaling up our collective efforts
towards implementation.
Such implementation needs to primarily be comprehensive and integrated
across the four pillars of the agenda based on coherence among the political, security,
development, human rights, gender equality and rule-of-law aspects. In that regard,
it is crucial to reiterate our commitment to greater implementation that reinforces
the mutual interlinkages with the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action,
particularly as this year also marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Fourth World
Conference on Women. It should also be inscribed within our broader efforts to fulfil
human rights and gender equality, including through the full implementation of the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women.
Furthermore, our collective implementation efforts cannot be effective unless
they are inscribed within a multi-stakeholder approach that involves all the various
actors. In that regard, it is important to recognize the invaluable contributions of
civil society, feminist groups and women human rights defenders in the promotion,
implementation and monitoring of the women and peace and security agenda.
In that spirit, Tunisia established a national committee in charge of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), which comprises representatives of
the relevant Government structures, constitutional bodies and civil society, with
women’s representation exceeding 50 per cent. The work of that multi-stakeholder
committee culminated in the adoption of a comprehensive and multidimensional
national action plan in August 2018, followed by 14 coordinated sectoral action plans
covering specific areas, such as law enforcement, security, health and prevention of
violent extremism.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has had devastating consequences for
women and girls, particularly in conflict and post-conflict settings. Unless properly
20-1473429/161

S/2020/1084

addressed, its impact will continue to be exacerbated, threatening to disrupt, and even
reverse, the progress that we have accomplished so far. Civil society organizations are
struggling to maintain their activities while being restricted due to the pandemic and
as their resources are being diverted towards urgent crisis response. Member States
need to ensure the continuity of the necessary funding mechanisms to support the
work and enhance the capacities of organizations that support women’s leadership,
empowerment and participation at all levels of decision-making.
We need to further implement the existing normative framework on women
and peace and security in order to address the causes and manifestations of gender
inequality that increase the vulnerability of women and girls in the face of conflict.
Special attention must be given to conflict-related sexual violence. We need to
promote a survivor-centred approach that recognizes that women and girls are not a
homogenous group and that they require adequate response measures in accordance
with their different needs and contexts. We also need to put an end to impunity so as
to deliver justice to the victims and prevent such heinous crimes in future. Finally,
we need to address the underlying drivers of conflict-related sexual violence by
promoting gender equality and human rights and by bringing national legislation in
line with international norms and standards.
Tunisia is committed to continuing to champion the women and peace and
security agenda at the national level through the implementation of our national
action plan, the integration of a gender-responsive perspective into our national
strategies and policies, and a true partnership and leadership by women in all public
and private spheres. We also reiterate our commitment to building on international
efforts rooted in peacebuilding priorities and principles that seek to protect women’s
rights and ensure their full, equal and meaningful participation in peace efforts and
decision-making processes.

30/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 15
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
I thank Secretary-General Guterres for his unwavering commitment to this
important issue. And I thank the other briefers, who provided us with important
insights on progress made since resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted and — even
more important — identified shortcomings that we all must address.
The United States has never been more committed to the goals of resolution
1325 (2000), and the Trump Administration has been a leader in advancing the
women and peace and security agenda. When President Trump signed the Women,
Peace and Security Act in 2017, the United States became the first country in the
world to pass comprehensive national legislation codifying its commitment.
Just last June, President Trump released the United States Strategy on Women,
Peace and Security, which outlines new, concrete actions to accelerate the United
States efforts. The strategy recognizes the central role women play in preventing
and resolving conflict, countering terrorism and violent extremism and building
post-conflict peace and stability. It begins with empowering women leaders with
the access, skills and influence they need to be effective. Women have always had a
strong voice; they just need to be heard.
Nowhere is this more apparent and urgent than in peacekeeping operations.
I witnessed first-hand the importance of women peacekeepers while visiting South
Sudan. In an environment where women are often the victims of conflict and bear the
burden of providing for families broken by fighting, women peacekeepers provide
empathy and sensible support to the people they serve to build resilience so they can
recover from violence.
When we increase the number of women peacekeepers we also see improved
performance, fewer incidents of sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeeping
troops and greater likelihood of women coming forward to report sexual and genderbased violence.
To increase the number of women in peacekeeping, the Governments must
reduce barriers to entry and provide leadership opportunities for women in national
security roles. Troop- and police-contributing countries should adopt and promote
policies to achieve these objectives.
All troop- and police-contributing countries must also enforce the
United Nations zero-tolerance policy by swiftly and credibly addressing allegations
of abuse. The United States praises the efforts of the United Nations to prevent
sexual exploitation and abuse. However, more must be done, including repatriating
and ensuring the prosecution of individuals and units who commit these terrible
crimes. The victims deserve justice.
The United States is deeply concerned about the recent allegations of
widespread sexual exploitation and abuse by personnel purportedly employed by
international organizations and private relief agencies in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo as part of the Ebola response. We are following this matter closely and
expect the allegations to be taken seriously and the necessary and appropriate steps
be taken to address the situation.
The United States strategy also promotes the protection of women and
girls’ human rights, gives victims a voice and access to humanitarian assistance
and provides safety from gender-based violence, including sexual exploitation and

20-1473431/161

S/2020/1084

abuse around the world. The strategy reinforces the United States commitment to
prevention and a focus on accountability.
The United States is also actively engaged with partners across the globe
to support their efforts to advance women’s participation in political and security
decision-making. In Colombia, women are increasingly welcome in the peace
processes and their perspectives are included into negotiated agreements. In
Afghanistan, as mentioned by Zarqa Yaftali, women now occupy important positions
within the Government and are participating in the United States-brokered peace
talks, but they are coming under threat and we all need to support them. And in
the Democratic Republic of Congo, we have seen the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo elevate women to
leadership positions as part of a project intended to restore social cohesion between
communities mired in conflict.
We have also supported the women and peace and security language in
peacekeeping and special political mission mandates. Despite attempts by some
members to block these efforts, we have pushed through language that promotes
meaningful participation by women in peace negotiations and other political
processes. Moving forward, we hope mandates will always feature the interests of
women and promote their active roles in peace and security.
Today the United States calls on all Member States, all of us, to adopt and
implement national action plans and strategies on women and peace and security.
The United States is ready to support Member States in that effort. Indonesia
worked to advance women during its time on the Council and currently deploys
more than 150 women in peacekeeping missions around the world. Kenya’s progress
in implementing the plan can serve as a model for partners in the region and around
the world. We all look forward to working even more closely with Kenya on this and
all global peace and security issues.
Together we must make it a priority to champion women and girls, protect
their safety and security and promote them so that they can participate in promoting
international peace and security. We must do this not just because it is the right thing
to do, but also because we know that our world will be safer and more prosperous
when women are supported and heard.

32/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 16
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dinh Quy Dang
I commend the Russian presidency for convening this open debate. I thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report (S/2020/946), and the UnderSecretary-General, the Executive Director of UN-Women and other briefers for
their insights.
We welcome the progress made in the implementation of landmark resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent relevant resolutions. The role of women and issues related
to women, including sexual violence and gender equality, have been increasingly
integrated in relevant mechanisms and regimes. We are encouraged by the report that,
between 2017 and 2019, approximately 70 per cent of Security Council resolutions
included explicit references to women and peace and security issues, while this
number was only 15 per cent in the first five years since resolution 1325 (2000) was
adopted. We also see increased participation by women in all areas, from conflict
prevention to peacebuilding, peace processes and reconstruction efforts.
However, much remains to be done. As mentioned in the report of the
Secretary-General, the progress has been too slow, too narrow and easy to reverse.
In this regard, to enhance the implementation of this agenda, I wish to highlight the
following points.
First, we call on all States to support the Secretary-General’s call for a global
ceasefire and an immediate cessation of hostilities in all corners of the globe to
reinforce diplomatic actions, help create favourable conditions for humanitarian
assistance and bring hope to the people, including women and girls, who are most
vulnerable to conflicts and the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Secondly, peace can be sustained only if conflicts can be prevented and
addressed at their roots. Therefore, we stress the importance of conflict prevention,
socioeconomic development and post-conflict peacebuilding, recovery and
reconstruction. During these processes, the women and peace and security issues
should be fully implemented.
Thirdly, we need to remove persisting barriers and push for a radical shift for
women’s meaningful participation in peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts, while ensuring that women are fully involved as equal partners from the
earliest stages in each and every peace and political process.
Last but not least, progress primarily depends on States, but also States’
partnerships, especially with a better-coordinated and adequately resourced
United Nations. To that end, we call on the international donor community to keep
providing a minimum of 15 per cent of official development assistance to conflictaffected countries to be used for advancing gender equality.
For its part, Viet Nam fully recognizes the key role of women in conflict
prevention and settlement, sustaining peace and socioeconomic development.
Vietnamese women have not only fought for the country’s freedom and independence,
but also have worked hard and made significant contributions to the national
recovery and development. When the situation demands it, Vietnamese women can
also be effective agents of peace, as peacekeepers. Besides, women’s organizations
in Viet Nam, including the Women’s Union, have played an active role in post-war
recovery, mine clearance and assistance to victims of Agent Orange victims and
veterans’ families, to name but a few. Viet Nam has been also fulfilling its respective
obligations and commitments under the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women and the Beijing Platform for Action.
20-1473433/161

S/2020/1084

In conclusion, Viet Nam reiterates its readiness and commitment to join the
efforts of the international community to ensure that the voices of women are heard,
their concerns and needs are addressed, and their roles and contributions to peace
and security both are enhanced and recognized.

34/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 17
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Afghanistan
to the United Nations, Mohammad Naeemi
Allow me to first thank the Permanent Mission of Russia for hosting today’s
open debate. I also want to thank Secretary-General, António Guterres; the Director of
UN-Women, Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka; the Goodwill Ambassador of UN-Women,
Danai Gurira; the Sexual and Gender-Based Violence Adviser to the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei, Nataliia Emelianova; and the Head of the Women
and Children Legal Research Foundation, Zarqa Yaftali, for their valuable inputs on
the imperative of continuing to take tangible actions towards the inclusion of women
in all aspects of peace and security, including in the armed forces, humanitarian
responses, peace processes, conflict prevention and resolution, and peacebuilding.
Twenty years ago, the Security Council acknowledged that women and girls
experience conflict differently than men and the important role of women in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts and peacebuilding. Resolution 1325 (2000)
challenged Member States to move beyond rhetoric into action. Since its adoption by
the Security Council in 2000, women in Afghanistan have made significant progress
across a range of indicators. Resolution 1325 (2000), adopted around the same time
as the fall of the Taliban, was, and continues to be, particularly relevant to the Afghan
people. When the post-Taliban Government of Afghanistan assumed power, global
rankings indicated that Afghan women faced one of the most difficult situations
in the world in regard to their civil liberties, protection against violence, access to
health care and education, and public participation. As such, the full implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) has been a key priority of the Government of Afghanistan
during the past two decades of reconstruction.
To ensure the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and in line with
the goals of the resolution, our Government launched its Resolution 1325 (2000)
National Action Plan in 2015. Afghanistan was among the first countries in Asia to
adopt a national action plan. The plan has sought to increase the role of women in
the peace process and acknowledge the impact that armed conflict has on women
in order to provide appropriate relief and recovery efforts. The second phase of the
Resolution 1325 (2000) National Action Plan began in August of 2019 and reaffirms
our Government’s efforts to preserve the rights of women and their role throughout
the peace process.
Our Government has worked to make significant progress on the inclusion of
women at all levels of our institutions, leveraging the legal framework of article 22
of the Constitution, which emphasizes the “equal rights and duties before the law” of
all citizens of Afghanistan. We have implemented a gender-sensitive security sector
reform and worked to remove barriers to entry for women in the security service,
including negative biases and traditions. Today, over 3,000 women serve as police
officers and 2,000 serve in the Afghan National Army. For the first time in our
history, there are female deputy ministers in the Ministries of Defence and Interior,
and based on a presidential order signed in July of this year, all 34 provinces have
appointed women as deputy governors. Women also play a much more significant
role in the judiciary, and every province has a woman heading the Office on the
Prevention of Violence against Women.
Despite the progress, today, many of these hard-fought gains are threatened,
and there are formidable challenges to be addressed. Women and children, especially
girls, are victims of terrorist attacks and constitute one-third of civilian casualties.
Continued efforts to safeguard and promote our achievements will be crucial in the

20-1473435/161

S/2020/1084

light of new vulnerabilities resulting from the coronavirus disease and the outcome
of the ongoing peace negotiations with the Taliban.
Particularly with regard to the ongoing peace talks, the Government has been
diligent in its commitment to an inclusive peace process that incorporates women at
the very centre of negotiations and ensures that any outcome result fully respects,
builds upon and consolidates the achievements of the past two decades, particularly
the constitutional rights of women, girls and minorities. A National Women’s
Consensus for Peace conference was held in February 2019 and a Consultative Loya
Jirga for Peace was held in April of the same year. In the latter, women made up
to 30 per cent of the 3,000 participants and headed various commissions. Both of
these meetings called for the participation of women in the negotiation team. Their
request has been answered by the Government and the current negotiating team
includes four women. The full, equal and meaningful participation of women at all
levels of the peace process will continue to be a priority for the Government. In this
connection, we thank the international community for its unwavering support to
Afghan women and its contribution to the Afghan Government.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Afghanistan’s firm commitment to
promoting and protecting the rights of women and girls, including the Resolution
1325 (2000) National Action Plan, as well as continuing its efforts to uphold women’s
rights and their social, economic and political inclusion in efforts to achieve peace,
stability and prosperity in Afghanistan.

36/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 18
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Albania

to

the

Albania commends the efforts of many Member States and partners to put
in place solid normative frameworks and commitments on the women and peace
and security agenda, as demonstrated by the increase in the number of national
action plans for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). However, we strongly
believe that effective implementation is not possible without the allocation of
proper resources.
It is important to celebrate progress, but equally important to recognize
the challenges we face. We need to pay special attention to the engagement of
communities at the grassroots level and demonstrate progress in people’s lives.
We need to give civil society, including women’s organizations and human rights
defenders, a voice that is heard in the Security Council. Their experience and knowhow are crucial to better understand what should be improved. To that end, we need
to engage more women mediators and ensure the meaningful participation of women
in both conflict prevention and in peacebuilding.
Albania is proud to report some significant achievements on the meaningful
participation of women in important decision-making processes. Our first 1325
national action plan, 2018-2020, sets out a robust and detailed plan with clear
implementation, financing, monitoring and evaluation strategies, and reporting
pathways. Albania is among only seven countries of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) region that have a costed and budgeted national
action plan. We have also made sure to include civil society in the main pillars of the
national action plan.
It mainly focuses on the increased participation of women in the armed
forces in peacekeeping missions outside of the country; the appointment of female
officers to leading positions in the police and armed forces and the strengthening of
management capacities of women in the police and armed forces; the establishment
of a reporting system for the implementation of the national action plan; awarenessraising activities with women members of Parliament and local Government
representatives on Security Council resolutions on women and peace and security;
and the delivery of trainings on gender equality in military operations, the handling
of post-conflict situations, and the prevention of and response to violence against
women and girls.
Albania is committed to increasing women’s meaningful participation in
crisis prevention and peace processes, as well as to improved protection against
sexual and all other forms of violence. To that end, Albania has increased the
meaningful participation of women in the security sector, while mainstreaming the
gender perspective in policies and structural plans of the Ministry of Defence and
the armed forces. We included the women and peace and security agenda as one of
the priorities of our 2020 OSCE chairmanship, injecting new momentum into the
OSCE’s work on women and peace and security.
If elected to the Security Council next year, Albania will champion the women
and peace and security agenda across the full breadth of its work. We strongly believe
that women are agents of positive change and that they must actively participate in
all peace and security efforts.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the chances for building and
sustaining peace are much higher once women are fully engaged. We cannot afford to
lose 50 per cent of our human energy, talent and ideas. The meaningful participation
20-1473437/161

S/2020/1084

of women will boost our common efforts for a more inclusive, transparent and
effective approach towards peace and security.

38/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 19
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Argentina to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Argentina aligns itself with the statements made on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security (annex 27) and the Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect.
At the outset, I would like to thank the delegation of the Russian Federation
for organizing this open debate. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres; the Executive Director of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile MlamboNgcuka; the Goodwill Ambassador of UN-Women, Ms. Danai Gurira; the Adviser
on Sexual and Gender-based Violence to the United Nations Interim Security Force
in Abyei, Ms. Nataliia Emelianova; and the Head of the Women and Children Legal
Research Foundation, Ms. Zarqa Yaftali for their statements.
In the framework of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) and the commemoration of 25 years of the Beijing Declaration and the
Platform for Action, Argentina reaffirms its commitment to the development and
implementation of the women and peace and security agenda.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has made it clear that it will
not be possible to prevent conflict, achieve peaceful solutions or build sustainable
peace without effectively ensuring gender equality and the full empowerment of
women and girls in all their diversity. To that end, it is necessary to increase the
presence of women at all levels of decision-making. The increased participation
of women will strengthen the contribution of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions in the field.
Argentina categorically condemns abuse and sexual and gender-based violence
against and exploitation of women and girls, and supports the United Nations zerotolerance policy in this area. We also condemn sexual and gender-based violence in
conflict and post-conflict situations. We are deeply concerned about the increase
in violence against women and girls during the pandemic caused by COVID-19. In
this regard, we reiterate our support for efforts to eliminate sexual and gender-based
violence against women and girls, and call for the means to ensure accountability
and the punishment of those responsible.
As of 2020 and coinciding with the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) by the Security Council, Argentina has embarked on a very
active policy aimed at giving new impetus and priority to the women and peace and
security agenda. In this sense, our country has worked hard in recent months on the
following substantive aspects of this agenda.
First, Argentina’s National Action Plan for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) was adopted in 2015 with the aim of identifying the structural barriers
that hinder women’s participation in the field of peace and security and of increasing
their participation in leadership positions in all areas at the national, regional and
international levels. During the first half of 2020, the evaluation process and conclusion
of the first plan was initiated, on 22 July, and the first interministerial dialogue for
the evaluation of the National Action Plan for the Implementation of Resolution 1325
(2000) was held. In this context, different ministries have collaborated closely in
preparing the second National Action Plan for the Implementation of Resolution
1325 (2000). Work has also been done with countries of our region and other regions
that also have national action plans, with the aim of exchanging good practices and
lessons learned in the development and implementation of these plans.
20-1473439/161

S/2020/1084

Secondly, in 2018 the Federal Network of Women Mediators with a Gender
Perspective, comprising 49 women mediators, was established. In September 2020,
this network held a meeting at which the 49 women mediators shared the actions
undertaken during the second half of 2019 and in 2020. In addition, a road map was
presented with activities to be carried out in 2020 and 2021, such as participation in
the annual meeting of the Global Alliance of Regional Women Mediator Networks
and the exchange of good practices and experiences with other networks of
women mediators.
Thirdly, the Ministry of Defence continued to increase the presence of women
in peace and humanitarian assistance missions, as well as their participation in its
decision-making bodies, by including female military personnel from the command
corps. It also carried out various activities related to dissemination, promotion and
training to increase women’s political participation in peace and security, peace
negotiation processes, conflict management and decision-making spaces in each
of these areas. It also conducted annual surveys related to post-deployment issues
to monitor the existence of gender-based rights violations and the implementation
of the information provided prior to deployment, among other topics, in order to
mainstream the gender perspective in all peacebuilding activities and humanitarian
assistance missions, including disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
activities. In addition, it undertook actions, such as the creation of a comprehensive
plan to promote policies for the prevention, detection and treatment of domestic
violence with the aim of protecting the human rights of women and girls in conflict
and post-conflict countries (including refugee camps and those in displacement
situations), especially in the face of gender-based violence and sexual violence,
promoting an environment of security and well-being.
Fourthly, the Ministry of Security continued to step up efforts to implement
and achieve increasingly better results in the women and peace and security
agenda. With regard to the peace operations in which participation included a police
component, throughout 2020 the number of women in United Nations peace missions
was maintained. Indeed, until March, when some mobility restrictions caused the
planned replacements to be affected, in the missions in which Argentina participates
with a police component, the proportion of female officers within the total number
of deployed Argentine troops increased or remained the same.
Moreover, in 2020, the Ministry succeeded in increasing the rate of women
who are receiving their predeployment training at the Peace Operations Training
Centre of the Argentine National Gendarmerie to 30 per cent of the total. Similarly,
infrastructure was adapted and modernized to continue providing housing and
improving conditions at the Centre, and 50 per cent of the permanent instructors in
matters related to peace operations at the Centre were women.
Also, at the institutional level, in 2020 the Ministry of Security created the
National Directorate of Gender Policy and maintained its training and continuing
education efforts on gender issues, both for members of the police and security
forces and for officials of the Ministry and the Integrated Gender Centres of the four
Federal Police and Security Forces.
Furthermore, at the international level, Argentina is promoting and working
with other countries on the establishment of a Network of Women Mediators of the
Southern Cone with a gender perspective, in order to strengthen the role of women
in building peace in the region. Argentina is also a member of the Group of Friends
of Women, Peace and Security within the United Nations; the national focal points
network, which was launched in September 2016; and the Elsie Initiative, which is
aimed at increasing women’s participation in peacekeeping operations.

40/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

In conclusion, Argentina reiterates its strong commitment to gender equality
and the economic empowerment of women and girls in all their diversity, as well as to
strengthening women’s participation at all levels of decision-making in international
peace and security.

20-1473441/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 20
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Armenia to the
United Nations, Mher Margaryan
I would like to thank the presidency of the Russian Federation for organizing
the Security Council meeting to mark the landmark anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. We also thank the
Secretary-General, the Executive Director of UN-Women and other speakers for their
comprehensive remarks outlining the importance of the meaningful participation of
women in promoting peace and security. We commend the personal contribution
and leadership of Secretary-General Guterres in promoting equal opportunities for
women across the United Nations system.
Resolution 1325 (2000) has been instrumental in consolidating the efforts of
the international community to promote the role of women in conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and peacemaking. It also set a normative framework for ensuring the
protection of women and girls in conflict situations. The anniversary of the adoption
of the resolution creates significant momentum to scale up practical measures for
countering all forms of violence against women and girls in conflicts and addressing
their particular protection needs.
Armenia prioritizes advancing the women and peace and security agenda
in the framework of its national policies and programmes aimed at promoting
gender equality, the political and public participation of women and their economic
empowerment. The adoption of the national action plan on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) has made national policies more coherent and coordinated to
this end.
The national action plan attaches great importance to the inclusive engagement
of all women affected by the Nagorno Karabakh conflict in peace and security
efforts. Among its focus areas are the protection of the rights of women and girls
affected by the conflict, providing special protection for displaced women and girls
and upholding their socioeconomic rights.
Twenty years after adoption of the resolution 1325 (2000), despite significant
progress in advancing the participation of women in peace processes, upholding
their rights in conflict situations and engaging women in the security sector, women
continue to be disproportionately affected by conflicts and complex humanitarian
emergencies, including in our region.
This discussion comes against the backdrop of the ongoing pre-planned largescale offensive against the people of Artsakh unleashed by Azerbaijan with the
direct military support of Turkey and involvement of the foreign terrorist fighters
and mercenaries. The military aggression was accompanied by indiscriminate
bombardment, artillery and missile strikes of the capital city Stepanakert, other
settlements and critical infrastructure of Nagorno Karabakh, resulting in the
killing of dozens of civilians, with hundreds of wounded, including many women
and children.
The actions of the Azerbaijani army have led to massive violations of human
rights law and international humanitarian law. Targeted attacks on residential
buildings, hospitals, schools and other objects of critical infrastructure have caused
a humanitarian crisis, which has affected women and girls as the most vulnerable.
On 28 October, the armed forces of Azerbaijan launched targeted strikes on the
residential areas of Stepanakert and Shushi, causing causalities among the civilian
population and completely destroying the maternity hospital of Stepanakert, in gross
violation of international humanitarian law and customary law.
42/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Perpetrated amid the coronavirus disease pandemic, Azerbaijan’s heinous
actions are aimed at denying people access to essential services and at erasing
decades-long efforts to fight disease, reduce child mortality and improve maternal
health — and, as such, reveal the criminal purpose of the leadership of Azerbaijan,
namely, to make life in Artsakh impossible. Moreover, the decision of the politicalmilitary leadership of Azerbaijan to target a maternity ward whose location was well
known to the military clearly demonstrates the genocidal intention “to destroy, in
part or in whole, a racial, ethnic, religious, or other group” by preventing births of a
particular ethnic group in Artsakh.
The international community should resolutely and unequivocally condemn
the ongoing aggression by Azerbaijan — with the involvement of Turkey and foreign
terrorist fighters — and extend its support to the efforts of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe Minsk Group co-Chairs to achieve a verifiable
ceasefire, which is crucial to ensure the protection of civilians, including women and
girls, from violence and restore their inalienable rights.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Armenia’s firm commitment to further
streamlining the empowerment of women in its reform agenda and promoting
their active participation in political and public life as important prerequisites for
promoting peace and stability.

20-1473443/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 21
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and for Women of
Australia, Marise Payne
As both Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Women, I am pleased to
present the national statement of Australia to the Security Council on this important
milestone: the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). We
welcome the Secretary-General’s call to action on the women and peace and security
agenda. We thank Russia for hosting this debate.
Calls by women activists to end conflict were pivotal to the development of
the agenda, with the recognition of women’s critical role in negotiating, building and
sustaining peace.
The women and peace and security agenda remains as relevant now as it was
20 years ago. We commend the critical role women are playing as front-line responders
as we work together against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). However, we
cannot overlook the negative and significant impacts on women during this crisis.
Growing levels of hostility against women, including political violence, conflictrelated sexual violence and intimate partner violence, have devastating effects on
victims and survivors. These are not just attacks on women; they are attacks on good
governance and democracy. They undermine communities’ resilience to conflict and
to extremism.
As we look towards building back better, we must draw on the capabilities of
all, particularly women.
Nationally, we are committed to improving the number and influence of women
in national security services, including by meeting the United Nations uniformed
gender parity targets and funding the Elsie Initiative to increase the meaningful
participation of uniformed women. We commend the United Nations Force in Cyprus
for the strong representation of women in its leadership team, including Australia’s
Major General Cheryl Pearce as Force Commander.
In our region, we strongly value our women and peace and security partnership
with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), including supporting
Viet Nam’s hosting of the Global Conference on Women and Peace and Security and
co-hosting the second ASEAN-Australia Women and peace and Security Dialogue.
Internationally, as a top-ten donor to UN-Women, we have renewed our
support for the Global Facility and the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund to
advance women’s participation, academic partnerships and women-led grassroots
organizations pivoting towards COVID-19.
Australia has played a key role in mainstreaming gender into the countering
violent extremism policy, including by co-chairing with Indonesia the Global
Counter-terrorism Forum Countering Violent Extremism Working Group, and
developing a policy toolkit to guide gender-sensitive implementation.
We are pleased to have supported the PeaceFem App through the Towards
Inclusive Peace project, an innovative digital tool to share strategies on gendersensitive peace processes with practitioners.
Australia also continues to use its voice on the global stage. As a member of
the Human Rights Council, we have consistently promoted and protected women’s
rights and gender equality in our work.
As the Secretary-General concludes in his report (S/2020/946), we must
go beyond plans and numbers to address the root causes of gender inequality and
44/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

conflict, including harmful norms and inequitable structures. We must promote and
protect women’s rights, including sexual and reproductive health and rights, and
commit to women’s meaningful participation in peacebuilding and crisis response
and prevention. As we adjust to the realities of COVID-19, Australia gives its
assurances to all that we remain committed to implementing fully the women and
peace and security agenda.

20-1473445/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 22
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Austria

to

the

We thank Russia for convening this open debate.
Austria aligns itself with the statements submitted on behalf of the European
Union (annex 38) and by the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends on Women and Peace and Security (annex 27).
Austria considers this year’s open debate particularly timely, as we are
celebrating not only the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000) but also the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action. We should seize this opportunity to take stock of the implementation and
identify the challenges that lie ahead of us.
Allow me to thank the Secretary-General for his annual report (S/2020/946),
which underlines, inter alia, the linkages between the women and peace and security
agenda and international disarmament efforts, including on nuclear disarmament —
a topic that Austria spearheads in its multilateral diplomacy. In recent years, the
gendered impact of conventional weapons has revived increasing attention. To give
an example, women are disproportionally affected by the long-term and reverberating
effects of the use of explosive weapons in populated areas. Austria therefore
encourages the Council to follow a comprehensive human-security approach in all
its deliberations.
Despite the call of the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire in response to
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, hostilities, shamefully, continue and
parties to armed conflicts persistently ignore their humanitarian law obligations with
regard to the protection of civilians. In resolution 1325 (2000), the Security Council
recognized that women and girls suffer disproportionately when international
humanitarian law is ignored by parties to armed conflict. Austria therefore calls
on the members of the Security Council to systematically mainstream the women
and peace and security agenda in all its country-specific debates and mandates for
United Nations peacekeeping and political missions. We welcome the efforts of the
Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security in this regard.
Furthermore, the Security Council should address situations of internal
conflicts where gender-based violence is systematically used to target human-rights
defenders, just as currently in Belarus. Overall, the widespread impunity for sexual
violence committed in conflict is outrageous and can no longer be banalized. We
need more decisive action to sanction such crimes. In this context, we applaud the
efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Pramila Patten,
and her team to advocate for more accountability, in particular through closer
collaboration with the International Criminal Court.
The COVID-19 pandemic and its socioeconomic consequences have increased
existing vulnerabilities and put at risk hard-won gender-equality gains. Around the
globe, we have witnessed a worrisome rise in gender-based violence. At the same
time, due to lockdowns, effective help by women grass-roots organizations has
proven to be more difficult. Therefore, at the national level, we are enhancing our
policies to combat all forms of gender-based violence, including acts of violence
committed online, in close collaboration with civil society organizations.
Austria strongly believes in the transformative power of civil society in
advancing the women and peace and security agenda. Through international
cooperation, we will pursue our financial support to UN-Women, the Women’s
Peace and Humanitarian Fund and, in particular, civil society partners to further
46/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

implement all pillars of the women and peace and security agenda together with
partner Member States. We commend the Global Network of Women Peacebuilders
and all its partner organizations at the grass-roots level for bringing the women and
peace and security agenda from the Security Council Chamber to the ground level
through localization programmes and the development of national action plans.
In order to make the voices of those first responders heard, Austria, organized
the Global Women’s Forum in Vienna in February, together with our partners from
the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund and the Global Network of Women
Peacebuilders. The discussions among more than 70 representatives of local
women’s organizations from 17 countries on priorities and challenges in the full and
effective implementation of the women and peace and security agenda resulted in
a set of concrete recommendations, which we should take into consideration in our
future work.
Twenty years after the adoption of the groundbreaking resolution 1325 (2000),
we are convinced that the focus of the international community should now centre
on its full and effective implementation. To achieve this, we do not necessarily need
new resolutions, but to act on our promises. We therefore welcome various initiatives,
such as by Germany and the United Kingdom, to accelerate implementation through
time-bound commitments. We look forward to the launch of the women, peace and
security and humanitarian action compact under the framework of the Generation
Equality Forum. More than ever, it is our conviction that women are agents of
change for peace and security. Let us actively follow up on our pledges in order to
further advance the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda in
a collective effort.

20-1473447/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 23
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Bahrain to the
United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to thank the delegation of the Russian Federation
for holding this annual debate on women and peace and security. This debate is of
great importance in the light of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and
its many repercussions for women, which are exacerbated by conflict.
I also thank His Excellency Secretary-General António Guterres and
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Under-Secretary-General and Executive Director
of UN-Women, for their valuable briefing.
This year marks the commemoration of important events related to women
and peace and security, namely, the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of
the United Nations, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action and the twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), in which the Council stresses the need to ensure the equal
participation of men and women at all levels, particularly with regard to decisionmaking and involvement in peacebuilding and peacekeeping, in view of the disasters
and conflicts afflicting humankind.
In the light of the emerging global crisis, the need to lay the foundations for
peace is more urgent than ever. We reaffirm the support of Bahrain for the SecretaryGeneral’s call in the first months of the pandemic for an immediate global ceasefire
and an international response to COVID-19.
Led by His Majesty King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa, the Kingdom of Bahrain
has made maintaining the highest levels of social security one of its national
priorities. In doing so, it supports women’s participation in decision-making and
public affairs and their role as equal partners in addressing current and future
challenges and opportunities, by promoting self-sufficiency, scientific excellence
and digital technology.
Aware that achieving gender balance supports sustainable development,
Bahrain is at an advanced stage of developing a comprehensive system to regulate
the processes of mainstreaming and ensuring equality of opportunity for men and
women. This system encompasses plans, programmes and mechanisms aimed at
supporting and integrating the needs and aspirations of women so that they may
continue their progress at the national, regional and global levels.
Under the leadership of Her Royal Highness Princess Sabeekah bint Ibrahim
Al Khalifa, Consort of the King of Bahrain, the Supreme Council for Women has
launched initiatives to provide everything necessary to meet the needs of Bahraini
women on the front lines and to ensure that they benefit from financial packages
and Government decisions to ameliorate women’s family and economic situations.
Such initiatives are in line with intensive national efforts to address the pandemic,
safeguard the gains made and strengthen the efforts of Bahrain in the area of women’s
advancement, in accordance with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
as the country continues to uphold its international obligations under the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action as well as resolution 1325 (2000).
In order to strengthen cooperation with the United Nations in supporting
women and achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, last year the Supreme
Council for Women announced the winners of the first edition of the Princess
Sabeekah Bint Ibrahim Al Khalifa Global Award for the Empowerment of Women.
48/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Her Royal Highness stressed that the award sums up, from an intellectual and
knowledge standpoint, our national experience with women’s participation and
continuing advancement in Bahrain, enabling us to place this initiative at the
disposal of the international community through UN-Women.
A believer in the important role of education in empowering women and girls,
especially those in conflict zones, Bahrain has established schools in Syrian refugee
camps in countries neighbouring Syria and in the Gaza Strip.
Moreover, Bahrain is working to eliminate practices that hinder women’s
progress and to bridge existing gaps in that regard. One example is combating
trafficking in persons; Bahrain was placed in tier one for the third consecutive year
by the United States Department of State in its report on combating trafficking
in persons, the lone country in the Middle East and North Africa region to attain
that distinction.
Lastly, we affirm that Bahrain supports all international efforts to promote
the advancement of women and achieve gender balance in all areas related to
development and humanitarian matters, so as to ensure a comprehensive response
to the coronavirus pandemic and recovery from its repercussions, as well as
to promote the contributions of women as active partners in security, peace and
sustainable justice.

20-1473449/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 24
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the
United Nations, Rabab Fatima
I wish to thank the Russian presidency for arranging this important debate
on the women and peace and security agenda and for its excellent leadership of
the Security Council this month. As we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of
the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), I congratulate the Council and all States
Members of the United Nations on their contribution to the women and peace and
security agenda.
I thank the Secretary-General for his statement (annex 1), and I take note of
his 2020 report on women and peace and security (S/2020/946). I also thank the
briefers for sharing their useful insights with us today.
Bangladesh aligns itself with the statement submitted by Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (annex 27).
I wish to recall the pioneering role of Bangladesh, as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council, in the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, in October 2000. It was during Bangladesh’s presidency in
March 2020, under the leadership of Ambassador Anwarul K. Chowdhury, that press
statement SC/6816 was issued on 8 March 2000 — International Women’s Day —
recognizing the role of women in peacemaking and peacekeeping. That eventually
led to the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
There have been significant qualitative changes in United Nations
peacekeeping with the participation of women peacekeepers. Women’s participation
has been found to make peacekeeping more humane, robust and sustainable. Women
peacekeepers have a different level of outreach with women, children and families
and can bring different life experiences and perspectives to the communities that
they serve.
With the changing nature of conflicts and the wider responsibilities that
peacekeepers are undertaking, the utility of women in uniform is increasing, with
specific roles that are more suited to women peacekeepers. Bangladesh also had a
pioneering role in deploying women to peacekeeping missions.
The feedback that we get from our women peacekeepers only strengthens our
conviction in the indispensability of women in peacekeeping operations. Women
peacekeepers contribute to reducing gender-based violence and to preventing
conflict in areas where they serve. They provide a higher sense of security,
especially to women and children, who often come forward and share their suffering
and miseries with women peacekeepers. That builds greater trust between the host
communities and the peacekeepers, which has an important bearing on the success
of peace operations.
Women peacekeepers have proved to be particularly effective in post-conflict
settings where sexual violence is rampant and mostly not addressed. On many
occasions, the victims, who are usually silenced by the societal norms, have gathered
courage and spoken out to the women peacekeepers. We all know that breaking the
silence is the first step in the journey to justice.
In line with its firm commitment to advancing women’s rights and gender
equality, Bangladesh adopted its first national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000)
in 2019. Our national action plan recognizes the adverse effects of conflict on
women and girls and prioritizes gender equality in all aspects of our engagement in
international peace and security, including peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
50/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

As a leading troop- and police-contributing country, Bangladesh is also
one of the front-runners in sending women peacekeepers, with more than 1,700
deployed in various missions. We are also taking measures to deploy more women
officers to fulfil the target set by the United Nations of 15 per cent staff officers/
military observers in United Nations peacekeeping missions. Along with other
partners, we are championing the women, peace and security priorities of the
Action for Peacekeeping.
We strongly support the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy 2018-2028 of
the Department of Peace Operations and the Secretary-General’s efforts towards
ensuring gender parity in senior appointments under the system-wide strategy
on gender parity. However, there is clearly much more to be done in enhancing
the number of not only women peacekeepers on the ground but also women in
leadership positions in peace negotiations. We earnestly hope that, in keeping with
his commitment to achieving gender parity in women’s representation in senior
positions in the United Nations system, the Secretary-General will also appoint
women as Force Commanders/Special Representatives of the Secretary-General in
field operations and political missions.
Increasing women’s leadership in peacekeeping would require a holistic
approach to women’s role in peace as a whole, in both civilian and military capacities.
Women need to participate equally and meaningfully at all stages of the peace
process, from the making of peace to its implementation on the ground. They also
need to be adequately trained to take up higher responsibilities. In the same vein,
ensuring a women-friendly space and environment in the mission setting is also an
important prerequisite to having more women in peacekeeping.
Implementation of the women and peace and security agenda is the key to
achieving all the aforementioned elements. While national Governments need to
accelerate their efforts by developing and implementing their respective national
action plans, the international community, especially the United Nations, also
has an important role to play. The women and peace and security agenda must
be internalized across the United Nations system, particularly in United Nations
country programmes. Let us step up our collective efforts to that end. In that regard,
Bangladesh underscores the importance of the increased, sustained, flexible and
coordinated funding for the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
women and peace and security agenda.
Bangladesh has been making its best efforts to ensure women’s empowerment
and participation in all spheres of our lives. In our endeavour to further strengthen
the women and peace and security agenda, we are willing to learn from the best
practices around the world and are ready to share our experiences with others.

20-1473451/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 25
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Brazil to the
United Nations, Ronaldo Costa Filho
The present debate is both critical and timely, and for that Brazil thanks
and congratulates Ambassador Vassily Nebenzia and the Russian Federation on
this initiative.
The celebration of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) is a milestone and an achievement of which this body should be proud.
As a testament to its ground-breaking nature, suffice it to say that since then, as
many as 10 follow-up resolutions have been adopted by the Security Council, the
most recent of which was endorsed by the current composition of the Council under
the Indonesian presidency, whom we also congratulate. Resolution 2538 (2020),
the first resolution devoted exclusively to women peacekeepers, is definitely an
important step.
The women and peace and security agenda is primarily driven by the
mission of maintaining international peace and security. Women peacekeepers and
mediators are valuable actors in peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. It is
a well-established fact that the greater the number of women negotiators, mediators,
peacekeepers and police officers, the better the chance that peace deals will be struck
and last longer and that peacekeeping missions will be successful.
Women Blue Helmets are also able to reach out to more segments of the
local population. The element of added diversity is conducive to more efficiency in
mandate implementation, and their presence on the ground encourages reporting of
cases of sexual violence.
The Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative recognizes the
significance of the women and peace and security agenda as one of its constitutive
pillars. It remains incumbent on all stakeholders involved in peacekeeping, not least
troop-contributing countries, to implement its commitments.
One area where progress must be expanded is meeting the targets of the
Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy 2018-2028. Brazil’s National Action Plan on
Women, Peace and Security commits to increasing the proportion of women military
and police officers in peacekeeping from the current levels in order to achieve the
Strategy’s targets, in which we are glad to report to have succeeded in several cases
this year.
The service of two of Brazil’s women peacekeepers also makes their
country especially proud. Commanders Marcia Braga and Carla Araújo were both
distinguished with the United Nations Military Gender Advocate of the Year Award
for their innovative work promoting mixed teams and striving to reduce sexual
violence in the Central African Republic. Such recognition stands as a testament to
the competence of those two officers, as well as to Brazil’s commitment to ensuring
a broader participation of women in peacekeeping.
With regard to sexual exploitation and abuse, Brazil adheres entirely to the
Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy, which we envisage as a starting point and
as a coherent conceptual framework to tackle this lingering scourge in the context
of peacekeeping. Brazil is proud of the overall track record of our peacekeepers in
their performance over more than 70 years under the United Nations flag. President
Jair Bolsonaro has recently joined the Secretary-General’s circle of leadership on
the prevention of and response to sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations
operations, in continuation of our unwavering commitment to this issue.
52/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

The international community celebrates the anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) at an especially challenging juncture. We must strengthen
our determination in perfecting the mechanisms of preventive diplomacy, conflict
prevention, peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. International efforts to
fight the pandemic must steel our collective resolve in tackling threats to international
peace and security, for which we congratulate the Council on its adoption of
resolution 2532 (2020), calling for a global ceasefire to allow for humanitarian aid
during the pandemic.
Moreover, we must consider that, among its various impacts on international
peace and security, the coronavirus disease pandemic creates an ever-more
challenging environment for survivors of sexual violence. The Council must remain
ever vigilant regarding the fight against sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations, especially in these troubled times.
As we continue the celebrations for the twentieth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000), Brazil would like to commend its neighbours in the Americas for the
past year’s efforts to develop a regional perspective on women and peace and security.
In that regard, we congratulate the efforts of the Women and Peace and Security
Focal Points Network under the Canadian and Uruguayan presidency and highlight
our determination to continue working with our regional partners to advance the
agenda in the Americas.
This occasion is also auspicious for the international community, and the
Security Council in particular, to reflect on the accomplishments attained over
the past two decades and on the obstacles that the women and peace and security
agenda still faces as we plough ahead. Member States can count on Brazil as one the
staunchest advocates of that agenda.

20-1473453/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 26
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Bulgaria to the
United Nations
Bulgaria aligns itself with the statement submitted by the European Union
(annex 38).
This is a seminal year for the rights of women and girls. In October, we
commemorated the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action. Moreover, 2020 also marks two decades since the adoption of the pivotal
resolution 1325 (2000). Those two anniversaries epitomize some of the highlights of
the progress made throughout the past quarter of a century. Yet they also come as
reminder that we need to take stock of the implementation in the field of women’s
rights and empowerment, especially in terms of participation in the peace and
security pillar, since, when considering the impact of armed conflicts and violence,
we always need to follow the gender perspective.
This year is also of landmark importance for Bulgaria, as in March we
joined the universal consensus on gender equality as the main predictor of peace
by adopting our first national action plan on women and peace and security for the
period 2020-2025. That critical step objectivizes my country’s commitment to the
women and peace and security agenda.
The impact of the coronavirus disease has proved to be unquestionably
gendered. While the pandemic has deepened security challenges, it has also
exacerbated risks for women in vulnerable situation, in particular gender-based
and domestic violence, and limited access to essential services, such as sexual and
reproductive health and rights, social protection, education, nutrition, full access to
clean water, including safe drinking water, sanitation and hygiene.
Bulgaria recognizes the achievements in the field of women and peace and
security in the 20 years since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and stands
as a staunch supporter of the full, equal and meaningful participation of women,
especially in the frame of peace processes. Nevertheless, we acknowledge that there
are still implementation gaps, since women are still highly underrepresented when
it comes to decision-making and processes related to peace and security. In that
regard, Bulgaria welcomes the adoption of resolution 2538 (2020), which is guided
by the principles of resolution 1325 (2000), and aims to strengthen action on women
and peace and security. The resolution firmly supports all efforts meant to ensure the
full and equal participation of women at all levels, ranging from conflict prevention
to post-conflict reconstruction, peace and security, as well as the prevention and
elimination of sexual violence in conflict.
My country attaches great importance to civil society organizations and
recognizes their crucial role in the implementation and the very creation of the
women and peace and security agenda. In that regard, reprisals and threats against
women human rights defenders, women peacebuilders, women political leaders and
activists should be condemned in the strongest terms, while addressing the shrinking
space for civil society.
Bulgaria remains committed to the promotion of gender equality and the
protection and fulfilment of the human rights of women and girls. Our view is that
we do not necessarily need new Security Council resolutions to achieve that goal.
At this point, we should follow up on our promises through the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action, the International Conference on Population and Development and the
outcomes of its review conferences.
54/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 27
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Canada to the
United Nations on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security
[Original: English and French]
We are submitting this statement on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security, an informal network of 63 Member States, representing all five
regional groups of the United Nations — Afghanistan, Albania, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Botswana, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Ghana, Guinea, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kenya, the Republic of Korea, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Mali, Mexico, Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Rwanda, Senegal, Singapore,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tanzania, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom, Uruguay, the United States of America and
Zambia — and the European Union. The Group welcomes the most recent report
of the Secretary-General as well as the recommendations it contains (S/2020/946).
As we mark the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), the Group recognizes the progress made as well as the opportunity and need
for far greater implementation of all pillars of the women and peace and security
agenda. The Group urges Member States to fully implement the provisions of all
previous Security Council resolutions pertaining to the women and peace and
security agenda and to reinforce their efforts in this regard. The Group underscores
the importance of ensuring that commitments made are kept and accompanied by
appropriate accountability frameworks.
The Group recognizes and pays tribute to the critical role played by civil
society in the creation and ongoing implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda. Now more than ever, we must create enabling spaces for civil
society’s important voices and critical perspectives to be heard, considered and
acted upon, including in the Security Council. The Group condemns in the strongest
possible terms the ongoing and, in many cases, increasing intimidation, threats and
violence against women peacebuilders, women political leaders, women community
leaders and women human-rights defenders. This violence is unacceptable, and it
must stop. The Group urges all Member States to fulfil their obligations to that end
and further urges all Member States to unequivocally call out speech and acts that
fuel gender-based discrimination, stigma and violence, including in the digital space.
The Group welcomes ongoing efforts undertaken by the Security Council to
more systematically include women from diverse backgrounds in its discussions and
urges its members to fully integrate women and peace and security into all of its
work and outcomes, including on country-specific situations and mission mandates.
The Group similarly welcomes continuing efforts across the United Nations system
and calls on United Nations departments and entities, including their senior officials,
to deliver on their 10 core commitments included in the 2019 report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/800). The Group emphasizes that women’s participation in peace
negotiations is not only desirable; it is essential to achieving more sustainable peace.
As such, the Group calls on the United Nations to aim towards making women’s full,
equal and meaningful participation a requirement in all mediation teams, political
transitions and the peace processes it leads or co-leads. The Group also encourages
Member States and the Security Council to follow up on the recommendations
addressed to them in the reports of the Secretary-General.
20-1473455/161

S/2020/1084

As highlighted in this year’s report, the Group emphasizes how increased,
predictable, sustained and flexible funding for women and peace and security is key
to making the agenda a reality. Despite some positive examples, we are concerned
by the relative stagnation in financing for women’s organizations, especially as
compared to the trillions of dollars spent every year on peace and security. The
financial situation of many women’s organizations has been further weakened as
a result of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. More must be done to
support them.
The twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) comes
at a time when the COVID-19 pandemic continues to wreak havoc worldwide, with
its impacts exacerbated for women and girls, including increased violence, impacts
on safety and livelihoods and exclusion from the design, implementation and
monitoring of response efforts. We remain outraged by reports of increased sexual
and gender-based violence against women and girls during COVID-19, including in
armed conflict and post-conflict situations, which undermines the fragile gains on
gender equality and women and girls’ human rights. Recalling the responsibilities
of parties to armed conflict to respect fully international law applicable to the
rights and protection of women and girls, the Group once again echoes the call
of the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire in response to COVID-19, and we
underscore the importance of human rights-based and gender-responsive measures
against the pandemic.
In this particularly challenging context, it becomes even more imperative to
seize on this anniversary year, which also marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, to call on the international community
to redouble our efforts to ensure the full, equal and meaningful participation of
women in all aspects of peace and security, to ensure women’s rights are promoted
and protected and to fill the gaps in the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.

56/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 28
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Canada

to

the

[Original: English and French]
This anniversary year has been a year like no other. While we had planned
to celebrate progress since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), 20 years ago, the
year 2020 has instead — ironically — proven how fragile this progress has been.
Hard-fought gains in advancing gender equality and inclusion have, in some
instances, been eroded in just a few months, due to the coronavirus disease and
inadequate pandemic response. Women, racialized and marginalized communities
are suffering disproportionately from shifting government priorities, increased
domestic and sexual and gender-based violence, limited access to sexual and
reproductive health care, and economic insecurity.
At the same time, women peacebuilders and human-rights defenders are
demonstrating once again that they are essential leaders in emergencies and play
key roles in addressing basic needs, defending human rights and preventing further
conflict and instability.
This year we have also witnessed blatant, and often violent, expressions of
racism, and are reminded how deep-rooted gender-based discrimination, violence
and racism are. It is clearer than ever that we need profound structural change.
As Canada develops our feminist foreign policy and implements our second
national action plan on women and peace and security, we are striving to address
the persistent inequalities among women, men, girls and boys, and to transform
power relations and discriminatory social, political, legal and economic systems
and structures.
Canada stresses that our collective focus must be on addressing critical gaps
in the full implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. On this
twentieth anniversary, women and girls are counting on us to increase our resolve,
not diminish it. This includes support for and protection of women peacebuilders and
human-rights defenders, support for sexual and reproductive health and rights, and
for a more inclusive agenda.
We commend the Security Council for inviting civil society activists to share
their expertise with Council members. Recommendations must now be translated
into informed decisions for action. Listening to women peacebuilders and humanrights defenders ensures our policies, programming and interventions are attuned to
the realities on the ground.
As co-Chair of the Women and Peace and Security Focal Points Network
together with Uruguay, Canada has heard directly from women peacebuilders
from all over the world. More than anything else, they have clearly articulated that
they lack sustainable, reliable financial support. To address this important gap,
Canada increased its financial contributions, including to the Women’s Peace and
Humanitarian Fund and the Equality Fund initiative — a first-of-its-kind global
platform that brings together government, philanthropic and private sectors and civil
society actors to create a sustainable source of funding for women’s organizations
and movements for years to come.
But we need to do more. That is why Canada will be launching a number
of new initiatives, including a dedicated funding envelope focused on women
peacebuilders, with an emphasis on supporting efforts at the grassroots level.
20-1473457/161

S/2020/1084

Canada is also pleased to serve as co-lead of the Action Coalition on Feminist
Movements and Leadership, and as a catalytic member of the Women, Peace and
Security and Humanitarian Action Compact — both important initiatives under
the Generation Equality Forum. We look forward to working with partners to
accelerate progress.
We must hold ourselves and each other accountable for turning words into
action. This includes the commitments made by United Nations entities operating
in fragile, conflict and crisis-affected settings to consult and partner with diverse
women’s civil society actors to inform their analysis, planning and programming.
If implemented, these commitments hold the promise of improved outcomes for
sustainable peace.
We must all track our efforts, evaluate our results and collaborate in exchanging
best practices. We should not underestimate the power of impact-driven, evidencebased action plans and initiatives in this regard.
For example, as lead of the Call to Action on Protection from Gender-Based
Violence in Emergencies, Canada has launched the Call to Action Road Map for
2021-2025. With an increased focus on gender equality, the empowerment of women
and girls, localization, intersectionality and the humanitarian-development-peace
nexus, the Road Map provides us with opportunities to make strong commitments
that align with the women and peace and security agenda.
Under the framework of the Elsie Initiative for Women in Peace Operations,
Canada and Norway have funded the development of a barrier assessment tool, to
assist police and military institutions in enhancing their integration and deployment
of uniformed women. This tool has been made public, with funding available through
UN-Women’s Elsie Initiative Fund to complete these assessments. Increasing the
meaningful participation of uniformed women in United Nations peace operations
is a priority.
Inclusion is at the core of the women and peace and security agenda, whether
it be in peace operations, at the grassroots, at the negotiating table or in decisionmaking processes; sustainable peace cannot coexist with inequality and exclusion.
Canada believes that working together, with smart investments of our energies and
resources, and a clear-eyed focus on our goals, we can and we will bring about the
transformational change that resolution 1325 (2000) has set in motion.

58/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 29
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Chile to the
United Nations, Milenko Esteban Skoknic Tapia
[Original: Spanish]
Chile is a member of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security
and associates itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the Group
(annex 27). We would like to contribute some additional remarks to this debate in our
national capacity.
The impacts of the coronavirus disease pandemic, together with other
global challenges, have further complicated already-difficult situations of conflict,
humanitarian crisis and peacebuilding. Twenty years on from the historic adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), and amid an increasingly complex global context, the
women and peace and security agenda is more important than ever. This agenda
has taught us major lessons on the differing impact of crisis situations on women,
and on the importance of placing women at the centre of response, recovery and
peacebuilding efforts.
Resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions on women and peace and
security constitute a foundational normative and political framework for protecting
the rights of women against gender-based violence and abuse and discrimination
in crisis and conflict situations. They also provide a road map for enhancing the
participation of women at all levels and in all phases of crisis and emergency
response — this includes in relevant institutions, operations and missions, as well as
of local women in negotiating and peacebuilding processes and in peace and security
decision-making at all levels.
We reiterate Chile’s commitment to this agenda, while recognizing the
importance of the tools developed under its auspices. We were among the first countries
in our region to develop, in 2009, a national action plan for its implementation. In
2015, we launched the second national action plan, which incorporated indicators
for monitoring and evaluation against goals and commitments, in line with
recommendations of the Secretary-General.
Chile is highly vulnerable to natural disasters, which, like other emergencies,
have a disproportionate impact on women. We are currently in the process of
developing our third national action plan, considering the relevance of the lessons
learned from, and tools developed under, the women and peace and security agenda
to emergency and disaster situations.
Another component of this agenda we deem particularly important is the
development of regional networks of women mediators and the established in 2019 of
the Global Alliance of Women Mediators. These reflect the aspirations, commitment
and participation and leadership capacities of women in peace processes.
Our region of Latin America and the Caribbean does not yet have such a
network linking women peace and security mediators and peacebuilders. That is
why we welcomed, and are actively participating in, the initiative of Argentina and
UN-Women in Latin America to establish a network of women mediators for the
southern cone.
We reiterate the need to address and eradicate the scourge of sexual and
gender-based violence, including in conflict situations, as well as in the context
of the pandemic, and must ensure that those responsible are held to account for
their actions.
20-1473459/161

S/2020/1084

In conclusion, we renew our commitment to the women and peace and security
agenda, and reiterate its centrality and relevance to international peace and security,
conflict prevention, peace processes and peacebuilding.

60/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 30
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations, Guillermo Fernández De Soto Valderrama
The twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) is an opportunity to
reiterate our political commitment to gender equality. Having recognized that the
achievement of a peaceful and inclusive society must be based on the promotion of
the political and economic empowerment of women in order to achieve the principles
of legality, entrepreneurship and equity, Colombia has been a living example of
resolution 1325 (2000).
Colombia has been working on the implementation of the gender perspective
established in the 2016 Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace, specifically through the materialization of the 51 gender
indicators of the Government’s implementation framework.
President Iván Duque Márquez has been emphatic in highlighting those
51 indicators as the path to implementing that approach in a cross-cutting manner.
The participation of women in peacebuilding is a priority for my Government, as
it contributes to the transformations proposed by the “Peace with legality” policy
with regard to economic autonomy, the generation of dignified workspaces and other
conditions in order to end the cycle of violence that violates women’s rights. That is
particularly true for rural women.
Women’s participation is fundamental at both the national and territorial levels.
At the national level, the Special Body for the Gender Perspective in Peace was set
up, with the representation of women’s organizations and platforms from different
sectors and backgrounds of the social movement in Colombia. At the territorial level,
more than 65,000 women participated in the formulation of the development plans
with a territorial focus.
To combat violence against women, my country is working on cultural and
institutional transformation. In the face of gender-based violence, we must change
social and institutional tolerance practices in order to ensure the safety of women and
prevent the recurrence of violence. That is why it is important to draw up guidelines
for establishing protocols for the prevention of sexual harassment and gender-based
violence and providing care for its victims. We have been working on that on an
inter-institutional basis.
Additionally, Colombia has been working on the promotion of legal economic
opportunities for women in areas that have traditionally been co-opted by illegal
economies, primarily drug trafficking and illegal mining.
The impact of violence against women, in terms of sexual violence and forced
displacement, is recognized globally, but very little has been said about the economic
and property violence suffered by women exposed to the control of illegal armed
groups and illegal economies. That is why we insist that ensuring their security can
contribute to their empowerment and economic autonomy.
I would be remiss if I did not mention the impact of the pandemic in relation
to gender-based violence. To that end, the Government has been working on ways
to mitigate the impact of the coronavirus disease, including specific guidelines to
prevent and deal with that violence.
The women and peace and security agenda is a priority for my Government,
and we will continue to share our lessons learned and challenges in order to continue
to make progress in making this agenda a reality.

20-1473461/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 31
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Costa Rica
to the United Nations, Maritza Chan Valverde
I would like to express my sincere appreciation to the Russian Federation for
convening today’s open debate. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his tireless efforts to address the implementation of this important resolution, and
wish to welcome today’s briefers.
The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) was a landmark moment in the history
of the United Nations, representing a widespread normative shift in how we talk
about women in the context of international peace and security. Resolution 1325
(2000) called on Member States to move women to front and centre in peace and
security processes, to stop talking only about women as victims and, instead, to
begin conversations about the importance of women’s agency and participation.
Resolution 1325 (2000) established a bold agenda in which gender equality was
recognized as the foundation of peaceful and inclusive societies.
However, a significant gap remains between our good words, agreements,
discussions and events, on the one hand, and our actions, on the other. As a
consequence, change — as stated by the Secretary-General last year — is coming
at a pace that is too slow for women and girls whose lives depend on it, and for the
effectiveness of our efforts to maintain international peace and security.
Costa Rica therefore welcomes the stress placed on implementing our common
commitments and delivering fully on the ambition of the existing framework of
women and peace and security resolutions, rather than producing more texts. In that
regard, Costa Rica would like to focus on one particular issue.
The original intent of resolution 1325 (2000) was not simply to promote female
soldiers, but rather to reap the rewards obtained when women become equitable
participants in all peace and security deliberations and solutions. That includes
women’s representation at international meetings and multilateral forums dealing
with arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation.
Research has shown that at meetings of international treaties and processes
that address disarmament and weapons issues, only about one quarter of participants
are likely to be women. Less than a fifth of statements made are likely to be given
by a woman. In many instances, almost half of all national delegations are composed
entirely of men, despite the fact that women often suffer disproportionate or
differential harm from the development, use and trade of weapons.
It is crucial to confront women’s underrepresentation and other patterns
of marginalization in those forums, alongside other objectives, such as ensuring
the participation of those who have been most directly impacted by the trade
and proliferation of weapons, and the full consideration of their humanitarian
consequences. Costa Rica encourages States, in accordance with their commitments
under resolution 1325 (2000), to intensify their efforts to fulfil this promising
aspiration and to reaffirm our commitment to promoting the leadership and full,
equal and significant participation of women in all disarmament processes —
including meetings that are held virtually — and to strengthening analyses and
approaches that take into account the gendered impact of weapons and weapons
systems. Empowering women and increasing women’s participation remain among
the most effecting tools for advancing global peace and security.

62/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 32
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Czech Republic to the
United Nations
The Czech Republic aligns itself with the statements submitted on behalf of
the European Union (annex 38) and the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security (annex 27).
This year we celebrate several important gender-related anniversaries. We
commemorated the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action during the recent special high-level meeting of the General Assembly.
Twenty years ago, resolution 1325 (2000) became the first step in creating what
we today call the women and peace and security agenda. Resolution 1325 (2000),
on women and peace and security, and the nine follow-up resolutions have brought
women’s full and meaningful participation to the very centre of both peacebuilding
and conflict prevention.
We thank the Secretary-General for his timely report on women and peace
and security, in which the Secretary-General states the regrettable fact that
“[w]e still live in a world where women face exclusion from peace and
political processes; where the number of attacks against women human
rights defenders, humanitarians and peacebuilders continues to rise; where
the attempted erosion of international human rights standards persists; and
where xenophobia, racism, intolerance, homophobia, transphobia and violent
misogyny continue to spread.” (S/2019/800, para. 3)
The Secretary-General’s statement also presented a range of
concerning statistics to help us identify some of the implementation gaps of
resolution 1325 (2000).
According to the report, between 1992 and 2019, only 6 per cent of mediators,
6 per cent of signatories and 13 per cent of negotiators of peace processes were
women. Furthermore, between 2015 and 2019, only 11 ceasefires and 26 other peace
agreements included gender provisions. That shows that women’s participation
remains disproportionately low and that women’s needs and voices are still not
adequately reflected.
That is true even 20 years after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
which recognized the role of women in conflict prevention, peacebuilding and
peacekeeping, and called on us to take action.
This sobering reality has indeed been aggravated by the coronavirus disease
pandemic, which has not only deepened pre-existing inequalities but also, in many
ways, now jeopardizes the fragile progress made in some areas.
As for the Czech Republic, we are meeting our commitments. As we speak,
the second national action plan, for the years 2021-2025, is being approved by our
Government and will be adopted by the end of this year. It sets out general goals, as
well as specific targets and concrete measures, to reach those targets. The preparation
of that document was a joint effort of various stakeholders, including the Government,
the non-governmental sector and academia. The document is the primary national
instrument to strengthen accountability and improve monitoring of our progress in
implementing the women and peace and security agenda. Mainstreaming the gender
agenda and achieving the women and peace and security agenda continue to be
among our top priorities.

20-1473463/161

S/2020/1084

We would like to once again urge all States that have not yet done so to join
more than 80 Member States in adopting and acting upon their national action plans
in order to improve the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda.
We must all redouble our efforts to make sure that the solemn promise of the women
and peace and security agenda is fulfilled.

64/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 33
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Denmark to the
United Nations, Martin Bille Hermann
The Nordic countries — Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and Denmark —
welcome the most recent report of the Secretary-General on women and peace
and security (S/2020/946), as well as its recommendations. We commend the
United Nations on efforts to enhance accountability, and commit to doing our part.
Twenty years after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we recommit to
stepping up our efforts to ensure the full implementation of all resolutions and all
pillars of the women and peace and security agenda. In that regard, we welcome
the Compact on Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action, as part
of the Generation Equality Forum, the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund’s
Rapid Response Window for the deployment of women to peace processes and the
Commitment 2025 initiative.
Inclusive peace processes are more likely to produce sustainable results
responsive to a diverse set of needs. Yet the numbers in the Secretary-General report
speak for themselves. While progress has been achieved in many areas, women remain
underrepresented at all stages of mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and in
political processes in general. Much remains to be done. I would like to mention a
few concrete examples.
First, women need to be part of peace talk delegations. The representation of
women in dialogue and mediation efforts are key to ensuring a sustainable outcome.
Secondly, peace negotiations should be informed by a gender perspective in
order to ensure that the needs of the whole population are considered.
Thirdly, reporting from conflict situations should include gender analysis and
sex-disaggregated data.
Fourthly, consultations with women’s organizations should be conducted
regularly. We need to link local initiatives to formal peace talks. Security Council
briefings from women civil society representatives help create informed decisions.
Fifthly, security assessments need to address the security of women, including
conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence.
Sixthly, security sector reform, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration processes should integrate a gender perspective to achieve inclusive
political transitions.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has exacerbated conflicts
and inequalities worldwide. We should not let it result in a setback for hard-won
progress on women’s and girls’ rights. We must work to ensure that our societies
emerge more resilient, equal and inclusive. The Nordic countries remain particularly
concerned about the Secretary-General report’s clear demonstration of a global rise
in sexual and gender-based violence and the increased risk of sexual exploitation
and abuse as a direct consequence of the COVID-19 crisis. The pandemic constitutes
a great challenge to women’s sexual and reproductive health and rights. Ensuring
the fundamental rights of women and girls is key to promoting their full, equal
and meaningful participation and representation. Moreover, there is a pressing
urgency for creating a safe environment for women peacebuilders and human rights
defenders. That is our duty as Member States.
The Nordic countries were among the first to launch a national action plan
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). National action plans remain a key
20-1473465/161

S/2020/1084

tool, but if we are to ensure accountability, they must be followed up with concrete
and tangible efforts to support women and girls living in conflict-affected areas.
Political will and sufficient resources are needed to speed up the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). The Nordic countries strongly urge all States Members
of the United Nations to put women at the front and centre of their peace and
security efforts in conflict prevention and humanitarian responses — from the very
start of a peace dialogue to the implementation of a peace accord. We call on the
United Nations to ensure gender parity on its mediation teams, and to take concrete
steps towards women’s full, equal and meaningful participation in all peace processes
and political transitions in which it has a role, as well as in the peace processes it
leads or co-leads. It is not only the right thing to do, it will also promote sustainable
and lasting peace.

66/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 34
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ecuador to the
United Nations, Cristian Espinosa Cañizares
[Original: Spanish]
I would first like to highlight the great work carried out by your delegation,
Sir, during your presidency of the Security Council for this month of October. I
thank you, in particular, for having convened this open debate to commemorate
the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, which reaffirmed the valuable role of women in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts, negotiations, consolidation and peacekeeping.
In that respect, the Ecuadorian State has a solid legal framework that
guarantees the validity, exercise and enforceability of women’s rights, which in
turn are based on two fundamental pillars: the Constitution and the international
instruments ratified by the State.
The Constitution establishes that the armed forces are an institution for the
protection of citizens’ rights, freedoms and guarantees. That framework includes a
gender perspective in the defence policy agenda and promotes policies for gender
parity. Through those instruments, Ecuador also implements resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1889 (2009).
Furthermore, our national development plan recognizes the equal participation
of women and men in public and private life and incorporates a gender perspective
in a cross-cutting manner.
On numerous occasions, the Council, the General Assembly, the SecretaryGeneral and Member States have expressed their views on the relevance and
invaluable contribution of women to the promotion of peace and security. At the
end of this first year of the decade of action, we must give a definitive boost to
the Organization’s efforts in this area, including the ongoing review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture.
Ecuador actively supports the objectives of resolution 1325 (2000), such as
increasing the participation of women and incorporating a gender perspective into
all the peace and security efforts of the United Nations.
Ecuador also supports and promotes the implementation of special measures —
by all parties to conflicts — to protect women and girls from violence in crisis and
post-conflict situations.
In recent years, following the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we have
witnessed important progress at both the international and the local levels. The
participation of women in the Ecuadorian Armed Forces has quadrupled since the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). In recent years, we have
also encouraged greater participation of women soldiers in peacekeeping missions.
On 28 August, we had the honour of co-sponsoring resolution 2538 (2020),
which calls on the Secretary-General to continue to implement the System-Wide
Strategy on Gender Parity and Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy 2018-2028.
Ecuador is very concerned that the crisis generated by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic has highlighted vulnerabilities and inequalities. It will take
time to know for certain the full impact of the crisis, but their general effects are
already clear: huge losses of lives and livelihoods, and deepening poverty and
hunger. The consequences of COVID-19 will be profound and lasting, and they risk
reversing decades of progress.
20-1473467/161

S/2020/1084

This has a disproportionate impact on women. We will not be able to achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
if we do not preserve and consolidate the gains we have made. We must also ensure
international solidarity to promote recovery through policies that are gender-sensitive
and ecologically sustainable, and promote peaceful, safe and resilient societies.
This year, we also commemorate the seventy-second anniversary of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
Charter of the United Nations and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Fourth World
Conference on Women. But what better way to commemorate those milestones than
by implementing them effectively? In that context, Ecuador reiterates its commitment
to continuing to promote gender equality and the empowerment of women, as
well as their participation in peacebuilding efforts and in processes to enhance
international security.

68/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 35

Statement by the Permanent Representative of Egypt to the
United Nations, Mohamed Edrees
At the outset, I would like to thank the Russian Federation for organizing
this open debate to celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000).
On this occasion, it is important to recall the African role in placing the
women and peace and security agenda on the Security Council agenda. Egypt praises
all African efforts to fully implement the women and peace and security agenda
in Africa.
In that regard, it is worthy to highlight that the African continent was the first
to commemorate the twentieth anniversary of this resolution. In its capacity as Chair
of the African Union Peace and Security Council, Egypt convened a meeting early
this month dedicated to commemorating that paramount resolution and reviewing
its implementation.
Egypt believes that adopting women and peace and security action plans is not
sufficient. Adequate resources should be allocated to the implementation of those
action plans. Egypt stresses the importance of lending assistance to African States,
upon their request, to build capacities and implement these ambitious actions plans,
especially for States suffering through or emerging from armed conflicts.
The President of the Arab Republic of Egypt was one of the first leaders to
join the Circle of Leadership initiative to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse in
United Nations operations. Raising awareness of sexual exploitation and abuse is an
integral part of the comprehensive training received by the Egyptian forces prior to
their deployment in peacekeeping operations.
Egypt takes pride in initiating and championing the negotiations on General
Assembly resolution 71/278, adopted on 20 March 2017, which advocated for a
system-wide response, comprising both United Nations and non-United Nations
personnel, aimed at forging a collective commitment to the zero-tolerance policy
on sexual exploitation and abuse throughout the United Nations by prioritizing
prevention, promoting accountability and providing justice for victims.
The Cairo International Center for Conflict Resolution, Peacekeeping
and Peacebuilding and Egypt’s National Council for Women continue to provide
capacity-building trainings for Egyptian stakeholders, as well as relevant officials in
the sisterly African countries.
We also stress the importance of ensuring the effective contribution of women
to peacebuilding. The global alliance of regional networks of female mediators is an
appropriate platform for stronger advocacy in this area.
Egypt is keen to stress the critical importance of ensuring the necessary balance
for the implementation of the four pillars of the agenda — prevention, protection,
participation and relief and recovery — while ensuring national ownership and taking
into consideration the cultural and societal specificities of the various countries in
armed conflict or emerging from it.
In conclusion, Egypt calls for renewing our political and moral commitment
to further supporting and empowering women during and after armed conflicts.
Women are critical during the transitional period from conflict to development. Their
empowerment is a must for a healthy and coherent society striving towards sustainable
peace. In that regard, Egypt welcomes the Peacebuilding Commission’s efforts to
adopt the System-Wide Strategy on Gender Parity, as well as the Commission’s
allocation of a portion of the Peacebuilding Fund to women’s empowerment in postconflict countries.

20-1473469/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 36
Statement by the Permanent Representative of El Salvador to the
United Nations, Egriselda González López
[Original: Spanish]
El Salvador aligns itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (annex 27), of which it is a member.
My country emphasizes its commitment to the development, implementation
and fulfilment of the women and peace and security agenda, while reaffirming
its conviction that women, in all their diversity, are active agents of peace and
development, as well as protagonists in the prevention of conflict and in the search
for effective and efficient responses to current and future challenges.
This year, which marks not only the twentieth anniversary since the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), but also the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action, a document that focuses on women and armed
conflict and recognizes the link between peace and the advancement of women, who
are a vital force for community leadership, conflict resolution and the promotion
of lasting peace at all levels. El Salvador recognizes the progress made in the
implementation of both instruments and the importance of urgently addressing the
remaining challenges, particularly in such a complex situation.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has highlighted the importance
of fulfilling the commitments set out in resolution 1325 (2000). In addition to its
devastating impact on health, the crisis, which has exposed existing inequalities and
vulnerabilities, is having profound social, economic and political consequences, with
significant challenges to peace and security, as well as the possibility of triggering
or intensifying violence, exacerbating gender inequality and reversing the peace
gains of recent years.
El Salvador expresses its deep concern about the serious impact that the
pandemic has had on women and girls. From health to the economy to security
and social protection, the effects of the pandemic, like those of conflict, have a
differential and disproportionate impact on women and girls.
Since gender-based violence has increased considerably in the current context,
with many increases of over 25 per cent, El Salvador believes that efforts to achieve
the full, equitable and meaningful participation of women in all activities related to
the prevention and resolution of conflicts, at all levels, cannot be delayed.
Informed by its experience with its own peace process and the challenges
it currently faces, El Salvador is convinced that achieving that goal requires
ensuring a significant increase in the representation of women in decision-making
mechanisms for the prevention, management and resolution of conflicts. That
requires incorporating a gender perspective into public policies and programmes
that contain concrete measures to guarantee that the commitments established in
resolution 1325 (2000) are met.
In that regard, as a sign of its willingness to comply with the provisions of this
resolution, El Salvador has formulated its Women, Peace and Security 2017-2022
national action plan. The plan takes up the historical background of women’s
participation in the Salvadoran peace process; it reinforces the country’s regulatory
framework and develops its method of action through the pillars of participation,
prevention, protection, reparation measures and measures for the restitution of rights,
and a strengthened implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). That makes El Salvador
one of 85 Member States — 44 per cent of the Organization’s membership — that
70/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

have translated the agenda into a national action plan. My country will initiate the
process of updating our plan to incorporate current challenges and ensure that it is a
renewed guide that enables all participating bodies to coordinate priority actions for
the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. El Salvador calls
on the United Nations and its Member States to continue supporting each country
in the development and implementation of its national action plan to comply with
resolution 1325 (2000).
In addition, through its participation in United Nations peace operations,
El Salvador has sought to mainstream resolution 1325 (2000) into the training of
its troops. One of the main advances in that field is that 35 per cent of the country’s
currently deployed police personnel is female, compared to 15.1 per cent globally.
The implementation of the women and peace and security agenda is a task
that concerns everyone and in which political leadership is essential. El Salvador
believes that, in future, it will be possible to meet the pending challenges in its
implementation only through coordinated and coherent action among the multiple
actors. It therefore calls for the strategic incorporation of the agenda into national,
regional and global plans, policies and guidelines.
With regard to the role of the United Nations in this area, El Salvador
considers it extremely important to follow up on the measures to be adopted by
the Organization, as reflected in the Secretary-General’s 2019 report (S/2019/800),
and to take advantage of the processes under way, such as the review of the
peacebuilding architecture and the repositioning of the United Nations development
system to incorporate concrete actions to implement the operative paragraphs of the
resolutions on women and peace and security throughout the Organization’s work.
It is essential that women and peace and security remain on the agenda of the
Security Council so as to ensure the inclusion of language on women, peace and
security in its decisions, the sustained increase in Arria Formula meetings on this
matter and its mainstreaming in all United Nations peace operations mandates.
Likewise, it is important to address the existing gap in financing the agenda
and to seek to allocate sustained, predictable and flexible resources. Increasing and
diversifying sources of funding will be key to translating political commitments
into concrete actions and implementing resolution 1325 (2000), thus serving
as a catalyst for progress on other instruments such as the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
Finally, El Salvador believes that in the current context, it will be key for
women in all their diversity, who have a critical voice in ensuring a gender
perspective in crisis and conflict mitigation, prevention and recovery policies at all
levels, to participate in decision-making on the response to and global recovery from
the COVID-19 pandemic. At the same time, we must redouble our efforts to achieve
the urgent commitments with regard to the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda.

20-1473471/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 37
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ethiopia to the
United Nations, Taye Atskeselassie Amde
Allow me to first congratulate you, Sir, on a successful presidency of
the Security Council and to extend our appreciation to you for organizing this
commemorative meeting. I also wish to thank Secretary-General António Guterres
and all the briefers for their statements.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of landmark
resolution 1325 (2000), the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action and the seventy-fifth anniversary of our Organization’s founding.
All of these instruments recognized the vital and indispensable role women play
in the promotion of peace and security and called on Member States to prioritize
gender equality and women’s empowerment.
As the Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2020/946) on women and peace
and security makes clear, despite the progress made with regard to gender equality
over the past two decades, major hurdles remain. Those limited gains are now at
risk of reversal due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Gender-based
violence is on the rise. Women are at the forefront of the fight against this deadly
virus and are paying enormous sacrifices. Tragically, they are also likely to be
disproportionately affected by its economic consequences. That is why it is so fitting
that this debate focuses on the implementation of that milestone resolution. More
work and practical commitments are needed to bridge the gap in implementation,
including in the context of the COVID-19 response, and to support Member States
in developing policies and strategies that align with the women and peace and
security agenda.
The full, equal and meaningful participation of women in development and
peace and security should no longer be an option. It is an absolute imperative. We
believe that neither peace nor prosperity can be achieved or sustained without the
active and meaningful involvement of women in society. Lasting peace and security
cannot prevail as long as women continue to face gender-based violence, have their
rights violated, lack access to public services and enjoy only limited participation.
For Ethiopia, the empowerment of women is a key pillar of our development
aspirations. Women have been responsible for the transformation in the provision of
basic health services throughout rural Ethiopia, especially with regard to maternal
and child health. They continue to be instrumental in conflict prevention, notably in
mediation and in the resettlement of internally displaced persons. Women’s role in
our security sector reform is also central.
The equal participation of women in all sectors of life in Ethiopia is
constitutionally guaranteed. Access to education is a critical element in that
endeavour. Women cannot enjoy their full rights as long as they continue to struggle
for access to education. Addressing poverty and the educational deprivation of women
is essential if we are to achieve fundamental changes in advancing gender equality.
Ethiopia is working to increase the enrolment of women at all levels of education and
boost their participation at all levels of decision-making in our national institutions.
The appointments of the country’s first woman President, the first woman
President of the Federal Supreme Court and the first woman Chair of the electoral
board and achieving gender parity in the Cabinet are all part of our efforts to increase
and elevate women’s participation. My Government also set up a new ministry with
a direct oversight of the security sector to ensure women’s involvement in peace
and security matters. Over the past two decades, Ethiopia has made steady progress
72/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

in increasing both the number of women and women’s leadership positions in our
armed forces and police, as well as in addressing their barriers to entry.
To minimize the implementation gaps, we must strive to mainstream the women
and peace and security agenda in all our policy interventions, and my Government
is committed to implementing a series of actions over the next decade under the
10-year perspective development plan. We are also consulting with a wide range of
stakeholders, including civil society organizations, on a draft national action plan on
the women and peace and security agenda.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm Ethiopia’s full commitment to sustaining progress
towards the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Today’s commemorative
meeting is an opportunity for us all to recommit to implementing the resolutions
and declarations we have agreed on, thus ensuring that women are fully involved as
equal partners in peace and political processes at all levels. I would like to take this
opportunity to call on the members of the Security Council to redouble their efforts
to strengthen women’s role in conflict prevention, peacekeeping, peacebuilding,
mediation and enforcement, including through capacity-building and the provision
of financial and technical support to developing countries.

20-1473473/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 38
Statement by the Permanent Delegation of the European Union to
the United Nations
The Candidate Countries Turkey, the Republic of North Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of groundbreaking
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, and the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the adoption of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action.
Both of these milestones speak to the importance of women’s leadership and
participation in peace and security processes and the need to fully consider the
gendered impact of armed conflict and violence. They also serve to underline the
need to understand gender inequality, the exclusion of women and human rights
violations as root causes and drivers of conflict and fragility. With the declaration
(General Assembly resolution 75/1) on the commemoration of the Organization’s
seventy-fifth anniversary, adopted in September, all States Members of the
United Nations pledged to accelerate action towards achieving gender equality,
women’s participation and the empowerment of women and girls in all domains.
In the twenty-first century, disasters and human-made crises and conflicts
are increasingly linked to global challenges, such as climate change, environmental
degradation, displacement and pandemics. The consequences of coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) have shown that the women and peace and security agenda is central to
addressing the need for women’s inclusion and leadership and the growing threat of
violence against women and girls. In order to implement the women and peace and
security agenda, we need all actors, including the Security Council, to take holistic,
whole-of-Government and cross-pillar approaches to security.
Moreover, as the pandemic has exacerbated both inequalities and wider
security challenges, those tensions create conditions conducive to violence,
particularly sexual and gender-based violence, including domestic violence, and
limit access to assistance and essential services, including sexual and reproductive
and other health-care services, social protection, education, nutrition, full access to
clean water, including safe drinking water, sanitation and hygiene. The European
Union (EU) remains particularly concerned about the Secretary-General report’s
(S/2020/946) clear demonstration of a global rise in sexual and gender-based violence
and the increased risk of sexual exploitation and abuse as a direct consequence of
the COVID-19 crisis. Nevertheless, the fact that 146 Member States and observers
in April answered the Secretary-General’s call to make the prevention and response
to gender-based violence a key part of their national responses to COVID-19 gives
us grounds for optimism.
While there have been notable achievements in the field of women and
peace and security since the year 2000, much remains to be done. Women are still
appallingly underrepresented when it comes to decisions and processes related to
peace and security. In that regard, we welcome that the recent resolution 2538 (2020),
on women in peacekeeping, was guided by the principles of resolution 1325 (2000).
We are deeply concerned about the increasing level of violence and threats
against women human rights defenders, aid workers, peacebuilders and political
leaders, as well as the shrinking space for civil society. In some cases, COVID-19
has exacerbated human rights violations and contributed to further shrinking spaces.
We must enhance our collective efforts to protect women’s rights. The EU remains
committed to the promotion, protection and fulfilment of all human rights and the
74/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

full and effective implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action, the Programme
of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development and
the outcomes of their review conferences, and remains committed to sexual and
reproductive health and rights.
Building on the success of our joint EU-United Nations Spotlight Initiative
in tackling all forms of violence against women and girls, we intend to move
forward hand-in-hand with our partners. We will reach out to international financial
institutions and the private sector to ensure that sustainable funding for gender
equality is included in multilateral investment and financing and provide further
support to global initiatives in the framework of the Generation Equality Forum.
The EU also plays an active role as one of the co-leaders of the Action Coalition
on gender-based violence. The EU will continue to call on all parties to conflict to
abide by their obligations under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law and to stop all forms of sexual violence in conflict, as well as to
end impunity for perpetrators of such crimes and to provide the survivors access to
justice and comprehensive health services.
For the European Union and its Member States, supporting and advancing
gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls is at the core of our
policies, whether at home or abroad. The EU has been at the forefront of promoting
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women in peace processes. Important
strategies have been adopted in that regard. We are working on the new Action Plan
on Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment in External Action 2021-2025 to
guide the EU’s external action for that period. The EU Action Plan on Women, Peace
and Security 2019-2024 is an integral part of that approach.
The women and peace and security agenda is driven by the critical contribution
of civil society, which also plays an essential role in its implementation. In this
milestone year for women’s rights and gender equality, we take this opportunity
to express our gratitude to civil society actors around the world, as well as to the
dedicated gender advisers and focal points, without whom we would never have
gotten this far. The future of the women and peace and security agenda depends on
how well we all work together to take this endeavour to the next level, as underlined
by the Human Rights Council in its resolution (A/HRC/RES/45/28) on promoting
and protecting the human rights of women and girls in conflict and post-conflict
situations, on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000).
We, the international community, have not yet delivered sufficiently on the
unanimous commitment we made in 2000: to implement the women and peace and
security agenda in full. To achieve that, we do not necessarily need new resolutions,
but to act upon our promises. The European Union is determined to lead by example.
We are determined to bring to bear all our political, diplomatic, technical and
financial instruments to ensure that this is implemented now so that, when we
mark the next anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), we can present results. The
United Nations and women peacebuilders, activists, human rights defenders and
leaders can count on our full support and engagement, and we invite all our partners
and allies to spare no effort in striving towards this goal for the sake of future
generations.

20-1473475/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 39
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Fiji to the United Nations
It has been 20 years since landmark resolution 1325 (2000), which recognizes
that women’s protection and participation are crucial to peacebuilding, sustaining
peace and promoting inclusive development. This year the United Nations also
commemorates 75 years since the signing of the Charter of the United Nations, and
25 years since the conclusion of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action for
women. These are significant milestones that show how far the United Nations has
come and how much more work it needs to do in order to realize the aspirations of
resolution 1325 (2000).
The Secretary-General’s 2019 report on women and peace and security
(S/2019/800), highlighted that there are considerable challenges to advancing the
goals of resolution 1325 (2000). The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has
multiplied all these challenges manifold.
Fiji welcomes the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire and to focus
all efforts on fighting the COVID-19 pandemic. Conflicts compound obstacles
to advancing women’s rights. The pandemic has further worsened conditions for
women and girls and undoubtedly represents the gravest challenges yet to the women
and peace and security agenda. Violence against women and girls has increased.
Girls have been disproportionately impacted by the closure of schools.
The Pacific Island Forum’s Boe Declaration on Regional Security identifies
climate change as the “single greatest threat to the livelihoods, security and
well-being of the peoples of the Pacific.” Fiji fully recognizes that enhancing the
preparedness, protection and resilience for all women and girls is an investment in
security.
Fiji is implementing its third women’s plan for advancing women’s rights. It
is working towards adopting a national prevention action plan to prevent violence
against women and girls. Fiji has established a national gender policy to promote
gender equality. There has been an increase in the number of women in leadership
positions, in both the civil service and the Parliament. Fiji’s social and economic
recovery pays considerable and careful attention to protecting social security,
supporting women in small businesses, enhancing food security and help women
who have become unemployed due to the pandemic.
Fiji has continuously participated in United Nations peacekeeping for over
40 years, for nearly 30 of which it has been deploying women peacekeepers. Fiji is
proud to report that 56 per cent of Fijian police officer peacekeepers are women,
including the first female Police Commissioner of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, Unaisi Vuniwaqa. Recently, Fiji deployed a female senior military
officer to be the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization as Chief of Observer
Group Golan.
Fiji is working closely with our partners to improve the capacity and skills
of women peacekeepers. Fiji continues to strengthen and mainstream gender
perspectives across all areas.
Advancing the women and peace and security agenda across our peace
operations is not free. Peace operations are becoming more complex, and they need
predictable and sustainable long-term financing.
In the past 20 years, Fiji has made continued progress in increasing women’s
participation and protection and in mainstreaming gender issues, under the Beijing
Declaration and Plan of Action and resolution 1325 (2000). However, far more needs
to be done.
76/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

This year, as we recommit to the Charter of the United Nations and to building
the future that we want, Fiji reaffirms its commitment to all its obligations under
resolution 1325 (2000).

20-1473477/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 40
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Georgia

to

the

At the outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General and all the briefers
for their valuable contributions.
Georgia aligns itself with the statement submitted by the European Union
(annex 38).
This year we mark the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the historic
resolution 1325 (2000). This was the first time that women were recognized as
proactive participants in all stages of the conflict cycle — from prevention to
conflict resolution and from peace operations to peacebuilding. This year also marks
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action,
which flagged 12 key areas in need of urgent action to ensure greater equality and
opportunities for women.
Whereas the past two decades have been marked by strides towards
strengthening the women and peace and security agenda, we must not forget that
the requirements set out in resolution 1325 (2000) and its subsequent resolutions are
far from being fulfilled. That reality has been well epitomized in the latest reports
of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security. We are concerned
by the ample evidence provided by the Secretary-General, which highlights that
the violence against women and girls and attacks on their human rights continue
to be rampant in both conflict and post-conflict settings. At the same time, the
participation of women in decision-making processes concerning the prevention,
handling and resolution of conflicts also lags behind. More worrying, the existing
social and economic inequalities, especially for women in fragile situations, have
been further exacerbated by the ongoing coronavirus disease pandemic.
Against that background, urgent action is needed to ensure that the gains
made towards gender equality and women’s empowerment over the past two decades
are not rolled back.
With that in mind, the Government of Georgia continues to promote gender
equality in all aspects of its public life, including by integrating gender perspectives
in the military as an essential part of the predeployment preparation of peacekeepers
and by increasing women’s participation in peace negotiations. Our third national
action plan for the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda
(2018-2020), among other activities, facilitates the increased involvement of women
in confidence-building and reconciliation processes.
Moreover, for years the Georgian delegation has been actively raising all
issues related to the needs and priorities of women internally displaced persons and
conflict-affected women within each round of the Geneva International Discussions
and the Incident Prevention and Response Mechanism — the only formal format
of negotiations between Georgia and the Russian Federation on the security and
humanitarian issues stemming from the Russian aggression and subsequent
occupation of the two Georgian regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali.
Extending protection to those conflict-affected women who live in the
Russian-occupied regions of Georgia, however, remains an insurmountable
challenge for the Government of Georgia. The protracted illegal occupation of those
two regions by the Russian Federation leaves local residents, including women and
girls, continuously deprived of their basic human rights. Restrictions of the right to
freedom of movement, the deprivation of property rights, the prohibition of education
in the native language and, to make matters worse, ethnically targeted human rights
78/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

violations have become an everyday reality for thousands of ethnic Georgians living
in the occupied regions, as well as in the areas adjacent to the occupation line.
Furthermore, Russia is responsible for closing the so-called crossing points
along the occupation line in Georgia’s Tskhinvali region, where those in need,
including women and girls, have been continuously denied access to urgent care and
medical evacuation. As a result, 16 Georgian citizens have died since September
2019. Just a few days ago, yet another woman resident of the Russian-occupied
Tskhinvali region died after several attempts to access the Georgian Governmentcontrolled territories to receive medical assistance.
Allow me to conclude by highlighting the fact that, despite the aforementioned
hardships, Georgia’s commitment to contribute to the promotion of the women
and peace and security agenda at the national and international levels will remain
unwavering. Finally, we call on the international community to urge the Russian
Federation to adhere to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and fulfil
its international obligations, first and foremost the European Union-facilitated 2008
ceasefire agreement.

20-1473479/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 41
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ghana to the
United Nations, Martha Pobee
The Group of Friends of the African Women Leaders Network to the
United Nations, chaired by the Permanent Mission of Ghana to the United Nations
and vice-chaired by the Permanent Mission of Germany to the United Nations,
expresses its appreciation to the Russian presidency of the Security Council for
convening this open debate as we commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the
landmark resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security.
The Group also commends the Secretary-General for his report on the issue
(S/2020/946), which captures the progress made on the role of women in securing
peace and security, while forthrightly calling on Member States to step up efforts on
financing and on the implementation of the agenda.
It is now 20 years since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security. However, women remain largely excluded from local, national,
regional and international decision-making processes.
Despite our strong and continued engagements to ensure women’s meaningful
participation, the global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has tested
Governments and civil society alike. It has added yet another layer of risk and
complexity to conflicts. It has also further widened gendered inequalities and
threatens to undermine human rights. The COVID-19 pandemic further exacerbates
poverty, inequalities and gender-based violence. It has been aptly coined the shadow
pandemic by UN-Women, with particular effects on women and girls, threatening all
efforts led on the peacebuilding front.
Despite the many challenges brought about by the pandemic, women in
peace and security in Africa and across the world have shown resilience in their
undertakings and determination to ensure that this invisible enemy does not erode
the gains made over the past two decades.
Since its launch in 2017, the African Women Leaders Network (AWLN) has
brought to the fore women’s leadership and participation in peace, security and
sustainable development. The AWLN platform is jointly supported by the African
Union (AU) Commission and the United Nations through UN-Women.
More than three years after the establishment of the AWLN, the Group
of Friends remains committed to making the message of women’s meaningful
participation a central part in the efforts regarding the maintenance of international
peace, security, conflict prevention and mediation, peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction. The AWLN Group of Friends wishes to focus its statement on four
main points.
First, the AWLN Group of Friends recognizes the urgent need to continue its
march to localize peace and security efforts and to continue to support a bottom-up
approach at the local and national levels if we are to ensure long-term gains for peace
and stability. Since 2017, 25 national chapters of the AWLN have been launched
in Africa in line with the Beijing+25 Conference, serving as rallying platforms
to continue our work of building sustainable peace together with the AU and the
United Nations.
AWLN women leaders are leading national and community efforts to prevent
and mitigate conflict and build peace. AWLN women in Mali have been able to bring
their expertise and to participate in the recent mediation and ongoing transitional
mediation process. AWLN women leaders in Zimbabwe and in the Central African
80/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Republic actively participate in peace, security and governance spaces, including
as voters, community leaders, candidates, civil society leaders, ministers and
parliamentarians. AWLN women leaders have been at the forefront of mobilizing
efforts and resources to respond to the COVID-19 crisis and prevent the widespread
contamination and misinformation at community levels and across the continent.
Secondly, the AWLN Group of Friends identifies intergenerational
partnerships, among younger and senior women, as a key instrument to build
sustainable peace and security, building on the synergies between the women and
peace and security agenda, pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000), and the youth, peace
and security agenda, pursuant to resolution 2250 (2015). At the country level, the
AWLN convened several intergenerational strategic engagements on peace, security
and governance, while hosting its first Intergenerational Retreat on Leadership in
Africa last year with young women and senior United Nations and AU officials
under the leadership of the President of Kenya, His Excellency Mr. Uhuru Kenyatta,
and the AWLN patron, Her Excellency Ms. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf.
Thirdly, the Group recognizes that the meaningful participation of women in
peace, security and peacebuilding processes requires moving beyond the numbers
to ensure that women’s rights, needs and experiences are heard and reflected in
the peace outcome documents and reconstruction processes. The Group of Friends
stands with the 2020 review of the Peacebuilding Commission in ensuring women’s
meaningful participation to help de-escalate tensions, prevent conflicts and promote
lasting and inclusive peace.
Lastly, AWLN leaders have operationalized resolution 1325 (2000) on the
ground by conducting 10 joint United Nations-AU fact-finding solidarity missions
in the course of three years to recentre women’s participation and leadership in
peace, security and development in the Sahel and the Horn of Africa, as well as
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Sudan and South Sudan. The Group
commends the leadership of AWLN champions United Nations Deputy SecretaryGeneral Ms. Amina Mohammed, UN-Women Executive Director Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka and African Union Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security
Ms. Bineta Diop, together with other AU and United Nations officials, for bringing
the agenda closer to the women and other people on the ground.
The ongoing world pandemic brings us closer to one reality, namely, that we
all have a role to play in building and sustaining peace. The Group of Friends of the
AWLN to the United Nations calls on the Security Council to continue to provide
robust mandates that integrate women and peace and security priorities, while we
continue to build the necessary partnerships and mechanisms to deliver on the call
for women’s meaningful participation.

20-1473481/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 42
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Greece to the United Nations
Greece congratulates the Russian presidency of the Security Council on
convening today’s open debate on women and peace and security on the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of the ground-breaking resolution 1325 (2000), which
triggered the evolution of the women and peace and security agenda. The agenda
reaffirms the disproportionate impact of armed conflict on women and girls and
stresses the importance of their meaningful participation, as agents of peaceful and
democratic change, in peace and security efforts.
This year also marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action, the most comprehensive global agenda for the
realization of gender equality and the human rights of women and girls. Furthermore,
it marks the fifth anniversary of the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, which recognizes the role of gender equality in the achievement of
the Sustainable Development Goals. All those anniversaries highlight substantive
gender equality as a key requirement for international peace and security, human
rights, the rule of law and sustainable development.
Nevertheless, 20 years after the adoption of the women and peace and security
agenda and despite some progress in some of its priority areas, women continue to be
disproportionally affected by violent or non-violent threats to their security. Whether
survivors of conflict and conflict-related gender-based violence or peacebuilders,
mediators, human rights defenders or journalists, women continue to experience the
disproportionate burden of war, authoritarianism and instability. Added to that, the
global health crisis caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, along
with climate change, exacerbates, as threat multipliers, pre-existing inequalities,
having a negative discriminatory impact, particularly on women and girls.
Greece remains committed to achieving substantive gender equality by
establishing and implementing a coherent legal and institutional framework. To that
end, the law mainstreams a gender perspective across the entire range of public
policies. Moreover, the National Action Plan on Gender Equality is being renewed
for the period 2021-2025, in conformity with international legal principles and
standards, as well as the European Gender Equality Strategy 2020-2025, focusing,
inter alia, on tackling the multidimensional impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
At the same time, Greece is currently finalizing its first national action plan on
women and peace and security, to be adopted later this year, which aims not only to
strengthen the foundations for systematic gender mainstreaming in foreign, defence
and security policies, but also to enhance gender-equal representation, participation
and leadership in decision-making at all levels. Furthermore, this action plan draws
attention to the protection of women and girls, including migrants and refugees,
from any form of violence, be it sexual, gender-based or domestic, as well as to the
full and unimpeded enjoyment of all their rights.
In addition, by implementing the aforementioned action plan, Greece seeks to
strengthen meaningful cooperation with the United Nations, the European Union,
NATO and other like-minded partners in order to advance the beneficial role of
women in conflict prevention and resolution and peacebuilding.
Finally, Greece firmly believes that substantial gender inclusiveness with
regard to peace and security efforts, as envisaged by the women and peace and
security agenda, together with the gender-responsive implementation of the 2030
Agenda, is the appropriate tool for achieving a better future for generations to come,
namely, a peaceful, sustainable and gender-equal world.
82/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 43
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Guatemala to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
In recent years, we have seen that the meaningful participation of women
significantly strengthens protection efforts, expedites economic recovery, enhances
peacebuilding efforts and leads to sustainable peace. Every year, the Council has
therefore been paving the way for reducing the vulnerability of women and girls,
particularly on the basis of resolution 1325 (2000) and its subsequent resolutions.
That once again convinces us that lasting peace cannot be achieved without the
protection of women and girls. Today, by means of this debate, we are bringing
added value in order to ensure the full implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.
Twenty years after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), it is important that
each State Member of the Organization assess the direction of our actions so as to
continue the implementation of this important resolution. We must conduct a review
and identify the outstanding gaps in order to strengthen and fulfil the commitments
that we have made at the national, regional and international levels.
Since the signing of the Peace Accords, in 1996, Guatemala has taken on
a series of commitments to the international human rights agenda, in particular
to women in a post-conflict context. These agreements include 28 substantial
commitments to advance the rights of women, who constitute 51.5 per cent of the
total population of the country.
Along these lines, efforts have been made in the implementation of mechanisms,
programmes and plans for the advancement of women, among which we can mention
the Political Peace Agenda for the period 2017 to 2026, which is aligned with the
national development plan “Katún Nuestra Guatemala 2032” and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.
We also have in place an advisory and coordinating entity that guarantees
the implementation of public policies in terms of promoting the comprehensive
development of Guatemalan women and fostering a democratic culture, which is the
result of the demand of Guatemala’s women’s movement, the commitments assumed
by the country through the adoption and ratification of international instruments by
the State of Guatemala, such as the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and the Beijing Platform for Action, among others.
Similarly, Guatemala has a national action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), which is a tool for advancing women’s rights, women’s full
participation in decision-making and their access to justice and reparation through
concerted interventions among the stakeholders involved, allowing for better followup and coordinated implementation of the global agenda for women and peace and
security. This plan has substantially contributed to strengthening national legislation,
women’s mechanisms and the coordination of institutional initiatives that have
generated internal changes in the public administration.
At the international level, we have participated in various meetings and
forums, including the network of focal points on women, peace and security. We
believe that these meetings are a platform for the exchange of experiences and
best practices on the global agenda of women and peace and security, and we are
convinced that the strategic alliances that have been generated within this network

20-1473483/161

S/2020/1084

are important to achieve the goal of a world with inclusive, peaceful societies that
advocate protecting and strengthening women’s rights in all aspects.
Women’s leadership and participation in conflict prevention and resolution
remains necessary. Furthermore, it is necessary for our countries to increase the
representation of women at all decision-making levels in the various national, regional
and international institutions and mechanisms for conflict prevention and resolution.
Based on this argument, Guatemala, committed to the noble task of contributing
to the United Nations peacekeeping operations and taking into account the need to
increase the number of female personnel in these operations, has so far deployed
more than 270 women and has trained more than 380 women in different national
and international courses. The Security Council has the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security. We recognize that the challenge
of sustaining peace requires the creation of close and functional partnerships among
the United Nations, Governments and civil society to complement efforts and
increase the role of women in decision-making with respect to conflict prevention
and resolution.
On this twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), Guatemala stresses
that we must redouble our efforts to continue achieving concrete results in realizing
the commitments of the global agenda on women and peace and security. This
will allow States and the United Nations together to increase the full participation
of women in peace processes. I urge the Council to continue to work hard on an
inclusive agenda that will strengthen the role of women as peacemakers.

84/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 44
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Hungary to the
United Nations
Hungary aligns itself with the statements made on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security (annex 27).
We thank the Secretary-General for his statement and leadership, as well as
the briefers for their insightful remarks.
On the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the landmark resolution 1325
(2000), Hungary reaffirms its commitment to the full and effective implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda.
Hungary has demonstrated its firm dedication to delivering on the agenda
at the national level since its inception. Last December, the Ministry for Foreign
Affairs and Trade organized a workshop for the relevant ministries, institutions
and academia, which was dedicated to the effective and full implementation of
the agenda, with special attention to gender-based violence in armed conflict. The
Hungarian Defence Forces have incorporated training and education on resolution
1325 (2000) — including on sexual exploitation and abuse, and conflict-related sexual
violence — into national predeployment training courses and international courses,
such as the International Military Observer Course. In addition, they regularly carry
out intensive training courses related to the women and peace and security agenda
for non-commissioned officers and officers.
Moreover, women contribute significantly to the work of the Hungarian police
and military forces; they account for 23 per cent of law enforcement and 20 per
cent of the armed forces. The participation of female officers in all civilian crisis
management and peacekeeping missions is ensured and encouraged. In order to
increase the number of deployed female personnel, we are working on projects that
contribute to recruiting a higher percentage of female soldiers for deployment, such
as creating a better work-life balance or atypical forms of employment.
Our efforts should be embedded in a wider agenda for the empowerment of
all women and girls, and ensuring the full enjoyment of all their human rights. The
twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, the entry
into the Decade of Action for Delivering the 2030 Agenda, as well as the seventyfifth anniversary of the United Nations this year provide remarkable momentum for
taking a holistic approach and accelerating efforts to this end.
Women should be free from the scourge of conflict-related sexual and genderbased violence, as well as sexual exploitation and abuse. They deserve comprehensive,
survivor and human rights-centred, immediate and long-term support, as well
as accountability and redress. Hungary has been regular contributor to the
United Nations Trust Fund to End Violence against Women to support this endeavour.
Peace is not possible without women. Women’s full, equal, meaningful and
institutionalized participation at all stages and levels of peace processes, postconflict recovery efforts, in the implementation of peace agreements and wider
decision-making structures, as a key to preventing conflict and putting societies on
the track of sustainable and inclusive peace. These efforts require the cooperation
of all stakeholders: Member States, regional and international organizations and
civil society.
Hungary is firmly committed to protecting and empowering women and girls
belonging to minorities, to upholding their rights, including their freedom of religion

20-1473485/161

S/2020/1084

and belief, and to amplifying their voices globally, with special regard to persecuted
religious communities, such as Christians.
History has shown that women’s participation is crucial to achieving
sustainable peace, and we call on the Security Council to keep this important issue
on its agenda as a priority.

86/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 45
Statement by the Permanent Mission of India to the United Nations
We thank the Russian Federation for convening the open debate on this
important issue. We also thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2020/946)
and all briefers for sharing their insights.
Five years after the Fourth World Conference on Women, the Security Council
adopted a path-breaking decision on 31 October 2000 — resolution 1325 (2000),
which, for the first time, linked gender equality and the maintenance of international
peace and security and recognized women’s participation as key to resolving conflict
and securing peace.
Conflict and humanitarian crises already hold women and girls back from
progress. The further burdening of health care systems and the economic fallout
of the coronavirus disease threaten to put women and girls in war-torn, fragile and
humanitarian contexts at even higher risk.
The women and peace and security agenda has transformative potential. It is
now recognized internationally, but there are still challenges. Patriarchy, inequalities
and discriminatory power structures inhibit effective conflict prevention, inclusive
peace, women’s rights and participation.
To realize the transformative potential of the women and peace and security
agenda, it is time to move from verbal commitments to action. Governments, the
United Nations, civil society and other actors must implement relevant commitments
across all thematic areas. States must identify and address barriers to women’s
meaningful participation in the prevention and resolution of conflict and in postconflict peacebuilding efforts and programmes.
Violence against women and girls perpetrated by terrorists deserves our
strong condemnation. Such violence targeting women distorts the very basis on
which civilized societies rest.
Advancing democratic structures and the rule of law in post-conflict situations
is instrumental to addressing the inequalities faced by women and to ensuring their
full and meaningful participation in peaceful and inclusive development.
It is also important that the Council strive to effectively integrate women
and peace and security considerations into sanctions regimes, including by listing
terrorist entities involved in violence against women in armed conflicts.
The positive impacts of the increased participation of women in United Nations
peacekeeping is well recognized. Members will recall that in 2007, India provided
the United Nations Mission in Liberia with its first all-female formed police unit. The
formed police unit provided critical policing support, deterring sexual and genderbased violence, and helped rebuild safety and confidence among the population. The
formed police unite proved to be a strong and visible role model for Liberian women,
gaining worldwide attention.
India attaches the utmost importance to the representation of women
in decision-making positions. In India, more than 1.3 million elected women
representatives lead the formulation and implementation of public policies at the
grassroots level. India has been using new and innovative people-centric schemes
and technologies to advance women’s empowerment.
Through the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, Member States are committed
to implementing the women and peace and security agenda by increasing the
number of civilian and uniformed women in peacekeeping. Despite United Nations
20-1473487/161

S/2020/1084

efforts, women form only 5.4 per cent of the military and 15.1 per cent of police in
peacekeeping operations.
India is committed to working in favour of the meaningful participation of
women in peace and security issues. India’s experience of mainstreaming women’s
leadership and political participation will continue to inspire our actions.

88/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 46
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Iraq to the United Nations
At the outset, allow me to thank the Russian Federation for convening this
debate on the issue of women and peace and security. We congratulate the Russian
Federation on its successful presidency for the month of October, and wish an equally
productive one for its successor.
This year paves the way for the celebration of the twentieth anniversary of
historic resolution 1325 (2000). Almost 20 years after its adoption, a considerable
gap remains in place, particularly in the context of addressing the specific needs
of women in peace processes, conflict prevention and resolution. The realization
of those goals requires a comprehensive approach, as well as realistic and
pragmatic solutions.
Terrorism and violent extremism also have serious adverse effects on women’s
lives. Genuine efforts are therefore needed to protect women and girls from violence
and extremism. Similarly, women are the main victims of sexual violence as a tactic
of war and terrorism; a horrific weapon of war that is a threat to international peace
and security. In order to end that brutal crime, we must promote accountability and
access to justice.
In March, when sufficient pieces of evidence were provided, Iraq held
accountable a terrorist of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), who had
committed sexual violence crimes against a Yazidi female survivor who was, at the
time, only 14 years old. The perpetrator was found guilty of participating in the rape
and abduction of a Yazidi girl by the court. Iraq believes that such a move would
encourage other women and girls raped and abducted by ISIL to come forward and
seek justice as the judicial system had been hampered in hearing this kind of case
owing to the reluctance of victims to testify in public. It will also empower women
and girl survivors of sexual violence and protect their rights.
Iraq is developing its second national plan, with the assistance of the
United Nations and civil society organizations, which focuses on new, as well
as previous, challenges. Owing to Iraq’s fight against terrorism and the multiple
hurdles that have developed as a result of that war, the first action plan was not fully
implemented. Iraqi women are playing an active role in mediation efforts and in the
country’s response to the coronavirus disease, as they have shown great resilience
in their fields of work.
In 2019, Iraq, in coordination with the United Nations Population Fund and
in collaboration with civil society organizations, developed its national strategy to
combat violence against women and girls, which will serve as a guiding tool to
prevent and respond to the needs of women and girls and raise awareness against
negative gender stereotypes. Civil society organizations have played an active role
in this regard, as they have helped supply significant inputs to the domestic violence
draft law and the survivors draft law.
In conclusion, Iraq is working to ensure the empowerment of women at
the economic, social and political levels, thereby enhancing their engagement in
political and economic decision-making, as women play a robust and effective role
in transformation and building processes towards the achievement of peace, security
and sustainable development.

20-1473489/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 47
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Ireland

to

the

We thank the Secretary-General and the Executive Director of UN-Women for
their continued leadership on this issue and the briefers for their insights.
As we mark the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security, Ireland would also like to thank the Russian Federation for
organizing today’s open debate with a focus on better implementation. We hope that
this occasion can be commemorated in a way that commits to advancing the agenda.
Ireland aligns itself with the statements made by the European Union (annex
38) and on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (annex 27).
Let us be clear, we have fallen short of our ambition. In the past two decades,
the women and peace and security agenda has seen significant normative advances
and modest success in implementation. But progress on making women and peace
and security a reality on the ground has been too slow. We see national actions plans
being developed and implemented. Women have played a critical role in some peace
processes, but not enough. I am saddened that, 20 years after its adoption, we are
still discussing the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) rather than seeing the
tangible results of its ground-breaking vision.
We made clear commitments in 2000 and there can be no excuse for not having
delivered on them two decades down the road. The truth is that, if the promise of
resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions had been fully realized, our work
on sustaining international peace and security would look very different across the
agenda of the Council. Put simply, the world would be a safer place.
Yet here we are in 2020, still grappling with many of the same obstacles we
faced in 2000. This is not a failure of language, as the 10 resolutions on women and
peace and security show; it is a failure of political will to see that language translated
into action.
We know from the recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/946) that
there remains a shocking dearth of women participating formally or informally in
peace processes; we know that women’s organizations are grappling with diminished
funding; we know that gender-based violence and attacks on women human rights
defenders are rising and impunity for conflict-related sexual violence is rampant.
We know that support for agreed commitments is being diluted and that gains made
on gender equality and sexual and reproductive health and rights are being reversed.
We know that those persistent challenges are now being compounded by the
disproportionate impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on women and girls.
So my question today is: If we know what the issues blocking the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda are, why are we not doing more to address
them? What is the problem?
Our rhetoric has not matched, and is not matching, our reality. And sadly,
the gap between what we say and what we do has consequences for women every
day struggling with the impact of war and striving to build peace. Convening
meetings once a year will not change this if we do not translate our own words into
concrete action.
For Ireland, this agenda is not merely words on a page. In Northern Ireland, we
witnessed first-hand the transformative impact of including women at the negotiation
table when the Northern Ireland Women’s Coalition, a group of women from both
sides of the political divide, fought for their voices to be heard. Their participation
90/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

resulted in a more sustainable and inclusive peace agreement, focused on building a
common future, while coming to terms with the past.
This lived experience has given us a deep appreciation of the importance
of implementing gender-responsive policies when it comes to peace and security.
It is why, with over 60 years of continuous peacekeeping experience, we push for
integrating gender perspectives and empowering women peacekeepers to enhance
mission response. It is why we recently partnered with UN-Women and the Global
Network of Women Peacebuilders to explore how the women and peace and security
agenda was being experienced by grassroots women peacebuilders — including in
the wake of COVID-19 — and how we can better support them. It is why we, along
with other States and the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research, are
working to integrate the women and peace and security and disarmament agendas
across the multilateral system and include the issue in our national action plan, given
that disarmament and arms control issues are central to the lives of so many women
and girls in conflict situations. And it is why, over a year into our third national action
plan, our Oversight Committee continues to actively review our implementation and
will report to our Parliament on progress. We are holding ourselves to account.
As an incoming member of the Security Council, Ireland will use our seat for
two years to make sure that the women and peace and security agenda is implemented,
not recited. We will work across the Council’s agenda to highlight the differential
impacts of conflict on women and demonstrate how women can be agents of change
in conflict and post-conflict settings, by bringing those women to the table. In short,
our aim will be to embed gender perspectives right across our Council activities.
To close, I want to emphasise five key points.
First, after two decades, we need to move beyond window dressing and actually
implement the women and peace and security agenda by integrating it across all the
Council’s work; it is not merely a topic for reflection at an annual event. The Council
must step up and more consistently integrate gender perspectives into its briefings,
discussions, mandate renewals and products.
Secondly, the Council needs to bridge the gap between New York and the
realities on the ground. It needs to hear directly from experts, civil society and
grassroots women’s organizations, and ensure their safety when doing so. Field
visits — be they virtual or in-person — must be used as an opportunity to listen to
women affected by conflict, and those who are working to build peace, including at
the grassroots level. The Security Council should not be an echo chamber.
Thirdly, we must do more to connect the instruments at our disposal at the
United Nations, from the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security
to the Peacebuilding Commission, and ensure that the important work being
undertaken by these bodies informs Council discussions and outcomes.
Fourthly, we need accountability for the agenda. National, regional and
organizational action plans, specifically those that are financed, are key ways to
guide implementation. We must invest in initiatives that promote gender equality
and provide direct assistance to women’s organizations. And we must accelerate a
gender data revolution on women and peace and security to ensure follow-up and
inform decision-making at the United Nations.
Fifthly, we will never stop saying it — we demand the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in peace processes. The first place to demonstrate that is
here within the United Nations system, through building capacity and empowering
women peacebuilders to facilitate their participation in all tracks of peacebuilding
initiatives. United Nations mediation teams must include women and engage with
20-1473491/161

S/2020/1084

women grassroots builders locally to ensure that gender perspectives are included in
negotiations and peace agreements.
When the Council meets in 20 years’ time to celebrate the fortieth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000), we cannot hear the same tired excuses for staggered
implementation. We must seize this opportunity to renew our commitment to the
women and peace and security agenda and drive work on implementation, integrating
the lessons learned from the COVID-19 pandemic to build back better. As we prepare
to take our seat on the Council in January, Ireland is ready to work with you, Sir, to
deliver the vision set out in resolution 1325 (2000), starting here, starting now.

92/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 48
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Israel to the United Nations
Resolution 1325 (2000) symbolizes an important milestone in the
United Nations recognition of the role that women should play in decision-making
and shaping policy, both nationally and internationally, in matters regarding peace
and security.
By urging Member States to increase the participation of women at all levels
of decision-making, the resolution took an important step towards gender equity. But
just as importantly, it took an important step towards fulfilling the United Nations
mandated purpose of promoting peace and security.
There can be no real security or sustainable peace without women’s
direct involvement. Much has been written about the strong correlation between
inclusiveness and creating long-lasting, sustainable peace. Women must be a part
of the prevention of conflicts, dispute resolution, peace processes and negotiations,
peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction. It is imperative that we use all the
tools in our collective box to assure the success of peace efforts. This includes the
meaningful inclusion of women in these efforts.
The resolution and the progress that it has produced over the past 20 years
should serve as a model for the way all decision-making bodies should be shaped.
Women add a unique and important perspective on all aspects of society. Hearing and
including women’s voices and views leads to better and more inclusive policymaking
and the adoption of decisions and laws that are better for everyone.
Ensuring that all countries implement the resolution is a first, important
step. The next step is ensuring that all countries embrace its spirit as well. The
participation of women in peace and security is not enough. Their voice must be
heard everywhere.
In Israel, female leadership is prevalent across all decision-making bodies.
Women serve as generals and top security officials in our defence forces, as ministers
in our Cabinet and members of our Parliament, and as executives in our boardrooms.
Israel has achieved gender parity in its judicial system, with 51 per cent of the judges
being women, including Israel’s Chief Justice.
We are also proud of Israel’s achievements on gender issues on the legislative
front. Just recently, in October of this year, our Cabinet adopted a decision setting a
goal that 50 per cent of senior positions in civil service should be occupied by women
by the year 2023. Israel was the first country to adopt domestic legislation based
on resolution 1325 (2000), calling for increased representation of women from the
various diverse sectors of Israeli society in public committees and teams that receive
Government funding.
In Israel and around the world, women serve on the front-lines of our response
to the coronavirus disease pandemic. They serve as officers in top ranks of the
Israeli military unit tasked with fighting the pandemic, as doctors and nurses and as
local leaders, psychologists and social workers, and as educators. The participation
of women in forming our national response plans is critical to ensuring a sustainable
and effective recovery.
In the same way that resolution 1325 (2000) has paved the way towards the
increased inclusion of women in peace and security over the past 20 years, it must
inspire a change in the way that we make key decisions that will shape our societies
over the next 20 years.

20-1473493/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 49
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Italy to the United Nations
Italy aligns itself with the statements submitted by the European Union
(annex 38) and by the Chair of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security
(annex 27), on behalf of a cross-regional group of countries, and would like to add a
few remarks in its national capacity.
We welcome the organization of this open debate on the occasion of the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), which highlighted
how women and a gender perspective are relevant to negotiating peace agreements,
planning and participating in peacekeeping operations, and reconstructing war-torn
societies with a view to achieving sustainable peace. In other terms, the resolution
defined how women’s participation, at all levels, can be a basic element of resilient
and stable societies.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and the launching of the women and
peace and security agenda, the Security Council has adopted several other important
resolutions, focusing on specific aspects of the agenda and its implementation. It
is essential for the Council to keep promoting further advancement of the women
and peace and security agenda and to resist any pushback. At the same time, the
importance of the women and peace and security agenda requires that all relevant
United Nations organs and entities constantly reaffirm their commitment towards its
full implementation and contribute to mainstreaming it in their activities.
Twenty years on, in spite of their meaningful contribution to conflict
resolution, women are still heavily underrepresented in peace processes. It is a
primary responsibility of Member States, alongside the United Nations, that this be
corrected, and Italy is unwaveringly committed to that goal.
Over recent years, we have stepped up our efforts to mainstream the
participation of women in peace processes in all our relevant policies and activities.
In December 2016, we launched Italy’s third national action plan on women and peace
and security, for the 2016-2020 period. The Italian Parliament allocated €4 million in
support of the plan’s implementation, which made Italy one of the very few countries
devoting public funding to the implementation of its national action plan.
The following year, in October, we launched the Mediterranean Women
Mediators Network, which is a proud co-founder of the Global Alliance. While we
are proud that our efforts have been paying off, we are resolved to engage further.
We are sparing no effort to further develop the Mediterranean Women Mediators
Network, through the opening of new local antennas. Two of these were recently
inaugurated, in Turkey and Cyprus, and a third one will be opened, in Kosovo, on
19 November.
Next month, within the framework of the Mediterranean dialogues, we will
organize the fourth edition of the Women’s Forum, in order to raise awareness on the
women and peace and security agenda and to gather inspiring women for a fruitful
exchange of ideas.
At the same time, we are looking beyond 2020. We are currently engaged in
the drafting of our fourth national action plan on women and peace and security,
2020-2024, with the active contribution of civil society organizations, academia,
non-governmental organizations, the private sector and trade unions. These actors
will also be heavily involved in implementing the plan.

94/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

The road ahead of us is still long and winding. We need to join our efforts to
face the challenges to the full implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. Italy will continue to play its part in this collective endeavour.

20-1473495/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 50

Statement by the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations, Ishikane Kimihiro
I would like to thank the Russian Federation for convening this debate
commemorating the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
on women and peace and security.
Japan promotes the women and peace and security agenda as an important
pillar of its international gender policy. As a staunch supporter of the human security
concept, Japan appreciates that today’s meeting focuses on the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda. Debating in the United Nations amounts to
very little if it does not result in positive changes on the ground and delivering better
to those in need.
Allow me to explain the concrete actions by Japan to implement its national
action plan, as required by the women and peace and security resolutions, in the
following four areas: participation, conflict prevention, protection, and humanitarian
relief and recovery.
First, on participation, in collaboration with UN-Women and bilaterally
through the Japan International Cooperation Agency, Japan supports developing
countries’ initiatives to improve women’s participation in conflict prevention and
resolution, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Under the Group of Seven Women, Peace
and Security Partnerships Initiative, Japan supports Sri Lanka through UN-Women
to promote women’s participation in national reconciliation and peacebuilding,
including the development of the national action plan.
Secondly, on conflict prevention with gender perspectives as well as addressing
gender-based and sexual violence against women in conflicts, Japan will continue
to support the work of the United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and
Sexual Violence in Conflict in the areas of criminal investigation and prosecution,
legislative reform and capacity-building for judicial and security authorities.
Thirdly, on protection for women and girls in and after conflicts, Japan
will work closely with UN-Women, the United Nations Population Fund and the
secretariat of United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict, among
others, to respond to the special needs of women and girls, including physical,
psychosocial, economic and judicial protection needs. This year, Japan contributed
€2 million to the Global Fund for Survivors of Conflict-Related Sexual Violence.
Fourthly, on humanitarian relief and recovery, since 2018, Japan has been
serving as the champion of UN-Women’s flagship programme initiative, Women’s
Leadership, Empowerment, Access and Protection in Crisis Response. In 2019, Japan
contributed approximately $8.8 million to support projects in Asia, Africa and the
Middle East under this initiative.
I wish to underscore two points that are crucial to realizing effective
implementation of the women and peace and security agenda by various actors
engaged in delivering assistance on the ground, including United Nations agencies,
bilateral donors, and local and international non-governmental organizations, among
others. The foremost is the principle of national ownership. The second is information
sharing among all the actors and coherent actions by all. UN-Women and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict should play
a leading role in this respect. Japan also believes that the Peacebuilding Commission
could make use of its convening power to provide a thematic platform on this issue
and bring together all relevant actors in the United Nations system and beyond.
To conclude, let me emphasize that Japan stands ready to support
United Nations efforts to strengthen its role on women and peace and security.

96/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 51
Statement of the Permanent Mission of Jordan to the United Nations
I would like to express Jordan’s appreciation to today’s speakers and to
welcome the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/946) and its recommendations
on women and peace and security.
Jordan also aligns itself with the statement submitted by Canada on the behalf
of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (annex 27).
As we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), Jordan reiterates its commitment to the full implementation of all the
pillars of the women and peace and security agenda. The women and peace and
security agenda is of utmost value to Jordan, and its goals have been introduced and
implemented through our national action plan. We have been at the helm of vouching
for gender equality, but there is certainly room for improvement, and that begins at
the systemic level.
As Jordan has outlined in the 2020-2025 Jordanian national action plan, it is
imperative to build a culture of peace and gender equality with a particular focus on
youth and preventing gender based violence.
My country has made major strides towards integrating gender perspectives
across all peacekeeping functions, and is committed to further developing best
practices on gender mainstreaming in military and police operations, including in
predeployment training, as well as supporting the role and tasks of gender advisors
deployed in peacekeeping missions. Jordan has increased the proportion of women
in senior leadership positions in the Civil Defence Directorate, from a baseline by
4.7 per cent, in 2018, to 5.5 per cent in 2019, and from 1 per cent to 1.6 per cent in the
gendarmerie for the same period. My country has also appointed a full-time gender
advisor in both the military and security institutions. In 2020, Jordan will also
deploy 716 peacekeepers in various missions, 29 of whom are female peacekeepers.
The Jordanian national action plan is also committed to providing humanitarian
services that are responsive and considerate to gender needs, such as psychological,
social, legal and health services, and facilitate safe access thereto, especially among
the most vulnerable women, girls and refugees in Jordan.
The Jordanian national action plan is also in line with Jordan’s response plan
to the Syrian crisis, and vocational training has been provided to women as frontline human service providers to equip women with the means to fend for themselves
and further community resilience. The Plan has also provided gender awareness
within the judicial system, and, according to the Family Protection Department,
reporting on domestic violence increased by 41 per cent in 2019 as compared to 2018.
Progress has also been made towards strengthening the capacities of
community-based organizations and women-led civil society institutions to ensure
an inclusive approach both in the preparation, implementation and monitoring of
the National Action Plans. Civil society actors, especially women’s organizations
operating in conflict regions, have the extensive knowledge and expertise needed to
build sustainable peace. They can play a central role in conflict prevention, including
in early warning and in peace processes. In addition, manipulation of the status and
rights of women by extremist movements makes it particularly important that violent
extremism be dealt with from the gender perspective; women’s organizations have
invaluable expertise in such cases.
The coronavirus disease has revealed the importance of the women and peace
and security agenda in response to crisis. During the lockdown, Jordanian women
20-1473497/161

S/2020/1084

in the security and health sectors were at the front lines of the response. In addition,
local women-led civil society organizations played an important role in responding
to local community needs during the lockdown. The Jordanian Government views
relations with civil society organizations as core to the success of our efforts aimed
at responding to the crisis. It is our goal to ensure that leadership and decisionmaking positions are among the work opportunities that women are eager to join.
The inclusion of women in all political and regional processes is a valuable principle
in the fight for peace and security.

98/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 52
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Michael K. Kiboino
At a time when the world is celebrating the twentieth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, the focus on better implementation,
full and equal participation and the political and economic empowerment of
women is of paramount importance. Kenya acknowledges the tenacity of women
peacebuilders, especially in the face of the coronavirus disease pandemic as frontline health responders, mediators and peacekeepers. particularly among internally
displaced persons and in refugee camps.
The various briefings, discussions and outcomes this morning have further
reminded us that there is a need for strengthened coherence and collaboration among
Governments, civil society and the international community, in order to ensure that
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on the ground fosters gender equality,
the protection of women and girls and accountability when it comes to sexual and
gender-based violence in both conflict and non-conflict situations.
Although strides have been made in the quest to ensure women’s participation
and leadership before, more needs to be done during and after conflict to realize the
full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and the following relevant points.
First, inclusiveness needs to be sustained through purposeful national policies
and strategies that prioritize women’s rights and enhance women’s contribution
to peace.
Secondly, resolution 1325 (2000) needs to be localized and community-based,
in order to address specific implementation contexts.
Thirdly, an intergenerational approach that links the women and peace and
security agenda, on the one hand, and the youth and peace and security agenda, on
the other hand, is critical. These agendas must be aligned for a comprehensive and
holistic response that leaves no one behind.
Fourthly, the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is a whole-of-society
endeavour that requires concerted and consistent action from both the Government
and its citizens. Therefore, entrenched sociocultural stereotypes that constrain
women’s full and equal participation need to be addressed.
Fifthly, issues relating to climate change and sustainable development should
be included in peacebuilding strategies, as these crises aggravate marginalization,
dislocate and weaken communities and exacerbate gender inequality, thereby
becoming threat multipliers and bottlenecks to the full implementation of resolution
1325 (2000).
Sixthly, gender-sensitive initiatives and perspectives need to be woven into
the design of peacebuilding and peacekeeping processes so as to meet women’s
specific needs and aspirations in the peace-conflict cycle.
In terms of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), the Government of
Kenya has achieved the following.
First, we have developed a national action plan to catalyse the mainstreaming
of resolution 1325 (2000) into development, conflict-prevention and -resolution,
peace and security and reconciliation strategies. We are in the second phase of the
implementation of the national action plan, as we also roll out the Decade of Action
for the Sustainable Development Goals.

20-1473499/161

S/2020/1084

Secondly, we have operationalized gender-based training for women
peacebuilders at the grass-roots level and incorporated them into Governmentsupported peace and reconciliation committees.
Thirdly, we have developed gender policies and strategies that advance the
career progression of women to leadership and decision-making roles in such peaceand-security organs as the Kenya Defence Forces.
Fourthly, we have increased the number of women engaged in peacekeeping
missions to 19 per cent.
Regional frameworks and mechanisms are also vital in reinforcing national
peacebuilding policies and projects. For our region, these include the African Union
(AU), the Network of African Women Mediators and the AU Continental Results
Framework for Monitoring and Reporting on the Implementation of the Women,
Peace and Security Agenda in Africa (CFR). We validated the CFR in March 2018, as
we see the importance of measuring value in implementation not only in quantitative
terms, but in qualitative terms as well.
As an incoming elected member of the Security Council, Kenya, in partnership
with like-minded States, will advance the women and peace and security agenda
with the aim of generating appropriate operational global action on the subject.

100/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 53
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Latvia to the United Nations
We commend the Russian Federation’s presidency of the Security Council for
the month of October for convening today’s debate. Latvia thanks Secretary-General
António Guterres and rest of the briefers for their remarks and valuable input in this
debate. Latvia welcomes the most recent report of the Secretary-General on women
and peace and security and its recommendations (S/2020/946).
Latvia aligns itself with the statements made on behalf of the European
Union (EU) (annex 38) and of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security
(annex 27).
This year the global community marks the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the landmark resolution for women’s rights in
both conflict and in peace. While so much has already been achieved, we cannot
become complacent and forget that we are not even halfway there, especially when
we are presented with new challenges.
The women and peace and security agenda has never been more relevant than
during this time of global pandemic. It tests the knowledge and experiences that
we have acquired over the years and poses unprecedented challenges to the rights,
inclusion, representation, equality and protection of women and girls. It amplifies
vulnerabilities in political, social and economic systems that in turn risk reversing
gains made over decades. We cannot allow the rights of women and girls to become
collateral damage.
Women and girls are the least protected group in the pandemic. At the same
time, they are constantly at the front lines of the battle against the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19), risking their lives to save lives. These unprecedented times show that
women’s participation in crisis prevention and gender-sensitive and human rightsbased actions is crucial and one of the keys to a successful response to the COVID-19
pandemic and its consequences. The data confirm this point and demonstrate that
women-led countries are showing better results than male-led countries during the
pandemic, which leads us to deeper appreciation of just how crucial the women and
peace and security agenda truly is.
It is once again a reminder that women must be an integral part of our
response, not only to COVID-19 but also to global security challenges and any other
matters that have an impact on women and girls. The international community must
join efforts to ensure the full implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. Only through working together can we accelerate gender equality and
women’s empowerment.
Latvia strongly supports the women and peace and security agenda,
particularly as it is fundamental to global security. Gender-equality issues and the
empowerment of women are Latvia’s long-standing priorities in its participation
in international organizations and in development cooperation. As a State member
of the European Union, we are actively involved in promoting the women and
peace and security agenda within the EU’s internal and external policies. Gender
equality is also a priority for Latvia at the United Nations. We actively support the
United Nations efforts, including financially aiding the operations of UN-Women.
In September, Latvia was elected to the United Nations Commission on the
Status of Women (CSW) for the 2021-2025 term. Our mandate in the CSW starts
next year, and we are committed to playing an active role in shaping and enforcing
global standards and policies for gender equality.
20-14734101/161

S/2020/1084

We are proud that, in its research for Women, Business and the Law 2019: A
Decade of Reform, the World Bank recognized Latvia as one of the six economies
worldwide that grants women and men equal legal rights. Latvia emphasizes the
advancement of women’s participation in decision-making positions — for example,
in the National Armed Forces, in State institutions and in politics. Specifically,
Latvia has integrated participation principles of the women and peace and security
agenda into practice with 16 per cent of soldiers in the National Armed Forces being
women — NATO’s average rate being only 10 per cent — and with 30 per cent of the
personnel of the State police being women.
On 14 July, the Latvian Government approved Latvia’s national action plan
on women, peace and security for the 2020-2025 term. Our plan envisages three
main tasks within the women, peace and security framework: first, raising public
awareness of gender equality issues and the elimination of gender-based violence,
especially in the younger generation; secondly, training for the defence and home
affairs sector, including the establishment of a gender adviser’s position; and, thirdly,
transmitting Latvia’s experience and knowledge. These tasks are being implemented
in close cooperation with non-governmental organizations, civil society and our
foreign partners.
The women and peace and security agenda is ever-changing and has evolved
a great deal over the last 20 years. The twentieth anniversary is the right moment
not just to reflect on the past but also to look towards the future and address existing
challenges to the implementation of the agenda. As such reflection coincides with
the global pandemic, we must reassess the framework and rethink our approach
as we strive to take the women and peace and security agenda forward in the next
20 years. It is also the right time to ensure that the necessary steps are taken so that
the agenda is celebrated every day and not just once a year. We must join our forces
to ensure that voices of women and girls are heard loud and clear.

102/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 54
Statement by the Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States
to the United Nations, Maged Abdelfattah Abdelaziz
[Original: Arabic]
Today’s Security Council meeting on women and peace and security is
especially important this year, as it coincides with our celebrations of the seventyfifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations and the twentieth anniversary
of the Council’s adoption of the historic resolution 1325 (2000), which continues to
serve as the basis for highlighting the important role that women play and their
active participation in preventive diplomacy, peacemaking, peacekeeping and postconflict peacebuilding.
Significant progress has been made towards strengthening the role of women
in maintaining international peace and security. This progress is evident in the
integration of the women and peace and security agenda into the various areas of the
work of the United Nations, because it is one of the sectoral issues associated with
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as well as in
related efforts to implement Goal 5 of the Agenda.
At the same time, at the high-level meeting of the General Assembly to
commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on
Women and the Beijing Platform for Action, it became evident that, despite the
great strides made in promoting the role of women and their participation in the
political, social and economic arenas, the international community must do more to
empower women to assume a role worthy of them, particularly in relation to peace
and security issues. The Security Council should attach the utmost importance to
this in the near future.
The reports of the Secretary-General clearly indicate that women’s
participation in United Nations peacekeeping missions is low, accounting for 4.2 per
cent of overall staff, and that very few women participate in negotiations aimed at
preventing, containing or resolving conflicts. Despite the progress achieved towards
granting women the opportunities they deserve to assume leadership positions at
the United Nations, women in many of our countries have yet to assume positions
commensurate with their outstanding professional potential as a result of archaic
cultural or religious norms.
At the regional level, the League of Arab States has been working tirelessly
to support the Security Council and the United Nations in implementing resolution
1325 (2000) since it was adopted. The League of Arab States has issued several
strategies and recommendations on protecting Arab women and promoting their
role, especially in the area of peace and security. In that connection, I would like to
note that the Council of the League of Arab States at the ministerial level adopted the
strategy for the protection of Arab women at its 144th session, in 2015. It constitutes
a regional strategy and executive action plan for the protection of Arab women, as
well as a fundamental platform for raising awareness of regional and international
resolutions among officials and relevant stakeholders and for implementing those
resolutions by providing protection to women and girls in the Arab region, based on
the fundamental pillars of the strategy.
Those pillars include supporting active participation by women and young
women and promoting their assumption of leadership roles; preventing conflict
and eliminating all forms of violence against women; and ensuring that women
and girls have their relief needs met promptly. The League, in cooperation with the
United Nations and its specialized agencies for women’s affairs, supports the
20-14734103/161

S/2020/1084

promotion and empowerment of women and their assumption of a fully active
role in political, security, economic and social matters. It extends this support by
organizing joint meetings and intensifying Arab efforts to identify and address
shortcomings within a regional framework that makes it possible to benefit from
shared experiences.
In this context, I would like to refer to the first Ministerial Conference on
Women and Achieving Peace and Security, held by the League of Arab States in
2016. Several important recommendations on the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda were adopted at the Conference. Accordingly, and in
view of the special circumstances of Arab women in conflict zones in our region —
including Syria, Libya, Yemen, Iraq, Somalia and elsewhere — the Council of
the League adopted a resolution at the ministerial level entitled “Formation of the
Emergency Committee for the Protection of Women during Armed Conflicts in the
Arab region”, at its 151st session, held in March 2019.
Moreover, the Network of Arab Women Peace Mediators was established as a
mechanism of the Arab Women’s Committee to work in concert with many similar
mechanisms in other regions. The Network facilitates the exchange of experiences
and enables members to benefit from shared experiences, in coordination and close
cooperation with the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment
of Women and the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia.
The Organization is celebrating several milestones in its history this year,
including the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
The League of Arab States urges the international community to seize this
important occasion to redouble its efforts to strengthen the role of women and
their empowerment in future, in line with the theme of this historic United Nations
session, “The Future We Want”; to uphold the full rights of women in various areas;
and to ensure that they participate actively, especially in senior leadership positions,
and are represented in decision-making, conflict prevention and resolution and postconflict peacebuilding efforts. By the time we meet again next year, we hope that
women will have accomplished even more, overcome more challenges and become
active partners in achieving international peace and security.

104/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 55
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the
United Nations, Amal Mudallali
Allow me first to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of October, and I thank you for organizing this
important debate on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the
milestone resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. I would also
like to thank the speakers for their thorough briefings, as well as for their leadership
in their respective field.
Coming from a country where women have shown the whole world that
women’s role is not to bear the brunt of conflicts and heal the wounds resulting from
them, it is with great pride that I address the Council today. Women have proved that
they are not just victims but essential and active agents of change.
Allow me to recall one particular relevant moment that asserts the latter.
On 27 November 2019, following a night of unrest in the Beirut suburbs, Lebanese
mothers and women of the area flooded the streets and marched together in a
solidarity rally, carrying Lebanese flags, banners, white roses and candles, calling
for peace, coexistence and unity and chanting out loud: “We, the mothers of the
country, will not accept its segregation.”
Lebanese women have been at the forefront of every occasion. They have played
an essential role through their widespread participation in the 2019 movement on the
ground, raising their voices to call for systemic change, maintaining the peaceful
face of the protests and forming buffers between security forces and protesters to
prevent outbreaks of violence. They were also the first responders to the tragic blast of
4 August 2020 as firefighters, nurses, doctors, paramedics, pharmacists, caregivers,
social workers, activists, journalists, reporters, media workers, survivors, human
rights defenders, leaders and volunteers.
In that context, our first national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000), which
was endorsed by the Council of Ministers last year, reflects Lebanon’s aspirations
to achieve gender equality and women’s empowerment and to consolidate the equal,
full, meaningful and effective participation of women in building sustainable
peace, preventing conflicts and promoting national stability. This year, despite
all the ongoing challenges, implementation is on the right track, with the National
Steering Committee 1325, spearheaded by the National Commission for Lebanese
Women and supported by United Nations agencies, leading the coordination and
implementation efforts.
Despite the unprecedented domestic crises, Lebanon is progressing rapidly in
the field of women’s participation in the defence and security sectors. The Lebanese
Armed Forces (LAF) made it a top priority to enlist women within their ranks,
which resulted in a significant increase in female enrolment, with more than 4,000
women, including in the air force, land border regiments and the Republican Guard
Brigade. Today, the participation of women in the Military Academy amounts to
43 per cent and the percentage of women among high-ranking military officers and
soldiers is 5.5 per cent, with five women brigadier generals.
Moreover, women in the LAF have been deployed to high-risk areas, such as the
Wadi Hmeid checkpoint in Arsal, one of the military’s most dangerous deployments,
which was attacked by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Jabhat al-Nusrah
in 2014. Women were also stationed in the Nahr al-Bared Palestinian refugee camp in
northern Lebanon, where fighting took place between the LAF and the Fath al-Islam
group in 2007.
20-14734105/161

S/2020/1084

Regarding the participation of women in the security forces, the General
Directorate of General Security has included the goal of a gradual increase in the
recruitment of women in its ranks in its five-year strategic plan.
With respect to the political participation of women, Lebanon is committed
to advancing this agenda. The current caretaker Government comprises six women
ministers, among them the Deputy Prime Minister and Defence Minister, making
her the first Arab woman to hold that position. In 2019, the previous Government
also embraced the Arab world’s first female interior minister.
Allow me to express my great gratitude for the immense contribution and
achievements of female peacekeepers in the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) and to stress the key role of women in peacekeeping. Today,
women represent a small but increasing percentage of the peacekeepers serving under
the UNIFIL flag. Over the past years, UNIFIL, which ranks second among major
United Nations peacekeeping operations in terms of the percentage of female
peacekeepers, has witnessed a slight increase in the number of women peacekeepers,
with around 29 per cent of approximately 800 civilian peacekeepers and around
5 per cent of approximately 10,300 military peacekeepers being women.
We strongly support the United Nations efforts to ensure gender parity in
peacekeeping. We thank UNIFIL troop-contributing countries for expanding the
participation of women in their contingents, and we strongly support the expansion of
the role and number of women in UNIFIL, as well as their meaningful participation
in all aspects of operations.
As a signatory country to the Action for Peacekeeping Declaration of Shared
Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, we consider the women
and peace and security agenda critical to enhancing the performance of peacekeeping
operations at all levels, thereby contributing to longer lasting and sustainable peace.
In that regard, we commend UNIFIL for incorporating a gender perspective in its
mission and for ensuring women’s full participation in the day-to-day operations, in
compliance with resolution 1325 (2000).
Despite the progress that has been made during the past 20 years regarding the
women and peace and security agenda, millions of women still agree that much work
remains to be done to evolve into a future where women lead and participate equally,
fully and meaningfully in peace and security matters. The voices of women, their
active presence on the ground across the world, their demands and their aspirations
should be translated into real change. The world of today, grappling with widespread
conflicts, wars and upheavals, needs an increased representation of women in all
domains at all levels for the prevention, management and resolution of conflict and
the promotion of peace and security.

106/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 56
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Liechtenstein to the
United Nations, Christian Wenaweser
The twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) is an important moment
for the Security Council. It marks the beginning of an agenda that both has had
enormous impact on the ground and is the source of ongoing frustration. However,
above all, we should salute the work of civil society in the creation and implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda, and it is its voice that should be heard
today. We are inspired by the brave female protesters in Belarus, who are exemplary
agents of peaceful change. While we see progress towards full, equal and meaningful
participation, women’s participation in formal peacemaking processes, for instance,
remains limited. Many peace agreements do not include provisions that give a
sufficient voice to women and adequately address their security and peacebuilding
needs. We also encourage the Security Council to more consistently invite female
expert briefers.
As a contribution to further strengthening the participation pillar of the women
and peace and security agenda, Liechtenstein commissioned a research project from
the Georgetown Institute for Women, Peace and Security on the impact of women’s
participation in State armed forces on respect for international humanitarian law.
To allow women to be agents of change and to contribute to a more
peaceful, sustainable and prosperous world, we need to create an environment
that is enabling and inclusive, free of discrimination and unfair social norms and
attitudes. Mainstreaming the women and peace and security agenda within the entire
United Nations system is of the essence to that end, as is the creation of synergies
with the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, including
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 5.
We deeply regret attempts to weaken internationally agreed human rights
standards and to roll back the goals of the women and peace and security agenda
by members of the Security Council itself. That regress is particularly worrisome in
times of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which has disproportionately
challenged women and girls. The pandemic has exacerbated pre-existing inequalities
and has been the cause of the shadow pandemic for women and girls in particular,
pushing women out of the workforce, depriving girls and young women of their right
to education and compounding the crisis of domestic violence.
Reports of the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and for Children and Armed Conflict document rape, sexual
slavery and other forms of sexual violence of comparable gravity perpetrated
against women, men, girls and boys in a large number of conflict situations, many
of which are on the Security Council’s agenda. Harmful gender stereotypes and
abusive power dynamics are the root cause of sexual and gender-based violence,
which affects women and girls disproportionately. However, the same stereotypes
also impair men and boys and often result in underreporting, as also documented by
the Liechtenstein-based human rights organization All Survivors Project. Resolution
2467 (2019) and its comprehensive survivor-centred approach are an important step
forward for the women and peace and security agenda. In times of quarantines,
lockdowns and other restrictions on movement caused by the COVID-19 pandemic,
it is particularly important to ensure that survivors of conflict-related sexual
violence have access to reporting mechanisms and necessary services. In addition
to ensuring the implementation of resolution 2467 (2019), we call on the Council
to include conflict-related sexual violence as a designation criterion in targeted
sanctions regimes.
20-14734107/161

S/2020/1084

We firmly believe that there can be no peace without justice and no justice
without peace, and there can be no justice without justice for all women. Structural
inequalities, discrimination and poverty all too often hinder women’s access to
justice, including transitional justice processes. We thank Belgium for its leadership
in the Council on this topic, and we hope that the Council will agree on an outcome
with a strong gender dimension. Achieving peaceful, just and inclusive societies,
as envisioned in SDG 16, requires increased access for women to justice from the
local to the national level, developing gender-responsive legal and judicial systems
and promoting the greater participation of women in the justice sector, including
in the post-conflict period through transitional justice mechanisms and reparations
processes. We applaud UN-Women and civil society organizations, such as Justice
Rapid Response, for their important work in that regard.

108/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 57
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Luxembourg to the
United Nations
[Original: French]
Luxembourg thanks the Russian presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this open debate on women and peace and security, as well as all the
briefers, who have enriched the debate with their experience and expertise.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the Security Council’s adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. The resolution represents
a key milestone in acknowledging women’s meaningful and effective participation at
all levels of peace and security processes as a prerequisite to achieving sustainable
peace. The women and peace and security agenda is based on the understanding that
there is a high correlation between gender inequality and the threat of conflict, as
well as a strong link between individual safety and respect for women’s human rights
and international peace.
While significant progress has been made in terms of gender equality over
the past 20 years, the context of the coronavirus disease pandemic has exposed the
fragility of those gains and the risk of a setback for women’s rights.
The Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2020/946) highlights gaps in the
implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. It also underlines the
need to ensure steady and ongoing funding for the commitments made.
It is incumbent on all States to continue to provide political and financial
support for women’s human rights, gender equality and women’s meaningful and
effective participation at all levels so as to contribute to the successful implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda, whether in the context of budget
negations or Security Council mandates, within regional organizations or through
their national policies. In that regard, Luxembourg fully endorses the statement
submitted by the European Union (annex 38) and will assist in the implementation of
the commitments that it has outlined.
Luxembourg continues to actively implement its national action plan Women
and Peace and Security 2018-2023 in conjunction with civil society. We also continue
to fund projects and initiatives to address sexual and gender-based violence and
to combat impunity, including through a policy of gender mainstreaming in our
official development assistance, which represents 1 per cent of our gross national
income. Luxembourg is among the top 20 contributors to UN-Women in real terms
and supports the work of the United Nations Special Rapporteur on violence against
women, its causes and consequences.
Such commitments are part of the feminist foreign policy of the Luxembourg
Government. The policy promotes women’s human rights, be they political, economic
and social rights or sexual and reproductive rights, as well as women’s representation
and participation at all levels. Gender equality is also one of the priorities that
Luxembourg will seek to promote if elected to the United Nations Human Rights
Council for the period from 2022 to 2024.
Now more than ever, it is essential to redouble our efforts to advance the
women and peace and security agenda at the national level and within multilateral
institutions. The Security Council can count on Luxembourg’s commitment and
determination to do that.

20-14734109/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 58
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Malta to the United Nations
Malta thanks the Russian Federation for holding today’s open debate on women
and peace and security on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000). We also thank the Secretary-General for his message and the briefers
for sharing their invaluable insights and experiences.
Malta joins the international community in commemorating this milestone.
Resolution 1325 (2000) puts to the fore the principle that women and a gender
perspective are crucial for sustainable peace, and this anniversary provides us with
an opportunity to reflect on the past 20 years and on how we continue to build on
what we have already achieved.
It is imperative that women be involved in all the stages of the peace process,
from peace negotiations to peacebuilding, and at all levels. Women on the ground
have a unique perspective, and their views must be duly considered and incorporated
in a meaningful manner. Peace processes that involve women are likely to be more
successful and sustainable. Without women, there is no peace.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has deepened pre-existing inequalities
and exposed further vulnerabilities in social, political and economic systems. The
reports of increased violence against women and girls around the world, particularly
in conflict-affected areas and in fragile, humanitarian and armed conflict-affected
contexts are particularly worrisome. Although the situation seems daunting,
solutions are available and within reach. It is crucial that States continue to fully
respect and implement existing commitments and obligations with respect to the
achievement of gender equality and the empowerment of all women and the full
and equal enjoyment of their human rights and fundamental freedoms. This also
should include the strengthening of women’s leadership and ensure the full, effective
and meaningful participation of women in decision-making processes at all stages,
and include gender mainstreaming across the board. Investing in young women’s
leadership will not only change the trajectory of their future, but that of their
communities as well.
Malta remains committed to the women and peace and security agenda,
including through achieving gender equality and the empowerment of women
and girls. Malta ratified the Istanbul Convention in 2014 and the Gender-Based
Violence and Domestic Violence Act came into force in 2018. In 2017, a Consultative
Council for Women’s Rights was established with the aim of strengthening dialogue
between the Government and civil society and mainstreaming equality in all aspects
of Government’s processes. And the Government of Malta launched the GenderBased Violence and Domestic Violence Strategy and Action Plan. The female
employment rate increased from 54.3 per cent in 2014 to 66.1 per cent in 2019, that is,
by 11.8 per cent.
Last year, Malta acceded to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, which was one of the
pledges it made in April 2019 during the high-level side event on women and peace
and security. We have also continued to raise awareness on women and peace and
security issues locally, regionally and multilaterally. Furthermore, Malta appointed
its first Ambassador for Women, Peace and Security, Her Excellency Cecilia AttardPirotta — proving its strong commitment to the cause.
Malta is proud to also be about to fulfil its second pledge, namely, the launching
of its first national action plan in the coming hours. Much effort and thought has
been put into its drafting, and we look forward to its official launch, followed by its
110/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

implementation. That is the real challenge to be faced — putting words into actions.
However, with the support of relevant local stakeholders, as well as by learning from
our international partners and their best practices, we will succeed.
Furthering the women and peace and security agenda is not a task for women
and girls alone. Men and boys need to be brought on board as well, since they also
have a stake in the agenda’s success.

20-14734111/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 59
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Mexico to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Twenty years after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we welcome some of
the important progress we have made in ensuring the role of women as key actors in
international peace and security. However, the comprehensive implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda remains a challenge, as the global pandemic
is diluting the modest gains that have been achieved because of its disproportionate
impact on women and girls, who continue to face discrimination, marginalization
and exclusion. We are concerned that, owing to various cultural, social and economic
factors, substantial participation by women in peace processes remains extremely
limited — for example, within the framework of the inter-Afghan dialogue.
Gender inequality, increased militarism, the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons, and violent extremism are all factors at the root of armed conflict.
Therefore, ensuring inclusive peace processes with the participation of women is the
only way to guarantee their sustainability. Failing this, armed conflict will remain
protracted, and therefore exacerbate violence of all kinds, including sexual and
gender-based violence, which has a devastating impact on the lives of women and
girls. In this regard, we welcome some progress in the normative framework, such as
the inclusion in the Arms Trade Treaty of provisions requiring that arms-exporting
States consider whether the arms could be used to commit serious gender-based
violence or violence against women and children in authorizing a sale.
We recognize the essential role of civil society in the design and implementation
of this agenda and the special protection that must be provided to women human
rights defenders and peacebuilders, who risk their lives in the face of increasing
threats and intimidation because of their work.
The Security Council should not simply address this agenda on its own. While
we have seen progress in this regard, there is concern that, in 2019, provisions on this
matter were not included in Council decisions as often as they should have been. We
must reverse this trend, as mainstreaming a gender perspective into all its decisions,
mandates and the work of its subsidiary bodies is the only way to achieve tangible
results on the ground.
The following are some of the premises that will guide Mexico’s participation
in the Security Council.
First, women and girls should be placed at the centre of conflict prevention
and resolution actions, as well as peacebuilding, and the mandates and strategies
of this organ should be based on international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, while guaranteeing the protection of all human rights of women
and girls in conflict situations and humanitarian contexts.
Secondly, the full, equal and meaningful participation of women, especially
marginalized groups, such as refugees, migrants, indigenous people, persons with
disabilities, the community of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex
persons, young persons and persons from rural areas, should be ensured in all areas
related to international peace and security, including conflict prevention, peace
processes and their implementation, ceasefire agreements and special political
missions, and their role as active agents in peacebuilding, and not just as victims of
armed conflict, should be stressed.

112/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Thirdly, the number of women civil society and peacebuilders in Security
Council meetings should be increased and their recommendations on specific
conflict situations should be incorporated.
Fourthly, more substantive use of the work of the independent Informal Expert
Group on Women and Peace and Security for this agenda should be made by inviting
its co-Chairs to review specific situations and the Council’s thematic agenda.
Mexico will submit its first national action plan this year. And, as part of the
Generation Equality Forum, which will take place in 2021, we have promoted the
establishment of the Compact for Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian
Action, which will also contribute to the mobilization of funding.
We reiterate our commitment to increasing the substantive participation
and training of Mexican women in uniform in peace operations. We welcome the
adoption of resolution 2538 (2020) and we support the recent call by the SecretaryGeneral on women transforming peace and security. The implementation of this
agenda, which we have built over two decades, is a collective endeavour, for which
all actors must be held accountable.
This year, which also marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of
the Beijing Platform for Action, we reaffirm our full commitment to gender equality
and the human rights of women and girls, and we will not allow any back-tracking or
attempts to weaken this agenda.

20-14734113/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 60
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Montenegro to the
United Nations, Milica Pejanović Đurišić
Montenegro aligns itself with the statement submitted by the European Union
(annex 38). In addition, as a member of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security, Montenegro joins the statement submitted by Canada on behalf of the
group of 63 member States (annex 27).
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of landmark
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, which for the first time
recognized women’s leadership in achieving international peace and security and
their contributions to conflict prevention, peacekeeping, conflict resolution and
peacebuilding. Today the situation of women and girls in conflict-affected areas is
further deteriorated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Therefore,
their representation in the processes of building and sustaining peace and addressing
the COVID-19 pandemic is more important than ever before.
Montenegro is strongly devoted to the implementation of all resolutions
on the women and peace and security agenda. The Government of Montenegro
demonstrated its determination to address this issue at the national level by adopting,
in 2019, its second action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
for the 2019-2022 period. This action plan clearly defines measures and actions for
integrating gender perspectives in the defence reform processes, thereby ensuring
the realization of three priorities, namely, increasing the participation of women in
decision-making and peacekeeping processes, protecting women and girls in conflict
zones and integrating gender perspectives and gender education in peacekeeping
operations, as well as mechanisms for the implementation of the resolution 1325
(2000) and its accompanying resolutions.
In addition, the Government of Montenegro is implementing its third action
plan for achieving gender equality for this period, which defines activities for the
further integration of resolution 1325 (2000) into the security sector. The overall
strategic framework has been improved by bringing the army closer to the younger
female population. In the forthcoming period, a multisectoral approach will be
strengthened in order to ensure the realization of defined goals by addressing societal
gender stereotypes that are not exclusively related to the security and defence sector,
but rather affect all segments of society.
Besides continuous implementation of policies on increasing the number of
women in politics, public life and the security sector and combating violence against
women and girls, Montenegro is focusing in particular on economic empowerment
of women through the implementation of its action plan on the implementation of
the Women’s Entrepreneurship Development Strategy 2015-2020, which focuses on
women in rural areas and marginalized groups. We are also fully dedicated to the
effective implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform of Action, as we
are aware that ensuring the promotion, protection and fulfilment of the rights of
women and girls has positive catalytic implications for the development and progress
of the entire society. We believe that, where women live free of violence, have equal
access to education, health care and political and economic opportunities, societies
are healthier, more prosperous and more peaceful. And that is our goal.
As we are marking several anniversaries this year — the twentieth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000), the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action and the seventy-fifth anniversary of the establishment of the
United Nations — there is a need for far greater implementation of all pillars of the
women and peace and security agenda. Therefore, we should redouble our efforts to
114/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

ensure the full, equal and meaningful participation of women in all aspects of peace
and security, to ensure women’s rights are promoted and protected and to fill the
gaps in the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda.

20-14734115/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 61
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Morocco to the
United Nations
My delegation would like to thank the Russian Federation, President of the
Security Council for the month of October 2020, for organizing this open debate on
a very important question of women and peace and security, to mark the twentieth
anniversary of the milestone resolution 1325 (2000).
As the international community celebrates this year the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) 20 years ago, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the visionary Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action, the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of
the United Nations, with its promise of gender equality enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations, and the fifth year of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
Agenda, these anniversaries will, unfortunately, not sound like a triumph as long as
the progress achieved so far is called into question by the succession of crises and
emergencies, of which women are often the first victims. These commemorations
should be an opportunity for all of us to reflect on what can be done to further
translate the commitments made into concrete actions. The normative framework is
already there; what remains is to fully implement it.
The full implementation of the women and peace and security agenda requires
full respect of the four pillars on which resolution 1325 (2000) and the subsequent
resolutions are based, in particular the participation of women in decision-making
and in the consolidation of peace; the protection of women’s rights before, during
and after conflicts; the role of women in conflict prevention; and the inclusion of
women in the resolution and recovery phase, taking into account their specific needs
during repatriation, resettlement, reintegration and reconstruction.
Convinced of the crucial contribution of women as essential early-warning
mechanisms, their awareness of threats to local security and their role in mediation,
Morocco actively participates in a number of initiatives, namely, the promotion of
mediation in the Mediterranean; launched by Morocco and Spain, the Women, Peace
and Security Focal Points Network, created by Spain; and the Mediterranean Women
Mediators Network, launched by Italy.
Moreover, Morocco, as an active member of the African Women Leaders
Network, launched, in December 2019, in Casablanca, the Moroccan chapter of this
network, with the objective of creating a joint movement aimed at strengthening
the leadership of women at all levels of decision-making in political, economic and
public spheres. The Moroccan chapter of the African Women Leaders Network
focuses on several components, such as the empowerment of rural women, political
participation, peace and security, the leadership of young women, financial inclusion
and social mobilization. Furthermore, Morocco is at a very advanced stage of putting
in place its national action plan on women and peace and security.
Article 19 of the Constitution of the Kingdom of Morocco underlines that
men and women enjoy, on an equal basis, civil, political, economic, social, cultural
and environmental rights and freedoms. This principle is also stated in the other
provisions of the Constitution, as well as in international conventions and covenants
duly ratified by the Kingdom.
The question of promoting gender equality and women’s autonomy is
concretized through the elaboration and implementation of a wide range of strategies,
policies and laws, put in place by the various ministerial departments and by civil
society, with the objective to mainstream the gender approach in all spheres.

116/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

The place of women in the Royal Armed Forces is no exception. Indeed, the
feminization of the army is an important development by the Royal Armed Forces.
Based on the principle that the defence of the national territory is incumbent on
women as well as on men, the integration of women into the Royal Armed Forces is
in line with the aspirations of the Kingdom of Morocco.
The new provisions of Dahir number 1-12-50, of 10 May 2013, providing for
a special status for officers of the Royal Armed Forces, upholds the right of women
executive officers to access higher military education, in particular to the advanced
defence course, staff officer course and the senior officer course.
The Kingdom of Morocco, as a major contributor of troops to United Nations
peacekeeping operations since the 1960s, attaches particular importance to the
participation of Moroccan women as United Nations peacekeeping troops. The
Moroccan Royal Armed Forces are engaged in a global strategy that includes, in
particular, the adaptation of existing infrastructure to accommodate the specific
needs of women; financial and professional incentives for recruitment as well as
deployment in peacekeeping mission; and a major reform of the recruitment process,
which enabled women to pursue commanding careers in combat units. That reform
will undoubtedly lead to a significant increase in women’s participation in the
near future.
The Kingdom of Morocco currently has deployed 44 women in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, as part of the Rapid Deployment Battalion; five military staff officers in
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic; as well as two military observers in the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan. We are confident that these numbers will increase in the near future,
mainly thank to the recruitment reform.
Finally, the Kingdom of Morocco would like to reiterate its unwavering
commitment to the women and peace and security agenda, and its support for
global efforts towards moving ahead with the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and its successors, through a timely, robust and action-oriented approach
that will allow for the full, equal and meaningful participation of women in peace,
security and development. This can be achieved through building and strengthening
confidence in women and believing in their full potential and merit.

20-14734117/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 62
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Myanmar to the
United Nations, Kyaw Moe Tun
My delegation wishes to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council. We are confident in your wisdom and
able leadership.
I thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2020/946) and his statement.
I also thank the UN-Women Executive Director, Ms. Phumzile MlamboNgcuka, and other briefers for their important briefings.
Myanmar welcomes the commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security.
We have witnessed significant progress in the promotion of the women and
peace and security agenda since the adoption of the resolution 1325 (2000), 20 years
ago. The meaningful participation and representation of women in conflict resolution
and prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding as well as in the protection of
women and girls in armed conflict has never been more relevant.
It is encouraging to see a positive trend in the number of women peacekeepers
in United Nations peacekeeping operations around the world. However, challenges
remain to the meaningful participation of women in the area of peace and security.
The twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) offers
the Security Council and Member States an opportunity to take stock of past
achievements, highlight gaps and further identify challenges for advancement in the
women and peace and security agenda.
After decades of successive authoritarian rule, isolation and ongoing internal
armed conflicts, Myanmar has relentlessly been striving to build a peaceful,
prosperous and democratic nation. The civilian Government has put gender equality
and women’s empowerment at the heart of national development strategies towards
a people-oriented democratic society. The Government is therefore encouraging the
participation of more women in the democratic transition as well as in the ongoing
peace process.
In this regard, the Government of Myanmar has undertaken the following
initiatives to promote and protect the rights of women and girls and advance the
women and peace and security agenda.
The 10-year National Strategic Plan for the Advancement of Women 2013-2022
is based on the 12 priority areas of the Beijing Platform for Action and the principles
of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,
which include women’s empowerment; preventing violence against women and girls;
women’s participation in politics and public office; women and peace and security;
and gender mainstreaming.
The Myanmar Sustainable Development Plan, adopted in 2018, is a
comprehensive social, economic and environmental policy reform agenda dedicated
to supporting the rights of individuals, especially women and girls, and to supporting
gender equity, increased women’s participation in politics and the economy, and
social inclusion.
Myanmar is committed to, and implements, a zero-tolerance policy against
sexual violence. Accordingly, we have carried out domestic legal reforms to better
protect the rights of women and girls. In this regard, the prevention and protection
of violence against women law has been drafted and will soon be enacted by the
118/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Parliament. The new law reinforces protection of women from all forms of violence,
including domestic and sexual violence.
To demonstrate its strong commitment to addressing conflict-related
sexual violence, the Government of Myanmar signed, in December 2018, a joint
communiqué with the United Nations on prevention of and response to conflictrelated sexual violence. Then, in March 2019, the National Committee on Prevention
and Response to Conflict-Related Sexual Violence was established to implement
the joint communiqué. With technical assistance from the United Nations, we have
drafted a national workplan.
Furthermore, one-stop women’s support centres and 24-hour helplines have
been set up to provide women and girls with physical, legal, psychological and social
support. The one-stop women’s support centres and helplines are operating 24/7
during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic to provide crucial services, as
women and girls are more vulnerable during lockdowns. Victims of sexual violence
are also provided with a one-time financial support for rehabilitation. To assist
with case management for gender-based violence, a new set of standard operating
procedures has been developed since 2019, using a survivor-centred approach.
Clinical guidelines are also being developed for responding to rape.
The child rights law, which was adopted in July 2019, criminalizes sexual
violence, requiring the Government, the Tatmadaw (military) and armed groups to
take necessary measures to protect children from sexual violence.
Moreover, Myanmar submits reports to the Committee on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women on the protection of the rights of women
and prevention of sexual violence against women and girls, and is also included in
the Universal Periodic Review process of the Human Rights Council.
With the aim of ending ethnic armed conflict and ushering in a democratic
federal union, the Government has been convening the Union Peace Conference,
21st-Century Panglong, since 2016. Even in the midst of the formidable challenges
caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government successfully convened the
fourth session of the Peace Conference, in August 2020, to advance the peace process.
Since the gender perspective is an important part in the process, it is integrated
into the Nationwide Ceasefire Agreement, signed in 2015. During the third session
of the Union Peace Conference, 21st-Century Panglong, four gender agreements
were included in the political sector basic principle of Part II of the Union Accord.
The Government is also promoting the meaningful participation of women in the
peace process.
The Government is implementing the Women, Peace and Development Action
Plan for the Advancement of Women in Kayin, Kayar and Mon States (2020-2022),
in line with resolution (1325).
In response to the Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire during the
pandemic, the Tatmadaw (military) announced a three-month nationwide ceasefire
from 10 May to 31 August 2020, which was extended twice, until end of October, to
help fight the COVID-19 pandemic. The unilateral ceasefire applies to all conflict
areas except where terrorist groups have taken positions.
In terms of accountability, the Independent Commission of Enquiry submitted
its final report to the President in January this year. The report was based on interviews
with close to 1,500 witnesses and came out with findings and recommendations
for further investigation and prosecution. The Attorney General is heading up the
criminal investigation and prosecution body mandated to investigate and prosecute
the perpetrators based on the findings of the Independent Commission of Enquiry.
20-14734119/161

S/2020/1084

The military has also set up a court of inquiry to investigate the allegations of
human rights violations during the security operations in Rakhine state. There have
been three courts martial. Moreover, an investigation of possible broader patterns of
violations in northern Rakhine in 2016 and 2017 has started. Such alleged broader
patterns could include an inadequate distinction between civilians and Arakan
Rohingya Salvation Army fighters, the disproportionate use of force, a failure to
prevent the plundering of property and destruction, or acts of forcible displacement
of civilians.
Despite all the formidable challenges it is facing, the Government of Myanmar
is committed to enhancing human rights for all its citizens, especially the most
vulnerable groups, such as women and girls.
Let me conclude by reaffirming our commitment to promoting gender
equality and women’s empowerment towards achieving national objectives as well
as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We will continue to engage and
work constructively with relevant United Nations agencies to achieve our common
objective of advancing the women and peace and security agenda.

120/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 63
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Namibia to the
United Nations, Neville Melvin Gertze
Namibia thanks you, Sir, for organizing this open debate on the issue of
women and peace and security. We are encouraged, as always, by the overwhelming
support for this open debate.
When Namibia was campaigning to join the Security Council back in 1998, it
was determined to make a positive and lasting contribution to international peace. At
that time, Namibia had only been independent for eight years, and our experience in
the liberation struggle certainly informed the decision to pursue progressive policies
for the maintenance of world peace.
During Namibia’s liberation struggle, women played various important roles
and were not necessarily seen as victims or as always needing protection. From
early on, it was recognized that women could contribute to the liberation movement
as teachers, doctors and fighters, and could certainly take a seat at the table when
peace negotiations took place. Namibian women in exile played their part in bringing
international attention to the colonial situation in Namibia, and engaged with various
partners, including the United Nations.
It followed that, by the time Namibia joined the Security Council in 1999, we
were ready to introduce the historic concept that women can and must contribute
to peace processes. The idea was premised on women’s experience in the liberation
struggle and also informed by regional and international experiences of women.
Although, at the time, the agenda was not the most popular, Namibia managed to
garner the support of civil society, women’s organizations and many Member States,
and in October 2000, under the presidency of Namibia, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security.
Resolution 1325 (2000) formally drew global attention to the unrecognized,
underutilized and undervalued contributions of women in preventing war, building
peace and helping rebuild societies after conflict. The United Nations acknowledged
that the protection of women and the prevention of violence against women and
children could no longer be left to men alone.
At that time, we envisioned that the agenda would be adopted by all
Governments and that, overall, we would see an increase in women’s participation
in peacekeeping, peacemaking and in general decision-making at the political level.
Indeed, the basic goal has been attained. In Namibia, various policies and
legislative frameworks have been enacted, such as the Defence Policy of 2010,
the Namibian Defence Force Gender Mainstreaming Action Plan 2000-2005, the
National Gender Policy 2010-2020 and, most recently, Namibia’s first national action
plan on women and peace and security, which was launched in 2019.
These frameworks and policies have translated into tangible gains for women
in decision-making and in the security sector. With 23 per cent representation,
Namibia is among the countries with the highest proportion of women in the defence
force in the Southern African Development Community region.
Regionally, the African Union (AU) has spearheaded several initiatives,
including the launch of the continental framework for reporting and monitoring on
the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda, which was a huge
milestone in advancing the realization of the transformative goals of resolution 1325
(2000) in Africa. The framework demonstrates the continued commitment of the
AU to fully implementing the women and peace and security agenda in Africa. In
20-14734121/161

S/2020/1084

addition, over 30 African countries to date have adopted national action plans on the
women and peace and security agenda.
However, these gains are not enough, there is more work to be done, not just
nationally but globally as well. As the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) continues
to spread, it poses an even more severe threat in conflict zones. Fighting the virus
must not distract us from the zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse,
and neither must it allow impunity for violations of that policy. In the context of
conflict, therefore, our call for action must be to ensure that, as we focus on and
bring all our energy to the battle against COVID-19, we must still keep a clear lens
on peacekeeping operations.
The missing piece for further implementation is political will. We should
develop strategies to promote women’s participation in decision-making, including
engagement with national electoral systems and political parties to provide an equal
playing field for women candidates. There is also a need to support leadership
development for women and girls so that we assist them in cultivating their political
potential and professional skills.
There is need for increased integration of gender in national planning and
budgeting as part of our strategies to train national officials to execute plans and
programmes, and thereby strengthen the abilities of women to advocate for decisionmaking positions and political leadership in general.
In addition, we should broaden the space for women’s participation in peace
processes, including training women mediators and advocating gender-equality
measures as critical to security policies and practices. To this end, Namibia will be
launching the international centre for women in peace and security, on 31 October
2020, as we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000). The centre will focus on, among other things, research aspects of mediation
and negotiations, as well as capacity-building and supporting women on issues
related to gender-based violence.

122/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 64
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Nepal to the
United Nations, Amrit Bahadur Rai
At the outset, I would like to thank the Russian presidency of the Security
Council for organizing today’s meeting to commemorate the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. I thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report (S/2020/946) and the briefers for
their updates.
The year 2020 is a time to reflect on the achievements made on this agenda
since the Security Council recognized its importance back in 2000. The hallmark
resolution recognized for the first time the importance of the participation of women
in peacemaking and peacebuilding efforts. The resolution also paved the way for
an additional nine resolutions that further recognized the crucial roles of women in
conflict prevention and resolution, while addressing different dimensions of conflict
affecting them. If implemented seriously, these resolutions have the transformative
potential to bring about women’s empowerment and equality without leaving
them behind.
The current pandemic has disproportionately affected women and girls,
particularly those in fragile and conflict-affected areas. In addition, a hidden
pandemic of gender-based violence is also growing, and women are being excluded
and marginalized from all areas of decision-making, including in the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) response and recovery efforts. Together, these issues have
threatened the decades of progress made in women’s rights and equality.
As our President stated at the high-level event on Beijing+25 last month,
“[w]e should not let the pandemic stall our progress. Ensuring timely medical
care, equal access to vaccines and robust recovery plans that take care of the
economic and social needs of women and girls are necessary.”
Nepal appreciates the exemplary strength shown by women from various walks of
life in combating COVID-19 within their communities. In particular, we commend
the selfless service of women peacebuilders and peacekeepers in educating local
communities about containing and preventing the spread of COVID-19 while
delivering on their peacekeeping mandate. This has proved that, during the crisis,
we need more women leaders, peacebuilders and peacekeepers.
From the days of the Council’s adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), Nepal has
been a proactive supporter of the cause of women and peace and security. As the
first country in South Asia and the second in Asia overall to do so, Nepal adopted its
national action plan in 2011 to implement resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008).
We have made explicit efforts to localize our plan and mainstream the women and
peace and security agenda in Government institutions. Nepal’s national action plan
has been an example of a transparent, inclusive and participatory process with the
close involvement of conflict victims and civil society organizations. This experience
has been widely shared with countries in the region and beyond.
Nepal has finalized a draft three-year national action plan for a second
phase. The draft of the plan builds on the experiences and lessons learned from
the implementation of the first-phase national action plan. The draft includes a
framework for monitoring, reporting and evaluation as well as a budget breakdown
for different components, strategies and activities. It fits well with national and
sectoral policies outlining a localization plan. After its adoption, the second national
action plan will also be localized at the provincial and local levels.
20-14734123/161

S/2020/1084

In conclusion, I want to express Nepal’s readiness to share its experience
and lessons learned through the constructive engagement of women in conflictprevention, peacebuilding and peacekeeping.

124/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 65
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Netherlands to the
United Nations
We would like to thank the Russian Federation for convening today’s debate.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands fully aligns itself with the statement submitted
by the delegation of Canada on behalf of 63 States members of the Group of Friends
of Women, Peace and Security (annex 27), and with the statement submitted by the
Delegation of the European Union (annex 38) .
Today we reflect on the progress made since the adoption, 20 years ago, of
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. This past month we were
enlightened by many interesting events supporting the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda. Owing to the coronavirus disease, those events took
place online. Although we could not meet each other in person, an inclusive space
was created in which people from all over the world — from Governments, civil
society, think tanks and academic institutions — participated, each one with a story
to tell, with knowledge and experience to share.
We will also cherish these dialogues in the years to come because this is how
we should work together to uphold, improve and implement all pillars of the women
and peace and security agenda in their entirety. We have made progress together, we
have achieved results large and small and we have been able to change lives for the
better, at least for some.
But that is not enough. Only a fraction of peace agreements contain provisions
on gender, and even when such agreements contain specific provisions on gender,
implementation has proven difficult. Furthermore, in the Netherlands, a lot remains
to be done when it comes to women’s participation in politics, peace and security.
Some 32 per cent of the members of Parliament in the Netherlands in 2020 are
women. Female soldiers currently represent 10 per cent of the armed forces, and of
77 top military officials — those with the rank of general — only two are female.
The report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2020/946) has made it clear again that we as a global community have not been
able to implement the women and peace and security agenda in a way that would
rightfully change the lives of all women and girls. Gender inequality in itself is a
driver of instability and conflict; it should therefore be addressed as a root cause
of conflict. Women and girls in all their diversity need to be able to participate
and get involved. They also have a right to live without fear and to tell their own
stories of how they would like to be involved in achieving peace and contributing to
the development and reconstruction of their own communities, their countries and
beyond.
We need to reinforce our efforts to keep the theme of women and peace and
security on the political agenda, both nationally and internationally, in order to make
a difference on the ground. Allow me to share some of our efforts, priorities and
challenges, so that we can learn from each other and improve the way we work.
With regard to policy development, planning and implementation, at the end of
this year, the Kingdom of the Netherlands will adopt its fourth national action plan,
focused on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) for the period 2021-2025.
In prior national action plans, monitoring, evaluation and learning remained an area
earmarked for improvement. In our upcoming plan, we will monitor and evaluate
our efforts better, using a robust monitoring, evaluation and learning framework
with clear links to internationally agreed indicators. Our new plan will also include
a national focus. The Dutch Government will need to address the specific needs
20-14734125/161

S/2020/1084

of migrant and refugee women and girls. Gender mainstreaming is also key in
the fourth national action plan, with a view to strengthening gender expertise and
using gender-sensitive conflict analysis for strategic planning and the allocation of
resources and programmes.
Lastly, as in previous national action plans, close cooperation between
Government institutions and civil society remains at the heart of the Dutch approach
to women and peace and security. As a key priority in our policy in this area, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands is committed to remaining an international advocate
for women’s rights and gender equality, with special attention paid to sexual and
reproductive health and rights, women’s participation and leadership in peace
processes and ensuring a gender perspective in all peace and security policies.
In our efforts to prevent and respond to sexual violence in conflict, the survivorcentred approach remains a guiding principle, including in our efforts with regard to
sexual and reproductive health, mental health and psychosocial support, and access
to justice.
Emerging global crises, such as the climate crisis and the coronavirus disease
pandemic, have serious and negative impacts on the progress made with respect to
gender equality and the position of women and girls. The latter bear the brunt of
socioeconomic stress and burdens of care, and they face increased violence in the
home. In a changing global context, local knowledge and resilience, including the
role of local women’s organizations — localization — are essential.
In conclusion, the challenge for us now is to make explicit use of the
transformative potential after crises and conflict and build back better, with a
specific focus on women’s rights organizations and movement-building.

126/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 66
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Peru to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
We would like to thank the Russian Federation, in its capacity as President
of the Security Council this month, for convening today’s open debate on the
twenty-fifth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), which established the women
and peace and security agenda, to which Peru attaches great importance. Likewise,
we would also like to thank the very valuable briefings made by the SecretaryGeneral, the Under-Secretary-General and Executive Director of UN-Women, the
United Nations Goodwill Ambassador for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women, the Adviser on Sexual and Gender-based Violence for the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei and the Head of the Women and Children Legal
Research Foundation.
In particular, we welcome and celebrate this important anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), as it marks an important milestone for the
Council and recognizes women as actors relevant to the building of international
peace and security. It is also special because it coincides with the anniversary of
the adoption of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, which constitutes
a central element in the rights of women and girls, recognizing the fundamental
role of women in our societies and developing an action programme in favour of the
empowerment of women and gender equality, while also envisaging a world in which
women can fully exercise their freedoms and rights.
For Peru, the agenda of gender equality and the empowerment of women is
crucial, which is why in recent years we have made great efforts to improve the
enjoyment and exercise of the rights of all women, adolescents and girls. Within
this framework, Peru is committed to the women and peace and security agenda,
which includes the empowerment of women and the achievement of gender equality,
in order, inter alia, to achieve the complete and effective participation of women in
various decision-making institutions and processes at all levels within our societies,
including those related to international peace and security. This commitment was
expressed in the work we carried out during our recent membership in the Security
Council, in particular within the informal group of experts on women and peace
and security, which Peru had the honour to co-chair with Germany. We also wish
to emphasize the support we give to multilateralism and the rule of law as essential
components of a strong international community.
It is undeniable that incorporating women and their perspectives in peaceoriented processes is important to ensuring sustainable peace. However, despite this
understanding, evidence shows that we must redouble our efforts aimed at having
the necessary levels of effective, full, equal and meaningful women’s participation
in them, considering women’s double dimension in this regard: on the one hand, they
are active agents of peace and, on the other, they are beneficiaries of peace.
If we want to accelerate the achievement of sustainable peace and security, we
must ensure the participation of all relevant actors, including women. However, their
involvement alone is not enough; their participation must be meaningful, on equal
terms and situated at all levels of decision-making. We welcome the progress made
so far, but we must continue to make progress and consolidate the true role of women,
with a view to achieving gender equality and their full empowerment. Furthermore,
we see that the diversity of women is still not properly recognized. Women are not
a single, homogeneous group. Therefore, their diversity, uniqueness and particular

20-14734127/161

S/2020/1084

needs must be recognized and taken into account. This will have a strong positive
impact on the advancement of the women and peace and security agenda.
The important role that women play in all areas of our societies is paramount.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has shown this, with women representing 70 per
cent of all health and social workers on the front lines of the pandemic. Nevertheless,
inequalities and gaps remain evident. Accordingly, the inclusion of women in
decision-making processes is quite relevant, since it helps to make their needs and
points of view more visible, thereby contributing to the elimination of stereotypes
about women’s roles. Evidence shows that greater participation by women in decisionmaking processes results in a diminished likelihood of conflict. In this regard, we
cannot fail to mention sexual and gender-based violence, which is a serious problem
that we as an international community must address and resolve in order to achieve
a safer world and more inclusive and sustainable societies, not only for the benefit of
women and girls but for all of humankind.
It is on the basis of what I have said here that Peru guides its actions and
promotes the participation of women. We would like to emphasize that our country is
the fifth-largest contributor of troops to United Nations peace operations in terms of
the percentage of female personnel in such operations and that a significant number
of them serve as officers at management level.
In conclusion, we would like to express our recognition of the important work
that the Secretary-General is doing in this area, as well as our firm commitment to
continuing to work with the United Nations and its Member States in a proactive and
constructive manner and to further advance this agenda in line with the need to build
a sustainable and inclusive peace.

128/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 67
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Philippines to
the United Nations, Enrique A. Manalo
The Philippines thanks the Russian presidency of the Security Council this
month for convening this important debate and the other members of the Council
for their efforts aimed at advancing the women and peace and security agenda in
the Council’s work. We also thank the Secretary-General and the briefers for their
briefings today.
The Philippines views women’s full, effective and meaningful participation
in all stages of the peace process as critical, given women’s indispensable role in
the prevention and resolution of conflict and in peacebuilding and peacekeeping.
These principles are embodied in resolution 1325 (2000) and in subsequent
relevant resolutions.
The Philippines was the first country in Asia to adopt a national action plan on
women and peace and security. A product of constructive engagement between the
Government and civil society, the Philippine plan maximized the gains of decades of
gender-mainstreaming work in the country. It enabled national Government agencies
and local Government units to identify interventions in the area of women and peace
and security for integration in their regular plans, budgets and accomplishment
reports, as required by the country’s landmark law, the Magna Carta of Women.
The Women, Peace and Security National Action Plan 2017-2022 currently provides
a framework for promoting women’s rights and leadership roles in peacebuilding,
peacekeeping and peace negotiations.
In 2014, the Philippine Government signed a peace accord with the rebel
group Moro Islamic Liberation Front, ending decades-long conflict in Mindanao.
The Government peace panel was headed by a woman, Miriam Coronel-Ferrer, the
first female chief negotiator in the world to sign a peace accord with a rebel group.
The Philippines supports the work of the United Nations system in integrating
gender dimensions in all aspects of peacebuilding. The Department of National
Defence has responded to the United Nations goal of increasing female participation
in United Nations peace operations by pledging 30 female military observers/
peacekeeping staff to the United Nations Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System.
In our view, women bring unique perspectives to peacebuilding and peacekeeping,
which results in improved situational awareness, enhanced access to critical services
and deepened trust with local communities, among other outcomes.
In the light of the coronavirus disease pandemic, the Philippine Defence
Department seeks to increase financing of the women and peace and security agenda
recognizing that the pandemic exacerbates gender inequality in conflict-affected,
post-conflict and humanitarian crisis contexts. Women and girls face a higher
incidence of gender-based violence, more difficulties in accessing basic goods and
services, and greater numbers of human rights violations.
The Philippine National Police (PNP) is mandated by law to prioritize the
recruitment and training of women in this male-dominated organization. The PNP
has to reserve 10 per cent of its annual recruitment, training and education quota for
women. In recent years, however, the actual percentage of women in the police has
gone up as much as 20 per cent. In promoting gender-sensitive investigations, the
PNP was able to establish 2,167 Women and Children Protection Desks nationwide,
manned by 5,774 trained women investigators.
In our region, the Philippines supports the efforts of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) aimed at mainstreaming the women and
20-14734129/161

S/2020/1084

peace and security agenda in its work. The ASEAN Women for Peace Registry, a
compendium of women leaders in ASEAN with expertise in the various aspects of
peace processes, including negotiation, mediation, facilitation and research, inter
alia, is a good practice that may be shared with other organizations. The ASEAN
Institute for Peace and Reconciliation, ASEAN’s research arm, can also share
best practices and lessons learned on conflict management and conflict resolution
involving women peace negotiators and advocates.
To promote the further participation of women in the peacekeeping work
of the United Nations, the Philippines recommends the designation of female
peacekeepers to key United Nations positions, an increase in training opportunities
for female peacekeepers and the allocation of a certain percentage of posts to female
peacekeepers in formed units or contingent deployments. The Philippines reiterates
its commitment to resolution 1325 (2000) and is ready to cooperate with international
partners to achieve these goals.

130/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 68
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Poland to the United Nations
Poland commends Russia for convening today’s important debate. We welcome
the focus of the debate on the implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda and on making our shared commitment a reality. We would like to express
our appreciation to Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing and for his valuable
report (S/2020/946). We also thank all the briefers for their insightful and thoughtprovoking remarks.
We align ourselves with the statements of the European Union (annex 38) and
the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (annex 27).
In 2000, courageous women peacebuilders, mediators and human rights
defenders were the inspiration behind resolution 1325 (2000), which, for the first
time in history, called for the inclusion of women in matters of peacebuilding and
peacekeeping. Today, 20 years after the unanimous adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), we recognize more than ever the urgent need to deliver on our commitments.
We fully subscribe to the words of the Secretary-General that
“women’s full, equal and meaningful participation [in peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts] is a non-negotiable political priority”.
The women and peace and security agenda has been greatly enriched over
the last 20 years, including by highlighting the disproportionate impact of armed
conflict on women and girls, the great benefits of enhancing the involvement of
women in peace processes and the absolute necessity of tackling the scourge of
sexual violence as a tactic of war. It is also widely understood that women and men
have different experiences both during and after conflict, and that women face a
particular set of challenges related to peacebuilding and security. We admit that
while certain progress has been made there remains a stark inconsistency between
declarations and actual actions. What is more, the consequences of the coronavirus
disease pandemic pose a real threat to the advancements achieved.
Evidence shows that women’s inclusion increases the quality and sustainability
of peace processes. However, they are still overwhelmingly absent from negotiations.
Since 1992, women only account for 3 per cent of mediators on peace agreements.
The United Nations must remain resolute in its efforts aimed at promoting women’s
meaningful participation at all stages of peacemaking. Acknowledging the existence,
skills, influence, values and approaches of women peacebuilders is a necessary
preliminary step in ensuring their rightful and systematic place at the tables of
negotiations and in decision-making and in fostering future peace around the world.
We also need to recognize that women are not a homogenous group and that the
women who tend be most marginalized, such as women with disabilities or women
belonging to religious and ethnic minorities, need to be engaged in peace processes.
We need to make sure that everyone’s voice is heard. In this context, it is worth
keeping in mind that resolution 2475 (2019), initiated by Poland and unanimously
adopted by the Security Council last year, calls on all States Members of the
United Nations to enable the meaningful participation and representation of
persons with disabilities in humanitarian action, conflict prevention, resolution,
reconciliation, reconstruction and peacebuilding.
Moreover, the meaningful participation of women in peace processes as well
as broader political processes is not about number of women at the table; rather,
it is about women’s leadership. We need to identify and support policies that
strengthen not only women’s voices but also women’s access to leadership positions
in decision-making in peacebuilding. We must also ensure that women have a strong
20-14734131/161

S/2020/1084

voice in decision-making from initial peacemaking processes to the establishment
and development of local and national Governmental institutions. We know that
women are adequately trained for these roles and that they are ready for high-level
appointments. We also know that qualified women are everywhere.
We fully support initiatives and programmes that contribute to increasing
the role of women in building lasting peace and security. To this end, Poland is
implementing its first-ever Polish National Action Plan on Women, Peace and
Security. The National Action Plan has been adopted for the term 2018-2021, and its
primarily focus has been put on the participation of women in conflict prevention
and peacekeeping, women and peace and security agenda implementation via Polish
humanitarian and development aid, protection and support of the victims of conflictrelated sexual and gender-based violence, and promotion and development of the
women and peace and security agenda both nationally and internationally.
We do recognize that the national action plans are useful only if the outlined
commitments are being actually translated into practice. That is why Poland has
committed itself at international forums to introducing measures that will ensure
that perpetrators are held accountable for acts of conflict-related sexual violence and
to strengthening prevention efforts and the fight against impunity of peacekeepers
who commit sexual exploitation and abuse.
As a non-permanent member of the Security Council in the 2018-2019
term, Poland was a strong advocate of the women and peace and security agenda.
Consequently, the protection of the most vulnerable groups, such as women and
children, remains one of the priorities of Poland’s from 2020-2022 term as a member
of the Human Rights Council.
The participation of female soldiers in United Nations peacekeeping missions
is our priority. Poland actively promotes policies that address potential barriers to
women soldiers in recruitment, participation and scope of engagement in peace
operations. After re-engagement in peacekeeping operations in 2019, Poland paid
special attention to the meaningful and appropriate assignment of women soldiers in
our contingent in the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). In 2020,
the level of participation of Polish women in UNIFIL reached approximately 10 per
cent, which is far above the 5 per cent average.
The women and peace and security agenda is one of the priorities of Polish
humanitarian aid and development assistance. In this area, Poland focuses mainly
on protecting women from conflict-related sexual violence. We are targeting these
objectives with the support of UN Women, the United Nations Population Fund
and UNICEF, and through bilateral cooperation that aims, inter alia, at providing
protection and health care and at creating an environment conducive to the
empowerment of women.
In order to effectively operationalize the women and peace and security
agenda, we need to identify and consistently address persisting barriers to women’s
engagement. This requires making precise recommendations, systematic and regular
assessments, and setting clear and measurable targets and concrete road maps. For
this reason, Poland supports all initiatives aimed at providing practical guidance for
the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda.
In this vein, we welcome the Women Peacebuilders Protection Framework,
created by the International Civil Society Action Network with the support of the
United Kingdom and whose report provides valuable insight into protecting needs
of female peacebuilders and is followed by operational guidance that provides
precise recommendations. We hope that this initiative will contribute to further
operationalization of the women and peace and security agenda.
132/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

We acknowledge and value the great impact resolution 1325 (2000) has had on
peace processes. It has changed the understanding of peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
The agenda that at first blush may stem from the need to ensure greater equality in
practice ends up delivering better, longer lasting and more effective solutions in
complicated peace and security circumstances. We do hope that the anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000) will give a real impetus to better implementation of the
resolution’s provisions. We know what to do; what we need now is political will and
an actual long-lasting commitment.

20-14734133/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 69
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Portugal to the United Nations
Portugal thanks the Russian Federation for organizing today’s open debate on
the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) and welcomes
the opportunity to follow up on the women and peace and security agenda, discuss
in particular the achievements made so far and redefine strategies to increase the
implementation of all its pillars. We align ourselves with the statements of the
European Union (annex 38) and the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security
(annex 27).
Portugal would like to commend the efforts of the United Nations system on
this subject and the Secretary-General’s recently published report on women and
peace and security (S/2020/946), which represents an important assessment of the
agenda 20 years after its establishment, and it is ever more relevant considering the
impacts of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
This year we also celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption
of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, which presents us with an
important opportunity to reaffirm our efforts aimed at addressing structural gender
inequalities, the role of women in peace processes and the prevention of conflictrelated sexual violence.
Victims and survivors of conflict-related sexual violence can be subject to
discrimination, sexual assault, sexual slavery, forced prostitution, human trafficking
and forced marriages. These crimes represent serious violations and abuses of human
rights and violations of international humanitarian law. Furthermore, in conflict
situations, attacks on schools disproportionally affect girls, thereby jeopardizing
gender equality and girls’ right to education, as well as increasing the risk of child
marriages, early and forced marriages, early pregnancies and sexual and genderbased violence. We must therefore ensure accountability and fight against impunity
and maintain a zero-tolerance approach towards aggressors, be they members of
terrorist groups, State actors or troops deployed on behalf of the United Nations.
It is urgent that specific strategies against acts of violence in conflict situations
be implemented, particularly through cooperation with civil society organizations,
youth and women’s organizations — including those designed to ensure the security
of women peacebuilders and women human rights defenders — and access to
information and the use of new technologies. This commitment includes protecting
and promoting sexual and reproductive health and rights and providing victims and
survivors with access to mental-health care and legal services.
Portugal’s holistic approach to the women and peace and security agenda is
based on promoting gender equality, the inclusion of women in conflict prevention,
the training of armed forces, and the fight against gender and sexual violence. This
approach is part of the policies and strategies Portugal has adopted and is included
in our operational planning in defence, foreign policy, development cooperation,
security and justice.
Portugal has adopted its third National Action Plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) in the period from 2019 to 2022. The third National Action
Plan is also part of the commitments assumed by Portugal in several international
forums, including the Council of Europe and the European Union. We comply with
the Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against
women and domestic violence, also known as the Istanbul Convention.
The third National Action Plan is based on four strategic objectives: reinforcing
the integration of the women and peace and security agenda and the perspective of
134/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

equality between women and men in Portugal’s interventions at national, regional
and international levels; protecting the human rights of all women and girls and
punishing all forms of violence against them, including sexual violence; promoting
the participation of all women and young people in conflict prevention and in
peacebuilding processes; and integrating the women and peace and security agenda
in the work of civil society organizations. Follow-up on the implementation of our
national action plans is seen in an increase in the number of training courses given
on the women and peace and security agenda, particularly for deployed armed forces
in international peacekeeping missions.
Some examples of Portugal’s good practices in implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) include the approval of the gender-equality strategy for cooperation with
partner countries — Angola, Cabo Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Sao Tome
and Principe and Timor Leste — which involves measures aimed at eliminating all
forms of violence against women and girls and at promoting their empowerment,
particularly in fragile, conflict and post-conflict States; the approval, by the Ministry
of National Defence, in March 2019, of the National Defence Sectoral Plan for
Equality 2019-2021, structured across three main lines: equality, reconciliation and
training; the Ministry of National Defence’s creation, in March 2020, of the Equality
Office, the first at the ministerial level in Portugal, proving our commitment to
the monitoring and institutionalization of an inclusive gender culture; and, within
the scope of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries, efforts to ensure
the approval of a defence action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), for which Portugal has already forwarded a proposal. In addition, Portugal is
committed to greater legal and judicial cooperation in this area. It is also committed
to expanding the presence and participation of women in military contingents,
security forces and international peacekeeping missions, as women soldiers exercise
a key role on the ground.
Portugal reaffirms its support to the Secretary-General’s call for a global
ceasefire in response to COVID-19, taking into account his important policy brief
on the impacts of the pandemic on women as well. COVID-19 is an added challenge
to the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

20-14734135/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 70
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Qatar to the
United Nations, Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I wish to congratulate the Russian Federation on its presidency
of the Security Council this month, and I thank you, Sir, for convening this important
debate. I also thank the Secretary-General for his valuable briefing and the Executive
Director of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women (UN-Women) for her briefing, as well as all those who have taken the floor.
The twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) is being
commemorated against the backdrop of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, which has had a negative impact on women and girls. The occasion
provides an important opportunity to intensify efforts to implement the women and
peace and security agenda. There is no doubt that the best way out of this global
health crisis is to intensify our joint efforts in a spirit of cooperation and international
solidarity to overcome this turbulent time.
In line with the women and peace and security agenda, we stress that it is vital
for women to participate fully and meaningfully in preventing conflicts and crises
and in devising strategies for conflict resolution and post-conflict recovery. We must
use women’s strengths in order to address challenges to international peace and
security, including by increasing the number of women involved in peace processes.
To that end, Qatar supports the Secretary-General’s system-wide strategy on gender
parity in all areas, including peace and security.
Qatar has supported and implemented the women and peace and security
agenda since its adoption, upholding its commitment to the principle of gender
equality, the promotion and protection of the human rights of women and the
maintenance of international peace and security. Qatar co-chairs, with Ghana, the
Group of Friends for Gender Parity at the United Nations and has supported the
global study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2005) on women and peace
and security.
Aware of the need to strengthen the role of women in peacemaking, Qatar
strives to ensure that women are involved in the peace processes for which it
serves as mediator. In that connection, Qatar strived to ensure that women were
fully represented at the Afghan peace talks held in Doha in September 2020.
Three Afghan women members of the negotiating team of the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan participated in the negotiations. Similarly, participation by women in
the negotiations held in Doha in July 2019 was exemplary. Afghan women played
an important role in the negotiations and had a significant impact in promoting a
productive environment for dialogue.
Qatar continues to support Afghan peace negotiations and remains convinced
that the involvement of women helps to ensure the success of mediation processes,
guarantee the rights of women and girls, and promote the advancement of women
and their active participation in society, as that is an integral part of any agreements
that are negotiated and reached.
As part of our ongoing contribution to multilateral international action, and
on the occasion of the fifth anniversary of the youth, peace and security agenda,
Qatar will host the High-Level Global Conference on Comprehensive Peace Paths
for Youth in May 2021 in Doha. The Conference will focus on the participation of
young women in peace processes. We have taken pains to ensure gender equality
136/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

at all stages of the Conference, from the preparatory stages to the Conference itself
to the follow-up of its outcomes. It is our great pleasure to hold this conference
in cooperation with our partners from Finland and Colombia, the Office of the
Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth and the Education Above All Foundation
in Qatar.
In conclusion, Qatar renews its commitment to continuing to cooperate with
all stakeholders in the women and peace and security agenda and providing the
support needed to ensure its implementation, thereby contributing to international
peace and sustainable security.

20-14734137/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 71
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations, Cho Hyun
The delegation of the Republic of Korea fully aligns itself with the joint
statement of the MIKTA countries — Mexico, Indonesia, Republic of Korea,
Turkey and Australia — and has the honour of submitting this statement in its
national capacity.
My country reiterates the importance of full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in all aspects of peace and security. In particular, we highlight
the importance of translating the guiding resolutions and strategies in this area into
concrete actions. In 2014, the Republic of Korea established its National Action Plan
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and, in 2018, adopted its second
National Action Plan, for the period of 2018-2020.
Furthermore, the Republic of Korea is exerting its utmost efforts to
increase the number of women serving as military observers or staff officers in
United Nations peace operations to 25 per cent by 2028, in line with the Uniformed
Gender Parity Strategy 2018-2028 of the Department of Peace Operations. We have
already made steady progress, as the representation of women has increased from
18 per cent to 22 per cent since the Republic of Korea made its pledge last year. As
the host country for the 2021 Peacekeeping Ministerial meeting, the Republic of
Korea will strive to ensure that the voices of women in peace operations are duly
recognized and endeavour to further contribute to the promotion of the women and
peace and security agenda.
My delegation would like to highlight the importance of preventing conflictrelated sexual violence and protecting victims. In particular, a survivor-centred
approach is critical to preventing and responding to conflict-related sexual violence.
Accordingly, my delegation emphasizes the significance of implementing resolution
2467 (2019) adopted last year. Necessary assistance should be provided to all victims,
including sexual and reproductive health-care services. To this end, the Republic of
Korea, as one of the board members of the Global Fund for Survivors of ConflictRelated Sexual Violence, is participating in the Fund and will continue to provide
support to it, including through financial contributions.
Following the first International Conference on Action with Women and Peace
last year, the Republic of Korea, on 24 November, will host the second international
conference of this kind, using a virtual platform, with the survivor-centred approach
as the theme. We greatly look forward to the Security Council’s active participation.
At this historic moment, in which we are celebrating the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), we would like to emphasize that its successful
implementation has a very special meaning for Korea. The Government of the
Republic of Korea will continue to endeavour to restore the honour and dignity
of the victims known as comfort women and turn this painful experience into a
lesson from history. The Republic of Korea has been exerting sustained efforts in
the advancement of the women and peace and security agenda and will continue to
spare no efforts to this end.

138/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 72
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Romania to the
United Nations, Ion Jinga
Romania aligns itself with the statement submitted by the European Union
(EU) (annex 38).
As we mark the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, and the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the adoption of the Beijing Platform for Action, it is unfortunate that these
momentous occasions are undermined by the coronavirus disease pandemic, which
disproportionately affects women and girls by severely affecting their safety and
livelihoods, as well as by exclusion and underrepresentation. The full and equal
participation of all women and girls is essential and has a direct impact on achieving
peaceful and sustainable societies. We must enable and include their voices,
perspectives and considerations in all processes and outcomes.
Acknowledging the importance of resolution 1325 (2000), Romania has
devised multiple national action plans for the resolution’s implementation. The
most recent plan, adopted in July this year, established a national implementation
group responsible for consolidating cooperation and consultation with international
organizations and civil society, as well as with monitoring and increasing the
efficiency of Romanian institutions in relation to the execution of the provisions
outlined in the resolution.
The renewed support for increasing the representation of women in mediation
teams, political transitions and peace processes at all levels, and in close consultation
with women’s groups at local and international levels, was deemed crucial for the full
and comprehensive implementation of the women and peace and security agenda.
While there have been notable achievements in this field since the year 2000, more
remains to be done, since women and girls are still not adequately represented.
Rebuilding societies affected by conflict and crises should be based largely on
women’s contributions, considering that they are among the most affected.
Peacekeeping and peacebuilding, enshrined in multilateralism and symbols of
international solidarity in the promotion and maintenance of international peace and
security, are among the most effective tools at our disposal. As an active participant
in missions sponsored by NATO, the EU, the United Nations and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, Romania understands and fully integrates
gender dimensions in all aspects of national and international security and
stability, and, as a result of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), 25 per
cent of Romanian police officers and 15 per cent of Romanian military personnel
participating in missions around the globe are women.
Their expertise and important role have constantly been acknowledged.
Romanian female officers have received the International Female Police Peacekeeper
Award and have been appointed to leading roles within United Nations missions.
Furthermore, Romania successfully deployed its first female engagement team in
Afghanistan where, owing to the status of women in that country, male soldiers were
prohibited from interacting with the female population. As a result, female personnel
were pulled from other duties and pressed into service to create an interface with
the 50 per cent of the local population that is female so as to better understand
their needs.
Women peacekeepers have proven that they can perform the same tasks as male
peacekeepers under the same difficult conditions and that they can also improve the
operational efficiency by engaging with local female communities. Their presence
20-14734139/161

S/2020/1084

in sensitive areas may constitute a model for local women and a determinant factor
for the latter to get involved in all aspects of decision-making. In this regard, we
welcome the recent resolution 2538 (2020), on women in peacekeeping.
We must strive to fully implement the women and peace and security agenda
in peacekeeping operations in order to increase performance and accountability,
improve the safety and security of peacekeepers and, last but not least, ensure that
a policy of zero-tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse is in place, in line with
the Secretary-General`s strategy to prevent and end this type of misconduct. To
this end, on 5 November 2020, Romania will organize an international conference
entitled “Gender Equality — 20 years after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000):
The impact on the security and defence sector”. This event will take place under the
auspices of the South-Eastern Europe Defence Ministerial Process.
Gender equality, the empowerment of all women and girls and the realization
of all their human rights will be essential to overcome current and future crises and
build more equal, inclusive and resilient societies for all. Together as the international
community, we need to be ambitious and continue to drive the changes needed to
create the same enthusiasm that made the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
Beijing Platform for Action possible over two decades ago.

140/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 73
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Senegal

to

the

First of all, I would like to congratulate the Russian Federation on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month and to welcome
the holding of today’s open debate on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on the theme of women and peace and security.
This anniversary coincides with the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing World
Conference on Women and the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations.
In adopting resolution 1325 (2000), the Security Council recognized not
only the differential, disproportionate and multidimensional impact of conflict
on women and girls but also, and most significant, the importance of their active
participation in peace processes. With the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
the prevention of violence against women, the protection of their rights and the
promotion of their involvement in decision-making became essential markers in all
peace policies and strategies at global, regional and national levels. Accordingly,
through the Action for Peacekeeping initiative and its subsequent Declaration of
Shared Commitments, endorsed by 151 States Members of the United Nations and
four regional organizations, which are aimed at revitalizing efforts to make peace
missions more inclusive and effective, the international community has renewed
its commitment to increasing the number of civilian and uniformed women at all
stages of peace processes. Equally important is the Secretary-General’s gender
strategy, under which important international peacekeeping responsibilities have
been assigned to women, including gender-equality and women’s protection advisers
deployed in several theatres of peace operations.
Despite this significant progress, the results of the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) are slow and structural, and cyclical and economic challenges,
including in the area of financing and institutional reform, persist, as was so well
highlighted in the latest report of the Secretary-General on the subject before us today
(S/2020/946). In conflict areas, in addition to being considered as weapons of war,
women continue to be victims of all kinds of abuses, including sexual and genderbased harassment by armed groups and regular armed forces. This is compounded
by their low representation in the defence and security sectors, as well as in conflict
prevention, resolution and peacebuilding processes.
Senegal, believing that nation-building is based on individual freedom and
respect for the human person, has consistently reiterated its faith in, and commitment
to, strengthening the rule of law and justice in the country with regard to women, as
evidenced by the ratification of almost all of the international instruments aimed at
the promotion of women’s rights.
In keeping with the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000), Senegal has put in
place a legal framework as well as policies and strategies for the implementation of
its commitments, with the goal of ending gender-based violence and promoting the
rights of women and girls, especially in the area of peace and security.
With respect to measures that integrate the gender dimension into issues of
peace and security, my country has drawn up and is implementing a national action
plan for the eradication of gender-based violence, as well as a gender-related sectoral
strategy for the period 2012-2022, whose main objective is to reach the goal of a
10 per cent proportion of women in the armed forces by the deadline.
That reform has made it possible to revise all texts relating to military personnel
with the aim of creating conditions conducive to the integration, advancement and
20-14734141/161

S/2020/1084

professional development of women. It has also led to the introduction of a gender
curriculum in schools and training centres for military and police personnel. The
appointment of a female commissioner to head the national police in 2013 was one of
the strongest expressions of that policy and provided additional motivation for young
Senegalese women dreaming of donning a uniform.
My country’s strong commitment to increasing the number of women in its
defence and security forces is also evident in its contributions to peacekeeping
operations. Senegal currently has 60 female soldiers, 121 female police personnel
and three female prison staff, that is, more than 2 per cent, 9 per cent and 14 per cent
of the total staff of those components, respectively.
In addition, following its creation in 2011, a monitoring committee on the
implementation of the national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000) was set up within
the Ministry of Women, Family and Gender, and an interministerial committee on
women and peace and security was set up in 2017 under the auspices of the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs and Senegalese Abroad.
Like many other countries, Senegal has also drawn up a second national action
plan on resolution 1325 (2000), this time for the period 2020-2024, on the basis of
resolution 2122 (2013), which calls on Member States to assess the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and to identify the strengths and weaknesses of such
implementation, with a view to taking new and more ambitious approaches.
Promoting women’s participation in peacekeeping also requires the elimination
of material obstacles to the recruitment and retention of female personnel in theatres
of operation and, consequently, sufficient consideration of their specific needs in the
establishment of infrastructures and services related to those operations.
Likewise, the issue of sexual abuse and exploitation deserves to be highlighted
once again. By endorsing the declaration of the Circle of Leadership on the prevention
of that phenomenon, Senegal is in lockstep with the zero-tolerance policy in that area
and remains convinced that an increased presence of women in peace operations is
of vital importance in the provision of assistance to victims.
Senegal therefore remains determined to support all international initiatives
aimed at ensuring gender equality in the maintenance and consolidation of
peace. However, my country believes that the effective implementation of such
initiatives must involve an ongoing dialogue between the United Nations and the
contributing countries, whose gender policies, it must be admitted, have made fairly
uneven progress.
Such an approach will help the Organization support those countries while
setting realistic and achievable objectives in terms of promoting the participation of
women in peace operations.

142/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 74
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Sierra Leone to the
United Nations, Alie Kabba
Sierra Leone welcomes the convening of this open video-teleconference on
“Women and peace and security: twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000),
focusing on better implementation”. We thank the Russian Federation for this
initiative and congratulate it for presiding over the Security Council in this month
of October in spite of the extraordinary challenges posed by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19).
Sierra Leone takes note with appreciation of the 2020 reports of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2020/946) and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission on
the issue of women and peace and security, both of which underscore the need for
all stakeholders to redouble their efforts to implement the women and peace and
security agenda with a sustained focus on commitments to build back better. We also
thank all the briefers for their insightful presentations.
Today’s meeting is a time for deep reflection on the status of implementation
of the historic resolution 1325 (2000) 20 years on. Indeed, it provides another
opportunity for all of us to proffer concrete recommendations on how to address the
challenges that have emerged over the years and those that persist.
Sierra Leone continues to demonstrate robust enthusiasm for the
implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. We have embedded
resolution 1325 (2000) into our national policy instruments and programmes. We
started with the adoption of a national action plan, which has now been elevated to
the level of a second-generation plan and which is also aligned with our mediumterm national development plan 2019-2023, which focuses on education for all, with
a cluster dedicated to empowering women, children and persons with disabilities.
We are giving women not only space to fulfil their potential but also a voice
in governance. The adoption of a resolution on women and peace and security by
our Parliament in 2019 created additional leverage for the increased participation
of women in issues related to peace and security. We currently have a female
Deputy Inspector General of Police. There has also been an increase in the effective
participation of women in Sierra Leone’s contingent for peace operations globally.
In 2019, the armed forces of the Republic of Sierra Leone recruited 332 female
military personnel, including 62 cadets — 42 in the infantry and 20 specialists — and
270 recruits. That will help to promote peace processes, as Sierra Leone is a nation
that contributes to peacekeeping missions around the world. Affirmative action on
the part of the Sierra Leone police has been taken to accelerate the promotion of
women in the police force and the increased participation of women in peacekeeping
operations, particularly in the police component.
We could not agree more with the Secretary-General on COVID-19 having
the potential to reverse the limited progress made on gender equality and women’s
rights. In that connection, we have put women and girls at the centre of our national
COVID-19 response and recovery strategy. Sexual and gender-based violence is
being combated at the highest political level. In 2019, His Excellency President Julius
Maada Bio declared himself a HeForShe Champion. Since then, he has spared no
effort to fight sexual and gender-based violence in our communities. He spearheaded
the launching of one-stop centres on sexual and gender-based violence and the
first-ever Sexual Offences Model Court for rape proceedings — a practical way of
addressing the scourge of rape by efficiently dealing with the backlog of cases.

20-14734143/161

S/2020/1084

Sierra Leone will continue to promote women`s full and effective participation
in national and community initiatives on peace and security issues throughout the
country. We are partnering with international and local organizations to conduct
leadership trainings and community awareness-raising sessions on women’s human
rights across the country. We are refining legal processes in support of women’s
political empowerment as well as their inclusion in conflict-resolution processes.
We are making use of the newly established women’s situation room, a platform
set up to address the issue of violence and intimidation against women, especially
during electoral processes. We fully agree with the call of the Secretary-General for
increased support for and the protection of women peacebuilders against all forms
of violence and abuse, be it physically or online.
Financing the women and peace and security agenda remains a major
challenge for many of our countries. There is an urgent need for more investment in
that area and not in militarized State security, which exacerbates violence, including
sexual and gender-based violence. We urge States with national action plans to
adopt more realistic resource-mobilization strategies, such as fully costing every
plan, public-private partnerships, developing localization guidelines to ensure that
local development plans are incorporated into activities related to women and peace
and security, the mapping of women peacebuilders’ and women-led peacebuilding
organizations, and engaging bilateral and multilateral partners for funding
and partnerships.
We are aware of our constraints and will continue to address them with
informed robust policies and concrete evidence. We wholeheartedly welcome
the creation of the Generation Equality Compact on Women, Peace and Security
and Humanitarian Action. We are eternally grateful to the Generation Equality
Core Group for having selected us to serve on the Board of the newly established
Compact. We reiterate our commitment to the guiding principles of the Compact. We
equally welcome the efforts of the African Union to adopt the Continental Results
Framework, a mechanism that will monitor and report on implementation of the
peace and security agenda in Africa.
Let me conclude by affirming that better implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda requires a renewed determination to ensure that every
commitment on paper is matched in practice. It also means paying close attention
to the key gaps in effective implementation, such as militarized investments,
discrimination against women in peace leadership and a strong focus on women
as victims of conflict with no context-specific or gender-sensitive analysis. We
will remain proactive in our fund-raising responsibilities. We will explore every
reachable source of funding, because there is nothing like “small money”, especially
from the perspective of ownership through local contribution.

144/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 75
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Slovakia to the
United Nations, Michal Mlynár
Slovakia aligns itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the European
Union (annex 38).
Allow me to express my gratitude for the holding of this open debate on women
and peace and security on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), focusing on its better implementation. In our view, it
is essential that the Security Council continue to systematically and consistently
advance, advocate for and promote a holistic women and peace and security agenda
in its work and decision-making.
It is significant to contemplate the fact that, in the first five years after the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), only 15 per cent of Security Council resolutions
included explicit references to issues related to women and peace and security.
Between 2017 and 2019, however, that number increased to approximately 70 per cent.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his 2020 report (S/2020/946)
on women and peace and security and to commend his leadership and commitment
to this important agenda. My delegation shares and supports the Secretary-General’s
view that all approaches to conflict prevention, resolution and recovery efforts
must have at their core women’s full, equal and meaningful participation and
rights, including respect for bodily autonomy. This, however, requires more than
tackling discrimination. Placing women at the centre of peacebuilding efforts must
involve ensuring that there is a solid foundation on which to build for the inclusive
participation of women.
I am glad to share that my Government approved the first national action plan
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) for 2021-2025, and we therefore
joined the 86 other States Members of the United Nations that have national
action plans on resolution 1325 (2000). This is yet another tangible example of our
commitment to the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda.
As I stated last year, increasing the number of women in our armed forces has been
and continues to be a long-term policy on the part of Slovakia, which, despite the
numerous challenges associated with the current global pandemic, remains active in
peacekeeping around the world. The United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus,
for example, includes 241 members of the armed forces of Slovakia, including
25 women. I would also like to draw the Council’s attention to Slovakia’s standing in
the Global Peace Index. As of 2020, my country has maintained its standing in the
top 25, with a score of 1.57.
Allow me also to reiterate the importance of having gender-sensitive
security-sector-reform strategies throughout all planning, design, implementation,
monitoring and evaluation phases. We believe that Member States should redouble
their efforts in that respect in order to not only address but also prevent sexual
and gender-based violence. Women must continue to be promoted as equal leaders,
and discrimination against and the stereotyping of women must be firmly and
publicly denounced. Women are capable of so much if given the opportunity. It is
our collective responsibility to provide and safeguard those opportunities.
Reforming the security sector must focus on recruitment processes and an
improvement in the delivery of security services to address and prevent sexual
and gender-based violence. The discussions also underscored the fact that women
must be promoted as equal and strategic leaders, barriers must be broken down and

20-14734145/161

S/2020/1084

stereotypes about women’s roles in societies, including their participation in peace
processes, eliminated.
Our support for gender equality and women’s empowerment is also reflected
in Slovak development cooperation projects. Slovakia is financially supporting the
implementation of the South Eastern and Eastern Europe Clearinghouse for the
Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons regional project aimed at strengthening
gender equality in the Ministries of Defence and Armed Forces of selected countries
of the Western Balkans.
Slovakia is currently in the process of drawing up three key strategic
documents on strengthening the role of women in society: the national strategy for
equality between women and men and equal opportunities 2020-2025, its action plan
and the national action plan for the prevention and elimination of violence against
women 2020-2025.
The whole world is currently facing a surge of unprecedented crises engendered
by the global coronavirus disease pandemic, which undoubtedly has impacted and
continues to impact the peacekeeping work of the United Nations around the world.
Nonetheless, the challenges that we faced prior to the pandemic but did not manage
to resolve remain with us. It is our sincere hope that as an Organization we will centre
our approach on solidarity and the protection of the most vulnerable, including in
particular women and girls.
In conclusion, my delegation believes that the United Nations must be equally
representative of, and responsive to, the needs of not only all countries but also all
human beings. In order for us to be successful in tackling the current health and
socioeconomic crises, responsible, inclusive and emphatic leadership matters. We
need to unite and work together and in solidarity to not only protect the women and
girls of our world today but also to ensure the full enjoyment of all human rights for
future generations as well.

146/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 76
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Slovenia to the
United Nations
Slovenia aligns itself with the statements submitted by the European Union
(annex 38) and by the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (annex 27).
The year 2020 marks important milestones for gender equality and women
and peace and security. Women’s meaningful participation must be at the centre of
all peace-related activities. Without women as equal and fundamental partners in
decision-making processes, there can be no equal and inclusive society and, without
resilience, which only equal and inclusive societies can provide, there can be no
sustainable peace.
Looking at the Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/946), we recognize that
certain progress has been made but that it has been too slow. Twenty-five years
after the international community’s commitment to achieving gender equality and
20 years after the essential role of women in securing and maintaining peace were
recognized, an equal and meaningful place at the table is still out of reach for too
many women. We must do more, and we must do it faster.
As we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), the coronavirus disease pandemic has revealed the structural inequalities
and devastating consequences of undelivered promises and unachieved goals.
The central role and power of women’s leadership have proved to be essential for
effective and human-rights-based response and recovery. However, the increase in
all forms of violence against women, including political violence targeting women,
remains of concern. Women’s organizations on the ground play a crucial role in the
implementation of the women and peace and security agenda, and we condemn all
threats and violence against women peacebuilders, political leaders, activists and
women human rights defenders. We reiterate our support for the Secretary-General’s
calls to end violence everywhere, in war zones and at home.
Our national efforts and achievements in implementing the women and peace
and security agenda over the past 20 years include the following.
The post of the Slovenian Minister of Defence has twice been occupied by
a woman, and women have been appointed as heads of the General Staff of the
Slovenian Armed Forces and of the Police. Slovenia also had the first woman to
command a contingent of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.
Currently, women constitute 33 per cent of employees in the Slovenian Police;
female soldiers represent 17 per cent within the Slovenian Armed Forces; and 61 per
cent of Slovenian Ministry for Foreign Affairs employees are women. Furthermore,
41 per cent of Slovenian Ministry for Foreign Affairs employees at the rank of
Ambassador are women.
Slovenia has integrated the gender perspective into a number of national
strategies, such as on national security and countering terrorism and violent
extremism. We have adopted our second national action plan on women, peace
and security, for the period 2018-2020, and established a centre for education and
training for participation in peacekeeping operations and missions, which provides
training on women and peace and security.
In November, the Slovenian Ministry of Defence, together with the Slovenian
Peacekeeping Operations Training Centre, will host a virtual conference to mark
the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). Together with
Norway, we will host a meeting of experts on women and peace and security in
January 2021.
20-14734147/161

S/2020/1084

We have been given the opportunity to build back better, and it is our
responsibility to seize that opportunity. To preserve the hard-fought gains of the past
20 years and accelerate progress on achieving our commitments and goals, we need
to act together, and we need to act now. Slovenia stands ready to do its part.

148/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 77
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Spain to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Twenty years after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we still face
enormous challenges in ensuring that women fully participate in all areas of society
on an equal basis. Over those 20 years, we have seen a fundamental shift from
considering women as victims of armed conflict, in particular sexual violence in
conflict, to seeing them as essential actors in conflict prevention and resolution
and post-conflict reconstruction. The path that we have already travelled should
encourage us, but there is still work to be done in the coming years.
Spain is determined to fulfil its commitments to gender equality and the
women and peace and security agenda, both at the national level and in the context
of international multilateral initiatives. We are aware of the many difficulties in
implementing the resolutions and the women and peace and security agenda in terms
of security and women’s participation in all stages of conflict and peacebuilding.
But we cannot forget that there can be no sustainable peace without the participation
of women, in all their diversity and without discrimination of any kind, both in its
definition and agreement and in its implementation.
The number of women participating in peace processes and the commitment of
the negotiating parties to women’s participation clearly remain insufficient. We know
for sure that in many countries of the world women are making significant efforts to
lead their societies towards peace. Their voices show us that our action and support
are even more pressing. Placing women’s organizations and women peacemakers
and mediators at the centre of decision-making must be a genuine and cross-cutting
priority for all. That is what the Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/946) on this
issue points out, seeing that as one of the obstacles to the effective implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda.
That is the underlying reason that Spain is a member of the Women, Peace
and Security and Humanitarian Action Compact of the Generation Equality Forum.
It is also the reason that, in 2015, Spain launched several international initiatives,
including the Women and Peace and Security Focal Points Network. In 2019,
together with Finland, we launched the Commitment 2025 initiative to ensure that
the inclusion and meaningful participation of women in peace processes becomes a
reality by 2025. Political, operational and financial commitments are directly linked
to women’s effective participation in peace processes. We must follow up on those
ambitious commitments if we are to ensure that transformative and genuine change
takes place in peacebuilding and negotiation processes.
In that conviction, together with Australia, Finland, Azerbaijan, Tunisia,
Argentina and Iraq, Spain submitted at the Human Rights Council resolution
A/HRC/45/28, entitled “Promoting and protecting the human rights of women
and girls in conflict and post-conflict situations on the occasion of the twentieth
anniversary of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)”, which was adopted by
consensus at the 45th session of the Human Rights Council.
Finally, we firmly believe that the women and peace and security and the Safe
Schools agendas are closely linked. That is why Spain organized, in 2019, the third
International Conference on Safe Schools, which addressed the gender impact of
attacks on access to education, since girls and women are especially vulnerable to
such attacks and their effects are particularly harsh and widespread over time.
We have made a joint effort to ensure women’s participation in the area of
conflict resolution. We strive to incorporate that agenda in each country so that
20-14734149/161

S/2020/1084

every woman can contribute with her voice and her ideas to building peace and
rebuilding their societies wherever they live.

150/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 78
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the
United Nations
[Original: English and French]
I extend my congratulations. Twenty years ago, the Security Council made
history by acknowledging that the increased representation of women at all levels of
decision-making was essential to preventing, managing and resolving conflicts. By
adopting resolution 1325 (2000), the Council responded to the calls of women’s rights
defenders, who continue to be crucial actors in any progress on women’s rights.
Over the past two decades, significant progress has been made in empowering
women and protecting their rights. Switzerland welcomes such developments
and notes encouraging measures around the world. In Colombia, former female
combatants engaged successfully with the authorities to include gender and
reintegration commitments in development plans. In Mali, despite being severely
underrepresented in the transitional Government, women leaders of all political
persuasions play a key role in the pursuit of inclusive solutions. Finally, in the
Sudan, women have assumed a central role and have worked tirelessly for peace in
the ongoing political transition.
However, more needs to be done. The coronavirus disease pandemic has
revealed the fragility of the progress made over the past two decades. As the
Secretary-General pointed out in the report that forms the basis for today’s discussion
(S/2020/946), gender equality is at risk of reversal. The Council can, and must, do
more to maintain the women and peace and security agenda across the various items
on its agenda. This agenda is a key driver for change on the ground, and the Council
is its most positive enabler. We need resolute action to increase women’s meaningful
participation and leadership in decision-making, combat sexual and gender-based
violence and promote women peacebuilders and human rights defenders. Among
the priorities for our collective action in the coming years, Switzerland emphasizes
the following.
First, the Council should systematically address the issue of women’s full,
equal and meaningful participation in peace and security, not only in its thematic
work but also in all the country situation-related items on its agenda. The Security
Council must take a strong position on the importance of recognizing, supporting
and protecting women in their work in conflict prevention, peacekeeping and the
promotion of respect for human rights. The inclusion of civil society is essential both
in the Council and in implementation on the ground. In 2007, Switzerland was one of
the first countries to adopt a national action plan to implement the women and peace
and security agenda. Over time, we have learned the importance of inclusive and
participatory processes to strengthen this agenda. Women’s groups and civil society
have played an important role in improving our national action plan. We even have a
group of Swiss parliamentarians who act as ambassadors for the agenda. They are all
partners who are closely involved in the implementation of the national action plan.
Secondly, the Council should use the tools at its disposal to strengthen
measures to combat sexual violence. To end impunity, it should promote a culture
of deterrence. Sexual violence is too often used as a weapon of war. The Council’s
decision to establish stand-alone designation criteria related to sexual violence in the
sanctions regimes against the Central African Republic and South Sudan reflected a
paradigm shift. The Council must use all the targeted measures at its disposal against
recidivist perpetrators of sexual violence and ensure the protection of all survivors.

20-14734151/161

S/2020/1084

Thirdly, we need more women in peace operations. Switzerland, for example,
encourages the participation of female police officers in United Nations missions
and supports them during their recruitment, training, deployment and return. We
know that diversity makes peacekeeping through civilian and military measures
more effective, allowing better access to communities. We welcome the Council’s
unanimous adoption of resolution 2538 (2020), on the role of women in peacekeeping,
in August. We also welcome the efforts of the United Nations to increase the number
of women in peacekeeping missions, especially in leadership positions.
Next year, Switzerland will further strengthen its commitment by assuming
the co-chairmanship of the Women and Peace and Security Focal Points Network.
Switzerland will remain strongly committed to the women and peace and security
agenda. It is our collective responsibility to always keep our shared vision alive,
redouble our efforts and take concrete action to implement this ambitious but
indispensable agenda.

152/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Annex 79
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Thailand to the
United Nations
This is a significant year for women, and Thailand joins the international
community in celebrating not one but two milestones, namely, the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the Beijing Platform for Action and the twentieth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. Thailand welcomes this
year’s Security Council open debate’s timely focus on reflecting on achievements
and challenges in implementing resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent related
resolutions over the past 20 years.
While the international community recognizes that women are effective
agents of change in society and can contribute significantly to durable peace, their
representative numbers in United Nations peace operations and in peace processes
worldwide remain low at all levels.
The challenges in implementing the women and peace and security agenda
will only be compounded by the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
global pandemic, where women and girls are being disproportionately affected. This
year’s annual report (S/2020/946) of the Secretary-General on women and peace and
security reiterates the linkages between elements of the agenda and international
peace and security and focuses, among other things, on the current and predicted
setbacks with regard to the agenda, partly due to the effects of the pandemic.
Gender-responsive COVID-19 response and recovery must therefore form
part of the full and effective implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda beyond the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). The effort will
need to be mutually reinforcing of all the elements of gender equality from both the
Sustainable Development Goals and the women and peace and security agenda.
Sustainable peace can be achieved only when there is an integrated and
inclusive approach that incorporates development and human rights for all, including
women. The empowerment of women and girls and gender equality are key elements
in conflict prevention and the promotion of international peace and security.
On our part, Thailand has continued to increase the participation of women
in peace and security. Thai women personnel continue to contribute positively to
our peacekeeping missions. Their ability to access communities and build trust
reflects their valuable skillset. We are pleased to have reached a high ratio of women
peacekeepers to male peacekeepers. We will continue our work to further promote
their participation at higher levels.
It is with our firm belief that, with political will and moral obligation, we
can — and we will — narrow down that gap with the robust implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the women and peace and security
agenda in a holistic manner.

20-14734153/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 80
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Timor-Leste to the
United Nations
Timor-Leste would like to congratulate the Russian Federation on its leadership
as President of the Security Council for the month of October and to commend all its
efforts in convening this important annual open debate. Timor-Leste also thanks the
Secretary-General and the other briefers for all their insights.
Timor-Leste regards the role of women in peace and security and their
involvement in decision-making at all levels in preventing, managing and resolving
conflicts as being of paramount importance. As we commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), it is important to reflect on
how far we have come with the implementation of that resolution and the impact that
it has had on our daily life, particularly towards the advancement of women and their
important role in the area of peace and security.
Timor-Leste is committed to its efforts on the empowerment and the
advancement of women. The Constitution of Timor-Leste guarantees protection
against discrimination based on gender and ensures equality of rights and obligations
and the fact that men and women must be treated equally in all aspects of life. TimorLeste is also a firm believer in the United Nations as a key multilateral organization
and in the fundamental role of the Security Council in upholding international peace
and security.
Since the restoration of our independence on 20 May 2002, Timor-Leste has
made remarkable progress in the empowerment and the advancement of women.
Timor-Leste has the highest proportion of women parliamentarians in the AsiaPacific region. Timor-Leste’s Law on the Elections of the National Parliament, as
amended in 2011, established a quota that requires one out of every group of three
candidates in political party lists to be filled by a woman. In 2016, the Government
of Timor-Leste approved a national action plan for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, to include women in decision-making
positions. Those positive developments have placed women at the core of policy and
decision-making processes.
Recently, the Government of Timor-Leste approved a project against genderbased violence aimed at contributing to the prevention of gender-based violence and
to the implementation and monitoring of legislation and policies on gender-based
violence in public spaces, with special attention to women in the most vulnerable
situation. The policy also aligns well with the spirit of article 7 of the United Nations
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women.
While the issue of women and peace and security has been on the Security
Council agenda for the past 20 years, we continue to witness growing discrepancies
and gaps between the rhetoric and the reality in terms of the implementation of the
women and peace and security resolutions. That is despite the number of resolutions
on women and peace and security, as well as the normative frameworks, such as
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women
and the Beijing Platform for Action, which guide us on the advancement of gender
equality. It is regrettable that, despite the countless commitments that we have made
as Member States over the past 20 years, war, violence and instability continue to
exist and ravage humankind in many parts of the world and women, children, the
elderly and the most vulnerable continue to be disproportionally affected.
That should serve as a call to attention on all of us as Member States to work
together to ensure that the Security Council can effectively exercise its fundamental
154/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

role in upholding international peace and security, particularly in promoting and
protecting the rights of women and the most vulnerable.
Our experiences have also taught us that exclusion greatly contributes to
conflict and the violation of basic human rights should be an early warning. Hence
Timor-Leste would like to announce its endorsement of the Safe Schools Declaration
to ensure safe education for women and girls. Timor-Leste is committed to ensuring
the promotion of peaceful, just and inclusive societies, where women are able to
reach their full potential by having their voices heard and being part of decisionmaking at all levels, as well as living a productive life, free of violence.

20-14734155/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 81
Statement by the First Deputy Foreign Minister of Ukraine,
Emine Dzheppar
We commend the Security Council for holding this important debate and thank
Secretary-General António Guterres (annex 1), Under-Secretary-General Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka and the other speakers for their briefings.
Ukraine aligns itself with the statements submitted by the European Union
(annex 38) and by the Group of Friends of resolution 1325 (2000) (annex 27).
As a State that participated in the drafting and the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) during its membership of the Security Council in 2000-2001, Ukraine
has committed to promoting the women and peace and security agenda. For us, this
issue gained new importance after 2014 with the beginning of an armed aggression
against my country.
Today’s anniversary provides us with a good opportunity to consider future
steps to better implement the women and peace and security agenda. Maintaining
and seeking the avenues for strengthening our commitments, enshrined in resolution
1325 (2000) and other pertinent documents, will be the centrepiece of our efforts to
that end.
Against the backdrop of crimes committed by the Russian occupation forces
and their proxies in the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine, the conflictrelated provisions of resolution 1325 (2000) gain special significance for our country.
We are convinced that a commemorative recommitment throughout the
women and peace and security agenda should be developed into an action-oriented
follow-up, in particular with regard to the calls on all parties to armed conflict to
respect international law applicable to the rights and protection of women and girls
and take special measures to protect women and girls from gender-based violence, as
well as to the need to exclude the crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes from amnesty provisions.
Women and girls remain among the most vulnerable groups in the occupied
Donbas. Those whom the occupation forces suspect of supporting Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity face intimidation, detention and ill-treatment, as
well as physical and sexual violence. The occupied territories have become a home
for discriminative cultural practices, cherishing gender inequality.
Oppressive policies against Crimean Tatar women, in particular activists,
lawyers and those whose relatives have been illegally detained, constitute another
dire consequence of the Russian aggression against Ukraine.
Nevertheless, Ukraine remains committed to the four pillars of resolution
1325 (2000), aimed at ensuring the equal participation of women in the maintenance
and promotion of peace and security, providing protection for women during and
after conflicts and giving them an important role in conflict prevention, as well as
addressing gender-specific needs in delivering humanitarian aid and relief.
We continue to implement resolution 1325 (2000) in accordance with the
national action plan for the period from 2021 to 2025, which was adopted just on
the eve of this meeting. The national action plan is aimed, inter alia, at achieving
the greater participation of women in decision-making, in particular in the areas of
national security and defence, and peacemaking, as well as ensuring the protection
of women and girls, including the prevention of and response to conflict and genderbased violence.
156/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

Ukraine continues to work on ensuring an equal gender approach and
guaranteeing the proper conditions for all women serving their country in the armed
forces. The active integration of gender equality into the activities of the Armed
Forces of Ukraine fostered changes to the list of military specialties and positions
open to women candidates. It speaks volumes that the number of women serving
in the Ukrainian army has been increased by more than 15 times since 2008, from
1,800 to 29,760, with 900 of them being senior officers. Women are also among
the peacekeepers who represent Ukraine in six peacekeeping operations throughout
the globe.
Commemorating the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), Ukraine
reiterates its commitment to continuing efforts aimed at promoting the women and
peace and security agenda and strengthening its implementation, at both the national
and the international levels, including within the United Nations.

20-14734157/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 82
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United Arab
Emirates to the United Nations, Lana Nusseibeh
The United Arab Emirates thanks the Russian Federation for convening this
year’s annual open debate on women and peace and security, which continues to
be one of our priority topics. We thank the Secretary-General for his recent report
(S/2020/946) on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
We are observing the twentieth anniversary of the landmark resolution 1325
(2000) today under exceptional circumstances as the world is currently unified
in halting the spread and overcoming the consequences of the global coronavirus
disease pandemic. These past months have once again demonstrated the detrimental
effects of crises on women and girls worldwide, at the same time highlighting how
crucial their positive contributions in such contexts are, as they make up the majority
of front-line workers.
Over the past two decades, the women and peace and security agenda has
been pivotal in recognizing the disproportionate effects of conflicts on women and
girls, but it has particularly contributed to their recognition as active agents and the
meaningful role that they play when it comes to conflict prevention and resolution
and post-conflict recovery processes.
While it is our duty to protect the progress made and to ensure that gains
will not be lost and inequalities further deepened, the advancement of the women
and peace and security agenda is a key priority for the United Arab Emirates and
will remain as such during its recently announced candidacy for an elected seat on
the Security Council for the 2022-2023 term, with its focus on the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and the subsequent nine resolutions.
The United Arab Emirates firmly believes that women’s active engagement
is a peace and security imperative, and 20 years after the inception of the women
and peace and security agenda, we can no longer allow for women and women’s
issues to be sidelined. As we strongly believe that multilateral efforts are essential
to achieving this goal, the United Arab Emirates and the Georgetown Institute for
Women, Peace and Security will launch, as a result of our panel series on the role of
women in post-conflict reconstruction and peacebuilding throughout the past year,
a United Nations action plan that will outline concrete priority actions and reforms,
encouraging Member States and United Nations agencies to introduce and extend
measures that ensure post-conflict activities are gender-mainstreamed.
The number and influence of women uniformed personnel are an essential
part of building sustainable peace, yet numbers of female peacekeepers remain
persistently low. Through the Sheikha Fatima bint Mubarak Women, Peace and
Security Initiative, the United Arab Emirates, in cooperation with UN-Women, has
enabled the successful graduation of over 300 women from Asia, Africa and the Middle
East to facilitate their effective contribution to peacekeeping, conflict resolution
and all aspects of building peace. The third round of trainings will commence next
year. Through this, the United Arab Emirates anticipates contributing to closing the
gaps related to gender-responsive security sector reform and therefore calls on all
Member States to identify and address barriers that women peacekeepers face.
While the focus on promoting women’s participation is essential, we cannot
dismiss the fact that the number of cases of sexual and gender-based violence remains
unwaveringly high and continues to increase. The United Arab Emirates strongly
condemns these crimes, as they pose a serious threat to peace and security, and
holding perpetrators accountable is a critical component of preventing and deterring
158/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

these crimes. Funding allocated to sexual and gender-based violence is still far from
covering the actual needs and the United Arab Emirates continues to contribute to
international efforts in this regard. Only last month, as a follow-up to last year’s
Oslo conference, the United Arab Emirates reiterated its support through additional
financial contributions to the Gender Standby Capacity and Protection Standby
Capacity Projects, as well as to Nadia’s Initiative. We call on all Member States to
ensure their foreign aid specifically targets such indispensable programmes and to
closely work together with United Nations entities and other organizations with a
view to ending sexual and gender-based violence.
It is without question that, for our shared ambition in preventing conflicts and
achieving safer and more peaceful societies, we must deliver on the commitments
made since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). The United Arab Emirates will
remain a committed partner, together with other Member States, United Nations
agencies and civil society, to facilitate enabling environments for women and girls, in
all parts of the world, for them to realize their full, equal and meaningful participation.

20-14734159/161

S/2020/1084

Annex 83
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Uruguay to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Uruguay thanks the Russian Federation for convening this open debate during
this extremely meaningful year, marking the twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000) and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action.
To make progress in the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda, we must first strengthen the rights of women and girls, eliminating
structural obstacles that impede their equal participation in society. Empowered
women are formidable agents of change, essential to achieving sustainable peace
and development.
Education plays a crucial role in the political, social and economic
empowerment of women, equipping them to overcome discrimination and violence,
to defend their rights and freely take decisions, making them architects of their own
destinies and protagonists of peace. Uruguay underscores the importance of the Safe
Schools Declaration to protecting the education of women and girls, especially in
conflict settings, and encourages more Member States to join it.
States have the responsibility to ensure that the rights of women are protected
and to facilitate the participation of women in decision-making and conflict
mediation, in prevention and resolution processes and in peacekeeping activities, as
articulated in resolution 1325 (2000). Women’s skill in rapprochement, negotiation,
understanding and empathy has been amply demonstrated.
Uruguay supports the presence of women in peace operations and has
continuously improved the quantity and quality of such participation, deploying,
in this regard, military observers to monitor ceasefires, disarmament and access
to humanitarian assistance. Uruguayan women contingents have participated in
operational units negotiating with armed groups and carried out prevention and
response to conflict-related sexual violence and human rights violations. Such
activities have confirmed the unique capacities of women in interacting with local
communities and fostering trust, especially in dealing with situations involving the
most vulnerable.
At the domestic level, the Government of Uruguay has implemented national
policies to make the armed forces and police more accessible to women and to facilitate
their integration into peacekeeping operations. Despite the challenges posed by the
fight against the pandemic, Uruguay has been able to complete its national action
plan, which will include targets relating to the training and deployment of women in
such operations and their contribution to the protection of civilians.
At the same time, Uruguay is supporting and developing strategies, in
coordination with the United Nations and other Member States, such as the Elsie
Initiative, promoted by Canada, under which Uruguay has conducted a study
on barriers to the deployment of women and to their capacity development for
such operations.
It is clearly more crucial than ever to unite the efforts of States, the
United Nations, regional and subregional organizations and civil society to step up
the long-awaited and necessary implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda, especially in the current circumstances, beset by new challenges from the
coronavirus disease pandemic, which threatens to undermine progress to date.

160/161

20-14734

S/2020/1084

The Women, Peace and Security Focal Points Network is another example of
effective cooperation. Uruguay is co-Chair of the Network, together with Canada.
The co-chairmanship began last December with a workshop held in Montevideo
on opportunities for the women and peace and security agenda in the America,
which brought together representatives of 17 countries of the region. That workshop
allowed for the deeper application of the agenda to the regional context and to the
specific security issues impacting the Americas. Other activities have been organized
throughout the year, focused on implementing the agenda during the pandemic,
supporting and protecting women peacebuilders, promoting national action plans,
the importance of intergenerational dialogue, and leadership and targeted action to
realize the agenda.
In conclusion, Uruguay recognizes the invaluable contribution of civil society
to upholding the rights of women and therefore calls for the protection of women
human rights defenders and peacebuilders and an end to threats against them and
their persecution.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the women and peace security
agenda has garnered significant normative strength. The time has come for its
implementation. Uruguay reiterates its commitment to this agenda and will continue
working tirelessly, together with the United Nations, other Member States and civil
society, to realize its full and effective implementation.

20-14734161/161
