A/55/PV.97

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-fifth session

97th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 21 March 2001, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Holkeri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Finland)

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.

It was so decided.

Agenda item 8 (continued)

Agenda item 101 (continued)

Adoption of the agenda, allocation of items and
organization of work: reopening of the consideration
of agenda item 101

High-level international intergovernmental
consideration of financing for development

The President: As indicated in the footnote to
document A/55/L.77, in order for the General
Assembly to take action on the recommendation of the
Preparatory Committee for the High-level International
Intergovernmental
Event
on
Financing
for
Development, it will be necessary to reopen
consideration of agenda item 101.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
reopen consideration of agenda item 101?
It was so decided.
The President: Members will recall that at its 9th
plenary meeting, on 11 September 2000, the General
Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 101 to the
Second Committee. In order for the General Assembly
to proceed expeditiously on the recommendation of the
Preparatory Committee, may I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to consider agenda item 101 directly
in plenary meeting?
It was so decided.
The President: May I further take it that the
Assembly agrees to proceed immediately to the
consideration of agenda item 101?

Draft resolution (A/55/L.77)
The President: In connection with this agenda
item, the General Assembly has before it a draft
resolution issued as document A/55/L.77.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/55/L.77, entitled “Preparations for the
substantive preparatory process and the International
Conference on Financing for Development”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/55/L.77?
Draft resolution A/55/L.77
(resolution 55/245).

was

The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Bøjer (Denmark): As Co-Chairman of the
Preparatory Committee for the High-level International
Intergovernmental
Event
on
Financing
for
Development, I should like, on behalf of the Bureau, to
express our deep appreciation for the offer so
generously made by Mexico to host the International
Conference on Financing for Development. The

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

01-29777 (E)

*0129777*

adopted

A/55/PV.97

Mexico venue for the Conference is emblematic of
what this process is about. We fully trust that the
Government of Mexico and its Mission here in New
York will devote much energy and skill to the
preparation and implementation of the Conference,
which would be quite in keeping with the valuable role
that Mexico has already played in the process.
Let me also thank other delegations, and in
particular the delegation of Kenya and other African
delegations, whose magnanimity and sense of
commitment to the financing for development process
made it possible for the decision on the venue for the
Conference to be taken immediately upon receipt of the
Mexican invitation, during our last Preparatory
Committee meeting.
Finally, I would be remiss if I did not take this
opportunity to thank you, Mr. President, for your
strong personal support for the financing for
development process.
Mr. Navarrete (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Under your wise guidance, Mr. President, the General
Assembly has just adopted a resolution that represents
an important step forward in the preparatory process
for the International Conference on Financing for
Development. My delegation would like to express its
gratitude for the sense of direction you have lent to the
consideration of this issue. I would also like to thank
the Co-Chairman of the Preparatory Committee for his
statement.
The resolution that has just been adopted is
simultaneously the culmination of one stage of the
preparatory process and the beginning of another even
more important and, without a doubt, more demanding
phase. Taking advantage of this opportunity to raise
international cooperation to a higher political level for
the benefit of more equitable and humane development
on a global scale will depend on the vision, will and
sustained efforts of Member States.
I would like to reiterate the firm commitment of
the Government of Mexico that took office last
December to the process that will culminate next year
in the International Conference on Financing for
Development. I would also like to reaffirm the high
priority we attach to achieving substantive agreements
to respond to the great expectations that have been
raised by the convening of that meeting. We are
committed to contributing to a process of discussion
and negotiation that is open, participatory and based on

2

a convergence of the efforts of the United Nations, the
Bretton Woods institutions, the World Trade
Organization and many other relevant actors from
every level and every sphere.
That process should be devoid of confrontation
and directed at identifying areas of agreement that will
make it possible for the international community as a
whole to agree on meaningful change in the world’s
trade and financial systems, to the benefit of
development . In other words, our aim is to contribute
to shaping a new global consensus to meet successfully
the challenges of development by adopting financing as
a strategic component.
In that regard, my delegation would like to recall
that Mexico will be the venue for the International
Conference on Financing for Development thanks to
the fact that a general agreement was reached to the
effect that this would help raise the visibility and
political profile of the Conference, thereby attracting
higher-level delegations in which national leaders in
the areas of foreign affairs, trade and finance would
participate as well as leaders, at the highest political
level during the summit stage. My country will serve as
host of the Conference also as a result of general
agreement that this would contribute to achieving a
better outcome of the Conference by promoting more
constructive and responsible debates, by providing a
cordial and friendly atmosphere for the deliberations,
and by fostering convergence of views and consensus.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 101.
Agenda item 8 (continued)
Adoption of the agenda, allocation of items and
organization of work
The President: Members will recall that at its 9th
plenary meeting, on 11 September 2000, the General
Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 94 to the
Second Committee, and that sub-item (e) of agenda
item 94 remained open for consideration during the
fifty-fifth session.
In order for the General Assembly to proceed
expeditiously on the recommendation of the
Commission on Human Settlements acting as the

A/55/PV.97

Preparatory Committee for the special session of the
General Assembly for an overall review and appraisal
of the implementation of the outcome of the United
Nations
Conference
on
Human
Settlements
(Habitat II), contained in document A/55/L.78, may I
take it that the Assembly wishes to consider sub-item
(e) of agenda item 94 directly in plenary meeting?
It was so decided.
The President: May I further take it that the
Assembly agrees to proceed immediately to the
consideration of sub-item (e) of agenda item 94?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 94 (continued)
Sustainable development and international economic
cooperation
(e) Implementation of the outcome of the United
Nations Conference on Human Settlements
(Habitat II)

Draft resolution (A/55/L.78)
The President: In connection with this sub-item,
the Assembly has before it a draft resolution
recommended by the Commission on Human
Settlements acting as the preparatory committee that
has been issued as document A/55/L.78.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution
A/55/L.78,
entitled
“Organizational
arrangements for the Thematic Committee”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/55/L.78?
Draft resolution A/55/L.78
(resolution 55/246).

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (e)
of agenda item 94.
The meeting rose at 10.30 a.m.

3
