90

General Assembly-Twentieth Session

8. Decides to establish an Advisory Committee on
Technical Assistance to Promote the Teaching, Study,
Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International
Law-composed of ten Member States to be appointed
every three years by the General Assembly-which shall
meet at the request either of the Secretary-General or
of a majority of its members, shall advise the SecretaryGeneral on the substantive aspects of the programmes
contained in the report of the Special Committee and
on the implementation of the present resolution and
shall report, as appropriate, to the General Assembly;
a representative of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization and a representative of the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research shall be invited, whenever necessary, to the
meetings of the Advisory Committee;
9. Reiterates the appeal to Member States, made
in its resolution 1968 C (XVIII) of 16 December 1963,
inviting them to offer foreign students fellowships in
the field of international law at their universities and
institutions of higher education and to consider the inclusion, in their programmes of cultural exchange, of
provision for the exchange of teachers, students and
experts, as well as books and other publications in
that field;
10. Calls the attention of Member States to the
existing arrangements whereby, apart from the programme me1tioned in paragraph 2 above, requests may
be made:
(a) Under part V of the regular budget for assistance with respect to any international legal aspects
involved in development projects, and under the human
rights advisory services programme for assistance relating to the field of international law;
(b) Under the Expanded Programme of Technical
Assistance for assistance in specific fields of international law related to economic, social or administrative
development, provided such requests are included in
country programmes in accordance with the relevant
rules and procedures ;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the
implementation of the present resolution and decides to
include in the provisional agenda of its twenty-first
session an item entitled "Technical assistance to promote
the teaching, study, dissemination and wider appreciation of international law";
12. Requests the Secretary-General to explore the
possibility of including the topic "The teaching, study,
dissemination and wider appreciation of international
law" among the subjects of technical assistance programmes and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its twenty-first session.
1404th plenary meeting,
20 December 1965.
At its 1404th plenar:y meeting, on 2G December 1965, the
General Assembly appointed, on the proposal of the Sixth
Committee,9 the members of the Advisory Committee on Technical Assistance to Promote the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law, established
under paragraph 8 of the above resolution.
The Advisory Conimit!ee will be composed of the following
Member States: AFGHANISTAN, BELGIUM, EcuAnoR, FRANCE,
GHANA,

HuNGARY,

UNION

OF Sov1E1 Soc1A1.1sT REPUBLICS,

9 Ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 89, document A/6136, para. 28.

UNITED KL'IGDO~! ()}- (;REAT BRITAIN ,IN[) NornHimN
UNITED

RFPURLIC

111,

TAKZANI,1

and

UNITJ-:n

]RELAND,

STATE~

OF

A MERK A.

ANNEX
l'rogra111111c for 1967

(a) A regional training and refresher course of four weeks'
duration, which will he given in Africa and which will be
1he first of a series of such courses to be held every two years,
in rotation, i11 ,\frica, Asia an<l Latin America;
( {,) A w11nl uf ten i cllowshiv at the request of Covc111ments
,,[ developing countric,;
(c) Advisory services of up to three experb, if requested
by developing countries;
(d) Provision of a set of United ~ations leg-al publications
to up to fifteen institutions in dl'.\ eloping- countries;
( c) Preparation nf a surv<:y of certain of the prim·ipa I
examples of the codification and progressive development of
intern:,tional law within the framework of the United Nat ions.
Programme for 1968
(11) A regional seminar of three weeks' duration, which will

be held in Latin ,\merica and which will he the first of lL
series of such seminars to be held every two years, in rotation,
in Latin Amc1·ica, :\ft-ica and Asia;
( /,) A ward of fifteen fellowships at the request of Govcrnmenh of developing countril'S:
( ,·) !\d,·isory sen-iccs of up to fi, e experts. if requested by
<lt>veloping countries;
( d) Provision of a sl"t of united Nations lrgal puhlicatiom
to up to twenty imti: utions in developing countries;
(e) Publication of a survey of certain of the principal
examples of the codification and progressive development of
international law within the framework of the United Nations.

2100 (XX). Draft Declaration on the Right of
Asylum
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1839 (XVII) of 19 December
1962 relating to the draft Declaration on the Right of
Asylum,
Having considered, at the twentieth session, certain
procedural ;i.spects of the item with a view to expediting
its future consideration,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to invite those
Member States which have not yet done so to submit
their comments on the draft Declaration on the Right
of Asylum before the twenty-first session of the General
Assembly, and to invite those Member States which
have previously submitted comments to submit supplementary comments if they so wish;
2. Decides to take up the item entitled "Draft
Declaration on the Right of Asylum" as soon as possible at its twenty-first session, with a view to completing the text of the draft Declaration as a whole.
1404th plenary meeting,
20 December 1965.
2101 (XX). Amendment to Article 109 of the
Charter of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Considering that the Charter of the United Nations
has been amended to provide that the membership of
the Security Council, as provided in Article 23, should
be increased from eleven to fifteen and that decisions
of the Security Council should be taken, as provided
