206

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

Women and the Committee against Torture are made
available to ali the members of these bodies;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit, as expeditiously as possible, the text of the present resolution to
ali members of the treaty bodies;
16. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session as a separate ítem, the item entitled
"Reporting obligations of States parties to United Nations
instruments on human rights".
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/106.

International Conference on the Plight of Refugees, Returnees and Displaced Persons in
Southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Gravely concerned at the deteriorating situation in
southem Africa arising from the continued domination
and oppression of the peoples of South Africa and Namibia by the minority racist régime of South Africa,
Conscious of the need to provide increased assistance to
the peoples of the region and the liberation movements of
South Africa and Namibia in their struggle against colonialism, racial discrimination and the policies of apartheid,
Conscious a/so of its responsibility to provide economic,
material and humanitarian assistance to independent
States in southern Africa in order to assist them in coping
with the situation resulting from the acts of aggression and
destabilization committed by the apartheid régime of
South Africa,
Aware that apartheid in South Africa, the illegal occupation of Namibia and acts of destabilization carried out by
South Africa and its surrogate elements continue to be the
main causes of refugee flows and the displacement of persons in the southern region of Africa,
Taking note of the decision of the Council of Ministers
ofthe Organization of African Unity at its forty-sixth session, held at Addis Ababa from 20 to 25 July 1987, to convene an International Conference on the Plight of Refugees, Retumees and Displaced Persons in Southern Africa
and to enlist the active support of the international community, in particular the United Nations, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the Southern
African Development Co-ordination Conference, to that
end, 99
Taking note also of the decision by the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to endorse the proposal for
the convening of an international conference to address
the specific situation of refugees and displaced persons in
southern Africa, 100
Appreciating the current efforts ofthe intemational community to provide humanitarian assistance to refugees and
other persons displaced by armed conflict in the countries
of southern Africa,
Recognizing that the task of caring for refugees is a matter of international concern and solidarity in keeping with
the Charter of the United Nations, international and regional instruments, in particular the 1951 Convention 10 1
and the 1967 Protocoi 102 relating to the Status of Refu99 See A/42/699, annex I, resolution CM/Res.1117 (XLVII).
100 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-second Session,

Supplement No. 12A (A/42/12/ Add.1), para. 209.
IOI United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.
102 /bid., vol. 606, No. 879 l.

gees, as well as the Organization of African Unity Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems
in Africa, 103 of 1969,
Convinced that there is an urgent need for the international community to extend maximum and concerted assistance to southern African countries sheltering refugees,
returnees and displaced persons and also to highlight the
plight of the refugees, returnees and displaced persons in
southern Africa,
l. Welcomes the decision of the Organization of African Unity to convene in September 1988 an lnternational
Conference on the Plight of Refugees, Returnees and Displaced Persons in Southern Africa;
2. Reiterates its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for bis efforts, on behalf of the international community,
to organize and mobilize special programmes of economic
assistance for those African States facing grave economic
difficulties, the front-line States and other independent
States of southern Africa to help them to withstand the effects of the acts of aggression and destabilization committed by the apartheid régime of South Africa;
3. Welcomes the decision by the Executive Committee
of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the convening of the Conference;
4. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations, in close co-operation with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, to give ali possible assistance
to the Secretary-General of the Organization of African
Unity in the preparation and organization of the Conference;
5. Appeals to ali Member States, the specialized agencies of the United Nations system and regional, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to provide ali the necessary support and resources needed for the
convening and success of the Conference;
6. Calls upan the international community to provide
increased assistance to the countries of southern Africa to
enable them to strengthen their capacity to provide the
necessary facilities and services for the care and well-being
of refugees, returnees and displaced persons in their countries;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to apprise the Economic and Social Council at its second regular session of
1988 and to report to the General Assembly at its fortythird session on the implementation of the present resolution.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/107.

Second lnternational Conference on Assistance
to Refugees in Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling ali its resolutions, particularly resolution
41/122 of 4 December 1986, relating to the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on assistance to refugees in Africa, 104
Mindful that the fundamental purpose of the Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in
Africa, held at Geneva from 9 to 11 July 1984, 105 was to
103 /bid., vol. 1001, No. 14691.
I04 A/42/491.
IOS A/39/402,

annex.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

launch collective action by the international community
aimed at achieving lasting solutions,
Gravely concerned at the persistent and serious problem
of large numbers of refugees on the African continent,
Aware ofthe heavy burden borne by African countries of
asylum on account of the prese~ce of thes~ refugees and its
consequences for their econom1c and social d_evelo~m:nt,
and of the great sacrifices made by them, des pite the1r hmited resources,
Deeply concerned that the _refugee situ~tio~ ha~ be:n
severely affected by the critica! econom1c s1tu~tton m
Africa, as well as by drought and other natural d1sasters,
Bearing in mind the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development
1986-1990, 106 adopted by the General ~s~embly at i!s
thirteenth special session, devote~ to the_cnttcal econom1c
situation in Africa, which refers m particular to the need
for the speedy implementation of the recommen_dations of
the Second International Conference on Ass1stance to
Refugees in Africa,
Recognizing that the efforts of the c?untries_ of asylum
require the concerted support of the mterna~10nal community to meet the needs for emergency r~hef, and for
medium-term and long-term development a1d,
Taking note of the declarations, decisions and resolutions adopted by the Assembly ofHeads ofState and G~vernment of the Organization of African Unity at 1ts
twenty-third ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from
27 to 29 July 1987, 107 and of the reso!uti?ns ad?pted by
the Council of Ministers of that orgamzatton at its fortysixth ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from 20 to
25 July 1987,69 on the situation of refugees in Africa,
Emphasizing the collective responsibility of sharing th_e
urgent and overwhelming burden of the problem of Afncan refugees through effective mobilization of additional
resources to meet the urgent and long-term needs of the
refugees and to strengthen the capacity of count_ries of asylum to provide adequately for the refu~ees wh1le th~y remain in those countries, as well as to ass1st the countnes of
origin in rehabilitating voluntary returnees,
Reiterating once again the vital importance of the co~plementarity between refugee aid and development assistance,
Noting once again with deep concern t~at many of the
projects submitted to the Second Internat1onal Conference
on Assistance to Refugees in Africa have yet to be funded
and implemented,
Desirous of ensuring the speedy implementation of the
recommendations and pledges made at the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa,
Noting the initiative taken by the Secretary-General to
promote increased and effective co-operation between the
United Nations Development Programme and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
through the signing of an agreement on co-operation, as
well as the measures he has taken to revitalize the Trust
Fund of the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa,
l. Expresses its deep appreciation to African host countries, which are the biggest donors, for their generous contribution and continuous etforts to alleviate the plight of
refugees in spite of their critical economic situation;

2. Reiterates its appreciation to all do!1or countries,_the
specialized agencies and other o~ga~izat10ns o_fthe Umted
Nations system, regional orgamzattons _and mterg~v~r~mental and non-governmental orga~izat10ns f<?r their m1tia! support and response to the proJects ~ubm1tted to the
Second International Conference on Ass1stance to Refugees in Africa; 108
3. Urges the international community to maintain the
momentum created by the Conference and to t~an~late
into reality the projects submitted as well a~ the pnnc1ples
of the Declaration and Programme of Achon adopted by
the Conference;
4. Emphasizes the vital importance of t~e complementarity of refugee aid and development ass1stance and ?f
achieving durable solutions to th~ ~roble~ of refugees m
Africa and the necess1ty of prov1dmg ass1stance for the
strengthening of the social and economic infrastructures
of African countries receiving refugees and returnees;
s. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General,
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme for their concer!ed action aimed_ at revita~izing and further strengthenmg the _mechamsms of 1mplementation of the Sec?nd I~ternat1onal Conference on
Assistance to Refugees m Afnca;
6. Requests the High Commissioner to continue to
keep the situation of refugees in Africa_under ~onsta!lt review so as to ensure that adequate ass1stance 1s ava1lable
for care and maintenance and for bringing about durable
solutions;
7_ Requests the United Nations J?~velop~:nt Programme to increase its efforts to mob1hze add1t1onal resources for refugee-related development projects and, in
general, to promote and co-?rdinat_e with ~he host countries and the donor commumty the mtegrat10n of refugeerelated activities into national development planning;
8_ Calls upan all Membér States and organizations of
the United Nations system concerned, as well as relevant
regional, intergovernmental and non-governmental or_ganizations, to intensify their support for the speedy implementation of the recommendations and pledges made
at the Conference;
9_ Again requests the Secretary-General, in_ accordance
with the Declaration and Programme of Act1on adopted
by the Conference, to monit?r, !n consultl;ltion an~ close
co-operation with the Orgamzat10n of Afncan Umty, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and ~he
United Nations Development Programme, the effecttve
follow-up to the Conference;
10. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its forty-third session, through
the Economic and Social Council, on the implementation
of the present resolution.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 19H7

42/108.

Continuation of the Offlce of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 37/196 of 18 Decembe~ 1982, in
which it decided to review, not later than at 1ts fortysecond session, the arrangements for the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees with a

106 Resolution S-13/2, annex.

107 See A/42/699, annex 11.

207

108 See A/41/572, annex.
