UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/15
6 April 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3513th meeting of the Security Council, held on 6 April 1995, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Somalia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered carefully the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia dated 28 March 1995
(S/1995/231) and notes the successful conclusion of the withdrawal of
UNOSOM II forces from Somalia. It expresses its appreciation to those
Governments and agencies that have provided the personnel, humanitarian
assistance and other support to the peace-keeping operation in Somalia,
including those Governments which participated in the multinational
operation for UNOSOM’s withdrawal. It pays tribute in particular to all
personnel who sacrificed their lives in this service.
"The Security Council underlines that the timely intervention of
UNOSOM II and the humanitarian assistance given to Somalia helped to save
many lives and much property, mitigate general suffering and contributed to
the search for peace in Somalia. The Council notes that, over the past
three years, the United Nations and the international community have made
significant efforts to restore peace and stability and facilitate the
re-emergence of a civil society. However, the continuing lack of progress
in the peace process and in national reconciliation, in particular the lack
of sufficient cooperation from the Somali parties over security issues,
undermined the United Nations objectives in Somalia and prevented the
continuation of UNOSOM II mandate beyond 31 March 1995.
"The Security Council believes that the Somalia operation provides
important lessons for the theory and practice of peace-making, peacekeeping and peace-building.
"The Security Council remains convinced that only a genuinely
representative and broad-based approach to reconciliation will bring about
a lasting political settlement and allow for the re-emergence of a civil
society in Somalia. The Council reaffirms, based on its experience in
UNOSOM II, that the people of Somalia bear the ultimate responsibility for
achieving national reconciliation and restoring peace to Somalia. The
95-10031 (E)

060495

/...

S/PRST/1995/15
English
Page 2

international community can only facilitate, encourage and assist the
process, but not try to impose any particular solution on it. The Council,
therefore, calls upon the Somali parties to pursue national reconciliation,
rehabilitation and reconstruction in the interest of peace, security and
development.
"The Security Council notes the recent agreements reached between the
factions in Mogadishu, especially on the control of sea and airport
facilities. It expresses the hope that this encouraging development is
indicative of a new spirit of cooperation among the factions and that it
will lead to further progress in the search for a lasting peace in Somalia.
"The Security Council supports the view of the Secretary-General that
Somalia should not be abandoned by the United Nations, which will continue
to assist the Somali people to achieve a political settlement and to
provide humanitarian and other support services provided that the Somalis
themselves demonstrate a disposition to peaceful resolution of the conflict
and to cooperation with the international community. It welcomes the
Secretary-General’s intention to continue a small political mission, should
the Somali parties so wish, to assist them in coming together in national
reconciliation and looks forward to the report which the Secretary-General
has indicated he will forward on this matter. The Council urges close
cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations, in
particular the Organization of African Unity (OAU), the League of Arab
States, the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), as well as the
Governments of neighbouring countries in these efforts. The Council
considers it essential that the Somali parties clearly express their
acceptance of such assistance and their willingness to cooperate with the
United Nations.
"The Security Council recognizes that humanitarian assistance in
Somalia is an important element in the effort to restore peace and security
in the country. It is therefore important to sustain United Nations
humanitarian activities in Somalia and to encourage non-governmental
organizations to do likewise. However, their ability to do so will depend
on the degree of cooperation and security offered by the Somali parties.
The Council welcomes the willingness expressed by the international
humanitarian agencies and NGOs to continue to provide rehabilitation and
reconstruction assistance in areas where security is guaranteed by the
Somalis. The Council stresses that the creation of a long-lasting, stable
and secure environment throughout the country is vital for the resumption
of large-scale activity in these fields.
"The Security Council reaffirms the obligations of States to implement
fully the embargo on all deliveries of weapons and military equipment to
Somalia imposed by paragraph 5 of resolution 733 (1992), and calls on
States, especially neighbouring States, to refrain from actions capable of
exacerbating the conflict in Somalia.
"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to continue to
monitor the situation in Somalia and to keep it informed about further
developments. The Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
