General Auembly-Eishteenth Seaion

14

lution 1767 (XVII), has under consideration various
proposals for other collateral measures,

I
1. Calls upon the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation
Committee on Disarmament to resume, with energy and
determination, its negotiations on general and complete
disarmament under effective international control, in
accordance with the joint statement of agreed principles for disarmament negotiations 2 and in a spirit
of goodwill and mutual accommodation ;
2. Recommends the Eighteen-Nation Committee to
continue to encourage the widening of the areas of basic
agreement or similarity in the principal parties' approaches to the fundamental issues of general and
complete disarmament ;

II
Urges the Eighteen-Nation Committee to make efforts to seek agreement on measures which could serve
to reduce international tension, lessen the possibility
of war and facilitate agreement on general and complete
disarmament ;

III
1. Requests the Eighteen-Nation Committee to submit to the General Assembly an interim report on the
progress of its work at an early appropriate date, and
a comprehensive report not later than 1 September
1964;
2. Commends the Secretariat of the United Nations
for its services to the Eighteen-Nation Committee and
requests the Secretary-General to continue to make
available to the Committee the necessary assistance and
services.
1265th plenary meeting,
27 November 1963.

1909 (XVffl). Question of convening a conference
for the purpose of signing a convention on
the pl'ohibition of. the use of nuclear and
thermo-nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,
Recalling the declaration on the prohibition of the
use of nuclear and thermo-nuclear weapons, contained
in its resolution 1653 (XVI) of 24 Novembe.r 1961,
Cognizant that the subject can be speedily and effectively studied by the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation
Committee on Disarmament in Geneva,
1. Requests the Conference of the Eighteen-N"ation
Committee on Disarmament to study urgently the question of convening a conference for the purpose of
signing a convention on the prohibition of the use of
nuclear and thermo-nuclear weapons, and to report to
the General Assembly at its nineteenth session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
text of the present resolution and all other relevant
documents to the Eighteen-Nation Committee.
1265th plenary meeting,
27 November 1963.
2 Ibid., Sixteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 19, document A/4879.

1910 (XVffl). Urgent need for 1u1pen1ion of
nuclear and thermo-nuclear teell

Th,· General Assembly,
Fully aware of its reponsibility with regard to the
question of nuclear weapon testing and of the views
of world public opinion on this matter,
Noting 'With approval the Treaty banning nuclear
weapon tests in the atmosphere, in outer space and
under water, signed on 5 August 1963 by the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America, and subsequently by a great number
of other countries,
Noting further 'With satisfaction that in the preamble
of that Treaty the parties state that they are seeking
to achieve the discontinuance of all test explosions of
nuclear weapons for all time and are determined to
continue negotiations to this end,
1. Calls upon all States to become parties to the
!reaty banning nuclear weapon tests in the atmosphere,
m outer space and under water, and to abide by its
spirit and provisions ;
2. Requests the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation
Committee on Disarmament to continue with a sense
of urgency its negotiations to achieve the objectives
set forth in the preamble of the Treaty ;
3. Requests the Eighteen-Nation Committee to report to t~e General Assembly at the earliest possible
date and, m any event, not later than at the nineteenth
session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to make available
to the Eighteen-Nation Committee the documents and
records of the plenary meetings of the General Assembly and the meetings of the First Committee at
which the item relating to nuclear testing was discussed.
1265th plenary meeting,
27 November 1963.

1911 (XVIII). Denuelearization of Latin America
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the vital necessity of sparing present
and future generations the scourge of a nuclear war,
Recalling its resolutions 1380 (XIV) of 20 November 1959, 1576 (XV) of 20 December 1960 and 1665
(XVI) of 4 December 1961, in which it recognized
the danger that an increase in the number of States
possessing nuclear weapons would involve, &ince such
an increase would necessarily result in an intensification
of the arms race and an aggravation of the difficulty
of maintaining world peace, thus rendering more difficult
the attainment of a general disarmament agreement,
Observing that in its resolution 1664 (XVI) of
4 December 1961 it stated explicitly that the countries
not possessing nuclear weapons had a grave interest
and an important part to fulfil in the preparation and
implementation of measures that could halt further
nuclear weapon tests and prevent the further spread
of nuclear weapons,
Considering that the recent conclusion of the Treaty
banning nuclear weapon tests in the atmosphere, in
outer space and under water, signed on 5 August 1963,
has created a favourable atmosphere for parallel progress towards the prevention of the further spread of
nuclear weapons, a problem which, as indicated in
General Assembly resolutions 1649 (XVI) of 8 Novem-

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

ber 1961 and 1762 (XVII) of 6 November 1962, is
closely connected with that of the banning of nuclear
weapon tests,
Considering that the Heads of State of five Latin
American Republics issued, on 29 April 1963, a declaration on the denuclearization of Latin America3 in
which, in the name of their peoples and Governments,
they announced that they are prepared to sign a multilateral Latin American agreement whereby their countries would undertake not to manufacture, receive, store
or test nuclear weapons or nuclear launching devices,
Recognizing the need to preserve, in Latin America,
conditions which will prevent the countries of the
region from becoming involved in a dangerous and
ruinous nuclear arms race,
l. Notes with satisfaction the initiative for the
denuclearization of Latin America taken in the joint
declaration of 29 April 1963;
2. Expresses the hope that the States of Latin
America will initiate studies, as they deem appropriate,
in the light of the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and of regional agreements and by
the means and through the channels which they deem
suitable, concerning the measures that should be agreed
upon with a view to achieving the aims of the said
declaration ;
3. Trusts that at the appropriate moment, after a
satisfactory agreement has been reached, all States,
particularly the nuclear Powers, will lend their full
co-operation for the effective realization of the peaceful
aims inspiring the present resolution;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to extend to the
States of Latin America, at their request, such technical
facilities as they may require in order to achieve the
aims set forth in the present resolution.
1265th plenary meeting,
27 November 1963.

1962 (XVill). Declaration of Legal Principles
Governing the Activities of States in the
Exploration and Use of Outer Space

The General Assembly,
Inspired by the great prospects opening up before
mankind as a result of man's entry into outer space,
Recognising the common interest of all mankind in
the progress of the exploration and use of outer space
for peaceful purposes,
Believing that the exploration and use of outer space
should be carried on for the betterment of mankind
and for the benefit of States irrespective of their degree
of economic or scientific development,
Desiring to contribute to broad international cooperation in the scientific as well as in the legal aspects
of exploration and use of outer space for peaceful
purposes,
Believing that such co-operation will contribute to
the development of mutual understanding and to the
strengthening of friendly relations between nations
and peoples,
Recalling its resolution 110 (II) of 3 November
1947, which condemned propaganda designed or likely
to provoke or encourage any threat to the peace, breach
of the peace, or act of aggression, and considering that
a Ibid., Eighttfflth S,s.riOK, Anntsts, agenda item 74, document A/5415/Rev.l.

15

the aforementioned resolution is applicable to outer
space,
Taking into consideration its resolutions 1721 (XVI)
of 20 December 1961 and 1802 (XVII) of 14 December
1962, adopted unanimously by the States Members of
the United Nations,
Solemnly declares that in the exploration and use
of outer space States should be guided by the following
principles:
1. The exploration and use of outer space shall be
carried on for the benefit :md in the interests of all
mankind.
2. Outer space and celestial bodies are free for
exploration and use by all States on a basis of equality
and in accordance with international law.
3. Outer space and celestial bodies are not subject
to national appropriation by claim of sovereignty, by
means of use or occupation, or by any other means.
4. The activities of States in the exploration and use
of outer space shall be carried on in accordance with
international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations. in the interest of maintaining internatiom 1
peace and security and promoting international cooperation and understanding.
5. States bear international responsibility for national activities in outer space, whether carried on by
governmental agencies or by non-governmental entities,
and for assuring that national activities are carried on
in conformity with the principles set forth in the present
Declaration. The activities of non-governmental entities
in outer space shall re<iuire authorization and continuing
supervision by the State concerned. When activities
are carried on in outer space by an international organization, responsibilitv for compliance with the principles
set forth in this Declaration shall be borne by the
international organization and by the States participating in it.
6. In the exploration and use of outer space, States
shall be guided by the principle of co-operation and
mutual assistance and shall conduct all their activities
in outer space with due regard for the corresponding
interests of other States. If a State has reason to believe
that an outer space activity or experiment planned by
it or its nationals would cause potentially harmful interference with activities of other States in the peaceful
exploration and use of outer space, it shall undertake
appropriate international consultations before proceeding with any such activity or experiment. A State which
has reason to believe that an outer space activity or
experiment planned by another State would cause potentially harmful interference with activities in the
peaceful exploration and use of outer space may request
consultation concerning the activity or experiment.
7. The State on whose registry an obj~t launched
into outer space is carried shall retain jurisdiction and
control over such object, and any personnel thereon,
while in outer space. Ownership of objects launched
into outer space, and of their component parts, is not
affected by their passage through outer space or by
their return to the earth. Such objects or component
parts found beyond the limits of the State of registry
shall be returned to that State, which shall furnish
identifying data upon request prior to return.
8. Each State which launches or procures the launching of an object into outer space, and each State from
whose territory or facility an object is launched, is
internationally liable for damage to a foreign State or
