conduct of the electoral process and threaten the territorial
integrity of Angola.

mandate of the United Nations Angola Verification Mission II
for an interim period,

"The Council calls on the National Union for the
Total Independence of Angola and the other parties in the
electoral process in Angola to respect the results of the
elections held on 29 and 30 September 1992, which the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Angola certified as being generally free and fair. It urges
the leaders of the two parties to the Accords to engage in
a dialogue without delay so as to enable the second round
of the presidential elections to be held. The Council will
hold responsible any party which refuses to take part in
such a dialogue, thereby jeopardizing the entire process.

Deeply concerned at the deterioration of the political
situation and the rising tension in Angola,
Deeply concerned also at the reports of the recent resumption of hostilities by the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola in Luanda and Huambo,
Affirming that any party which fails to abide by all the
commitments entered into under the Peace Accords for Angola
will be rejected by the international community, and that the
results of the use of force will not be accepted,
1. Approves the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral to extend the existing mandate of the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission II for an interim period, until 30
November 1992;

"The Council strongly condemns the attacks and
baseless accusations made by Vorgan, the radio station of
the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola,
against the Special Representative and the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission II. It calls for the immediate
cessation of these attacks and accusations, and reiterates
its full support for the Special Representative and for the
Mission.

2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Security Council by that date a detailed report on the situation
in Angola together with long-term recommendations, accompanied by the financial implications thereof, on the mandate
and strength of the Mission;

"The Council reiterates its readiness to act without
delay on the basis of recommendations that the SecretaryGeneral might make concerning the contribution of the
United Nations to the completion of the electoral process."

3. Strongly condemns any such resumption of hostilities
and urgently demands that such acts cease forthwith;
4. Calls on all States to refrain from any action which
directly or indirectly could jeopardize the implementation of the
Peace Accords for Angola and increase the tension in the
country;

Letter dated 29 October 1992 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council

5. Reiterates its full support for the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Angola and the Mission, and
its strong condemnation of the attacks and baseless accusations
made by Vorgan, the radio station of the National Union for
the Total Independence of Angola, against the Special Representative and the Mission;

Decision

At its 3130th meeting, on 30 October 1992, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Angola, Brazil, Portugal
and South Africa to participate, without vote, in the discussion
of the item entitled "Letter dated 29 October 1992 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/24 736)". 17

6. Supports the statement by the Special Representative
certifying that the elections held on 29 and 30 September 1992
were generally free and fair and calls upon the National Union
for the Total Independence of Angola and the other parties to
the electoral process in Angola to respect the results of the
elections;

Resolution 785 (1992)

or 30 October 1992
The Security Council,

Recalling also the statement made on its behalf by the
President of the Security Council on 27 October 1992,™

7. Calls upon the parties to the Accords to abide by all
the commitments entered into under the Accords, in particular
with regard to the confinement of their troops and collection of
their weapons, demobilization and the formation of the unified
national armed force, and to refrain from any act that might
heighten tension, jeopardize the continuation of the electoral
process and threaten the territorial integrity of Angola;

Taking note of the letter dated 29 October 1992ZA7 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security
Council, in which he recommends an extension of the existing

8. Urges the leaders of the two parties to engage in a
dialogue without delay so as to enable the second round of the
presidential elections to be held promptly;

Recalling its resolutions 696 (1991) of30 May 1991 and 747
(1992) of 24 March 1992,

89

2. Appeals to the troop- and police-contributing States to
lend cooperation to the Mission in order to restore as soon as
possible its mandated strength;

9. Reaffirms that it will bold responsible any party which
refuses to take part in such a dialogue, thereby jeopardizing the
entire process, and reiterates its readiness to consider all
appropriate measures under the Charter oftbe United Nations
to secure implementation of the Accords;

3. Welcomes the joint declaration of the Government of
Angola and the National Union for the Total Independence of
Angola made in Namibe on 26 November 1992 and urges them
to take immediate and effective actions in accordance with the
declaration;

10. Decides to remain seized of the question.
Adopted unanimowly al the 3130th
m«ling.

4. Demands that the two parties scrupulously observe the
cease-fire, immediately stop all military confrontations, and in
particular offensive troop movements, and create all the
conditions necessary for the completion of the peace process;

Further report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission II

At its 3144th meeting, on 30 November 1992, the Council
discussed the item entitled "Further report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Angola Verification Mission II
(S/24858 and Add.1)". 17

5. Urges the two parties to demonstrate their adherence
to, and fulfilment without exception of the Peace Accords for
Angola, in particular with regard to the confinement of their
troops and collection of their weapons, demobilization and the
formation of the unified national armed force and to refrain
from any ;,~ion which might heighten tension or jeopardize the
return to normalcy;

Resolution 793 (1992)
of 30 November 1992

6. Strongly appeals to the two parties to engage in a
continuous and meaningful dialogue aimed at national reconciliation and at the participation of all parties in the democratic
process and to agree on a clear timetable for the fulfilment of
their commitments in accordance with the Accords;

The Security Council,
Recalling its resolutions 696 (1991) of 30 May 1991, 747
(1992) of 24 March 1992 and 785 (1992) of 30 October 1992,
Taking note of the further report of the Secretary-General
of 25 and 30 November 1992 on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission II,™

1. Reaffirms that it will hold responsible any party which
refuses to take part in such a dialogue, thereby jeopardizing the
entire process, and reiterates its readiness to consider all
appropriate measures under the Charter of the United Nations
to secure implementation of the Accords;

Deeply concerned by deterioration in the political and
military situation in Angola and especially by the troop
movements which have taken place and by the hostilities which
occurred on 31 October and 1 November 1992,

8. Calls on all States to refrain from any action which
directlyorindirectlycouldjeopardize the implementation of the
Accords and increase the tension in the country;

Welcoming and supporting the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative for Angola aimed at
resolving the present crisis,

9. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Security Council by 31 January 1993 a further report on the
situation in Angola together with his longer-term recommendations for the further role of the United Nations in the peace
process, which should be clearly defined in scope and time and
based on a wide degree of support in Angola;

Disturbed by the continuing non-implementation of major
aspects of the Peace Accords for Angola,
Reiterating its support for the statement by the Special
Representative that the elections held on 29 and 30 September
1992 were generally free and fair and taking note of the
acceptance by the National Union forthe Total Independence
of Angola of the results of the elections,

10. Decides to remain seized of the question.
Adopted unanimously at the 3144th
meeting.

Decision

Noting the intention of the Secretary-General to continue,
in this as in other peace-keeping operations, to monitor
expenditures carefully during this period of increasing demands
on peace-keeping resources,

Following consultations held on 2 December 1992, the
President made the following statement to the media on behalf
of the members of the Council:93

1. Approves the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral to extend the existing mandate of the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission II for a further period of two
months until 31 January 1993;

"The members of the Council wish to express their
deep concern and outrage about the increasing number of
attacks against United Nations personnel serving in various
peace-keeping operations.
90
