VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of tbe Tbird Committee

151

tative, in particular by not allowing the Special Representative to visit the country,

40/142.

Taking into account the specific and detailed allegations
ofgrave and extensive violations ofhuman rights to which
the Special Representative refers in his interim report on
the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of
Iran 188 and to which the Govemment of that country has
not responded,

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 260 A (III) of 9 December 1948,
by which it approved and proposed for signature and ratification or accession the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,
Mindfu/ of the fact that the year 1986 marks the thirtyfifth anniversary of the entry into force ofthe Convention,
Reaffirming its conviction that genocide is a crime under
intemational law, contrary to the spirit and aims of the
United Nations,
Expressing its conviction that implementation of the
provisions ofthe Convention by ali States is necessary for
the prevention and punishment of the crime of genocide,
Bearing in mind that the fortieth anniversary of the victory over nazism and fascism in the Second World War is
being commemorated in 1985,
1. Once again strongly condemns the crime of genocide;
2. Reaffirms the necessity ofintemational co-operation
in order to liberate mankind from such an odious scourge;
3. Takes note with appreciation of the fact that many
States have ratified the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide or have acceded
thereto;
4. Urges those States that have not yet become parties
to the Convention to ratify it or accede thereto without
further delay;
5. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its forty-first session a report on the status of the Convention;
6. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to consider at its forty-second session the question of promoting
the full implementation of the Convention and to submit
its observations and proposals thereon, through the Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly at its
forty-first session.
116th plenary meeting
13 December 1985

Endorsing the conclusion of the Special Representative
that continued monitoring ofthe human rights situation in
the Islamic Republic of Iran is called for,
l. Takes note with appreciation ofthe interim report of
the Special Representative of the Commission on Human
Rights on the situation of human rights in the Islamic
Republic oflran and ofthe general observations contained
therein; 189

2. Expresses its deep concern over the specific and
detailed allegations of violations of human rights in the
Islamic Republic of Iran to which the Special Representative refers in his interim report, and, in particular, those
related to the right to life, such as summary and arbitrary
executions, the right to freedom from torture or cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, the right
to liberty and security ofperson and to freedom from arbitrary arrest or detention, the right to a fair tria!, the right to
freedom of thought, conscience and religion and to freedom of expression, and the right of religious minorities to
profess and practise their own religion;
3. Endorses the conclusion of the Special Representative that, on the basis of the information available to him,
specific and detailed allegations concerning grave violations of human rights cannot be dismissed, and urgently
appeals to the Govemment ofthe Islamic Republic oflran
to respond satisfactorily to these allegations;
4. Urges the Govemment of the Islamic Republic of
lran, as a State party to the Intemational Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, 7 to respect and to ensure to ali
individuals within its territory and subject to its jurisdiction the rights recognized in that Covenant;
5. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
study carefully the final report of the Special Representative, as well as other information pertaining to the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran, and
to consider further steps for securing effective respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms for ali in that
country;

6. Urges the Govemment of the Islamic Republic of
Iran to extend its full co-operation to the Special Representative of the Commission on Human Rights, and, in
particular, to permit him to visit that country;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to give ali necessary
assistance to the Special Representative;
8. Decides to continue its examination of the situation
of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran, including
the situation of minority groups such as the Baha'is,
during its forty-first session in order to examine this situation anew in the light of additional elements provided by
the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and
Social Council.
116th p/enary meeting
13 December 1985
188 A/40/874

Status of tbe Convention on tbe Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide

40/143. Summary or arbitrary executions
The General Assemb/y,_
Recalling the provisions of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 6 which states that every human being has
the right to life, liberty and security of person,
Having regard to the provisions of the Intemational
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 7 which states that
every human being has the inherent right to life, that this
right shall be protected by law and that no one shall be
arbitrarily deprived of his life,
Recalling a/so its resolution 34/175 of 17 December
1979, in which it reaffirmed that mass and flagrant violations of human rights are of special concern to the United
Nations and urged the Commission on Human Rights to
take timely and effective action in existing and future cases
of mass and flagrant violations of human rights,
Recalling further its resolution 36/22 of 9 November
1981, in which it condemned the practice of summary or
arbitrary executions, and its resolutions 37 /182 of 17
December 1982, 38/96 of 16 December 1983 and 39/ I I O
of 14 December 1984,
18 9 lh1d .. sect. 11.

252

General Assembly-Fortieth Sesslon

Deeply alarmed at the continued occurrence on a large
scale of summary or arbitrary executions, including extralegal executions,
Recalling resolution 1982/ 13 of 7 September 1982 of
the Sub-Commission on Prevention ofDiscrimination and
Protection ofMinorities,1 90 in which the Sub-Commission
recommended that effective measures should be adopted
to prevent the occurrence of summary or arbitrary executions,
Welcoming Economic and Social Council resolution
1984/50 of 25 May 1984, and the safeguards guaranteeiñg
protection of the rights of those facing the death penalty
annexed thereto, which resolution was endorsed by the
Seventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders in its resolution
15, 138 as well as the ongoing work on summary or arbitrary
executions within the Committee on Crime Prevention
and Control,
Convinced of the need for appropriate action to combat
and eventually eliminate the practice of summary or arbitrary executions, which represents a flagrant violation of
the most fundamental human right, the right to life,
l. Strongly condemns the large number of summary or
arbitrary executions, including extra-legal executions,
which continue to take place in various parts of the world;
2. Demands that the practice of summary or arbitrary
executions be brought to an end;
3. We/comes Economic and Social Council resolution
1982/35 of 7 May 1982, in which the Council decided to
appoint for one year a special rapporteur to examine the
questions related to summary or arbitrary executions;
4. A/so we/comes Economic and Social Council resolution 1985/40 of 30 May 1985, in which the Council
decided to continue the mandate of the Special Rapporteur, Mr. S. A. Wako, for a further year and requested the
Commission on Human Rights to consider the question of
summary or arbitrary executions as a matter ofhigh priority at its forty-second session;
5. Urges all Governments and all others concerned to
co-operate with and assist the Special Rapporteur of the
Commission on Human Rights in the implementation of
his mandate;
6. Requests the Special Rapporteur, in carrying out his
mandate, to respond effectively to information that comes
before him, in particular when a summary or arbitrary
execution is imminent or threatened, or when such an execution has recently occurred;
1. A/so requests the Special Rapporteur to consider, in
bis next report, possible measures to be taken by the
appropriate authorities when a death occurs in custody,
including adequate autopsy;
8. Considers that the Special Rapporteur, in carrying
out his mandate, should continue to seek and receive
information from Governments, United Nations bodies,
specialized agencies, regional intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations in consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to provide ali necessary assistance to the Special Rapporteur so that he may
effectively carry out bis mandate;
10. Again requests the Secretary-General to continue
to use bis best endeavours in cases where the mínimum
standard of legal safeguards provided for in articles 6, 14
and 15 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 7 appear not to be respected;
!90 See E/CN.411983/4-E/CN.4/Sub.2!1982/43 and Corr. l. cha p. XXI.

sect. A.

11. Requests the Commission on Human Rights at its
forty-second session, on the basis of the report of the Special Rapporteur to be prepared in conformity with Economic and Social Council resolutions 1982/35, 1983/36,
1984/35 and 1985/40, to make recommendations concerning appropriate action to combat and eventually eliminate the abhorrent practice of summary or arbitrary executions.
116th p/enary meeting
13 December 1985

40/144. Declaration on the human rights of individuals who are not nationals of the country in
which they live
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the human rights of
individuals who are not nationals of the country in which
they live,
Decides to adopt the Declaration on the Human Rights
of Individuals Who are not Nationals of the Country in
which They Live. which is annexed to the present resolution.
116th p/enary meeting
13 December 1985
ANNEX
Dedaration on tbe Human RJ1b1s of lndhidaals Wbo are not Natioaals
of tbe Coantry ia wblcb Tbey Live
The General Assembly,
Considering that the Charter ofthe Unitcd Nations encourages univenal

respect for and observance of the human rights and fundamental freedoms
of ali human beinp, without distinction as to race, sex, language or religjon,
Consideringthat the Univenal Oeclaration ofHuman Rights6 procla,ms
that ali human beinp are bom free and equal in dignity and rights and that
everyone is entitled to ali the rights and freedoms set forth in that Oeclaration, without distinction of any kind, such as race, colour. se~. language,
religion, political or other opinion. national or social origjn, property, birth
or other status,
Considering that the Univenal Oeclaration of Human Rights proclaims
further that everyone has the right to recognition everywhere as a person
before the law. that ali are equal before the law and entitled without any
discrimination to equal protection of the law, and that ali are entitled to
equal protection apinst any discrimination in violation of that Declaration
and against any incitcment to such discrimination,
Being aware that the States parties to the Jntemational Covenants on
Human Rights 24 undertake to ¡uarantee that the rights enunciated in these
Covenants will be exercised without discrimination of any kind as to race,
colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social
origin, property, birth or other status,
Conscious that, with improving communications and the development
of peaceful and friendly relations among countries, individua Is increasingly
live in countrics of which they are not nationals,
Reaffirming the purposes and principies of the Charter of th~ United
Nations,
Recognizing that the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms provided for in intemational instruments should also be cnsured for
individuals who are not nationals of the country in which they live.
Proc/aims this Oeclaration:
Amele I

For the purposes of this Oeclaration, the term "alien" shall apply, w1th
due regard to qualifications made in subsequent articles, to any individual
who is not a national of thc Slate in which he or she is present.
Arllc/e 2

Nothing m th1s Declaration shall be interpreted as legitimizing the
illegal entry into and presence in a State of any alíen, nor shall any provi1.
