•
91

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Bearing in mind the special responsibility of the
United Nations with regard to the Territory of Namibia
and its people,
Deeply concerned at the deteriorating situation in
Namibia due to the continued illegal presence of South
Africa in the Territory in dehberate defiance of the
United Nations, a situation which threatens international peace and security,
Gravely concerned that the continued refusal of
South Africa to comply with the decisions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly seriously undermines
and encroaches on the authority of the United Nations,
Taking into consideration the fact that South Africa
has persistently violated the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, and mindful of the obligations
of Member States under Article 25 thereof,
Considering that the basic condition for the fulfilment of the responsibilities of the United Nations towards Namibia IS the application of effective measures
to ensure the removal of South Africa from the Territory,
Noting with appreciation the report of the United
Nations Council for Namibia, 11
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Namibia to self-determination and independence in conformity with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV),
and the legitimacy of their stf\lggle against the foreign
occupation of the Territory;
2. Recommends the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia to all States and to the subsidiary
organs of the General Assembly and other competent
organs of the United Nations, as well as to the specialized agencies and other international organizations
concerned, for appropriate action, acting in conformity
with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council;
3. Condemns the Government of South Africa for
its persistent refusal to comply with the decisions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly and to
withdraw from the Territory;
4. Further condemns the Government of South
Africa for the extension of the internationally condemned policies of apartheid to the Territory, and for
its policies aimed at destroying the unity of the people
and the territorial integrity of Namibia through the
creation of the so-called separate "homelands";
S. Condemns the support given to South Africa in
the pursuit of its repressive policies in Namibia by the
allies of South Africa and, m particular, by its major
trading partners and financial, economic and other
interests operating in the Territory;
6. Calls upon the Governments concerned to cease
immediately any assistance to, and co-operation with,
South Africa;
7. Invites the Security Council to consider taking
effective measures, including those provided for under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, in
view of the continued refusal by the Government of
South Africa to comply with Council resolutions 264
(1969) and 269 (1969);
8. Calls upon all States, particularly the permanent
members of the Security Council, to lend their full
sul>port to the Council in the application and implemen-tation of all measures which the Council has decided
r, Official Records of the General A ssemhlv. Twenty-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/80?.4)

or may decide upon to obtain the withdrawal of South
Africa from the Territory;
9. Appeals to all States to take appropriate steps,
throu$11 action in the specialized agencies and other
organizations within the United Nations system of
which they are members, with a view to discontinuing
any collaboration with the Government of South Africa;
10. Reaffirms its solidarity with the people of
Namibia in their legitimate struggle against foreign
occupation and calls upon all States, in consultation
with the Organization of African Unity, to provide
increased moral and material assistance to the Namibian
people in their struggle;
11. Calls again upon the Government of South
Africa to treat the Namibian people captured during
their struggle for freedom as prisoners of war in accordance with the Geneva Convention relative to the
Treatment of Prisoners of War, of 12 August 1949,8
and to comply with the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War,
of 12 August 1949;7
12. Endorses the measures taken by the United
Nations Council for Namibia with a view to the issuance of identity certificates and travel documents to
Namibians, and appeals to all States which have not
already done so to communicate to the Secretary-General their willingness to recognize and accept such
documents for purposes of travel to their countries;
13. Requests the United Nations Council for
Namibia to continue to perform the functions entrusted
to it in the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, including consultation, in Africa or at United
Nations Headquarters, with the representatives of the
Namibian people and of the Organization of African
Unity;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide the necessary assistance and facilities to the
United Nations Council for Namibia for the discharge
of its duties and functions;
15. Calls upon all States to co-operate fully with
the United Nations Council for Namibia in its efforts
to discharge its responsibilities.

1923rd plenary meeting,
9 December 1970.

2679 (XXV). United Nations Fund for Namibia
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966, by which the United Nations decided to terminate
the Mandate for South West Africa and assume direct
responsibility for the Territory until its independence,
Recalling further its resolve to discharge that responsibility with respect to the Territory,
Bearing 1n mind that that responsibility includes the
solemn or·· gation to assist and prepare the people of
the Territory for self-determination and independence,
Considering that, in order to discharge its responsibilities under resolution 2145 (XXI), the United
Nations should provide comprehensive assistance to
the people of the Territory,
Having considered the request made by the Security
Council, in its resolution 283 (1970) of 29 July 1970,
6 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), No. 972.
'' United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 ( 1950), No. 973.

92

General Auembl:,-Twenty-fifth Seuion

that a United Nations fund be established to provide
assistance to Namibians who have suffered from persecution and to finance a comprehensive educational and
training programme for Namibians, with particular
regard to their future administrative responsibilities in
the Territory,
Taking into account the assistance provided to
Namibians at present from United Nations agencies and
funds, notably the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Southern Africa and the
United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa,
1. Decides that a comprehensive United Nations
Fund for Namibia shall be established;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to make a detailed study and report to the General Assembly at its
twenty-sixth session on the development, planning,
execution and administration of a comprehensive programm.e of assistance to Namibians in various fields;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to take
into account the observations made during the present
session of the General Assembly in regard to the
establishment of such a programme;
4. Invites the specialized agencies, the Advisory
Committee on the United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for South.em Africa, the Committee of Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund
for South Africa, the Ad Hoe Sub-Committee established in pursuance of Security Council resolution 276
(1970) of 30 January 1970, the United Nations
Council for Namibia, the United Nations Hi~ Commissioner for Refugees and the Organization° African
Unity to provide advice and assistance, as may be required by the Secretary-General, in the preparation
of the study and the report referred to in paragraph 2
above;

5. Decides that, in anticipation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the matter, a decision on the extent of the financial implications of the programme
should be deferred to the twenty-sixth session of the
General Assembly;
6. Authorizes the Secretary-General, in the meantime, in consultation with the Chairman of the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational
and Training Programme for Southern Africa, the
Chairman of the Committee of Trustees of the United
Nations Trust Fund for South Africa and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to make
interim grants from the regular budget of the United
Nations for 1971, not exceeding a total amount of
$50,000 over and above the assistance provided at
present, in order to enable the existing Umted Nations
programmes to provide greater assistance, as necessary,
to Nanuoians.
1923rd plenary meeting,
9 December 1970.

2680 (XXV). Petition& concerning Namibia
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the special responsibilities of the
United Nations with regard to Namibia, including in
particular those set out in General Assembly resolutions 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966, 2248 (S-V)
of 19 May 1967, 2325 (XXII) of 16 December 1967,
2403 (XXIII) of 16 December 1968 and 2517
(XXIV) of 1 December 1969,

Noting that the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoeles has received and examined during
1970 three petitions concerning Namibia, in accordance
with paragraph 3 of General Assembly resolution 1805
(XVII) of 14 December 1962 and within the context of the implementation of the Declaration,
Noting further that these petitions relate, inter alia,
to the general situation and recent developments concerning Namibia, to the refusal by South Africa to implement General Assembly resolutions 2145 (XXI)
and 2248 (S-V) and, in particular, to the continued
implementation by South Africa of the recommendations of the Odendaal Commission, 8 including the removal of Africans from their ancestral lands,
1. Notes that the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples has taken these petitions into
account in its consideration of the situation in Namibia
within the context of the implementation of the Declaration;
2. Notes further that those petitions which raised
matters of concern to the United Nations Council for
Namibia have been brought to the latter's attention by
the Secretariat and have been taken into consideration
by the Council in the performance of the functions
assigned to it by the General Assembly in resolutions
2248 (S-V), 2325 (XXII), 2403 (XXIII) and 2517
(XXIV);
3. Draws the attention of the petitioners concerned
to the report on the Territory submitted by the Special
8
Committee, to the resolutions on the question of
Namibia adopted by the General Assembly at its
twenty-fifth session and to the report of the United
Nations Council for Namibia.to
1923rd plenary meeting,
9 December 1970.

2700 (XXV). Question of Papua and the Tru•t
Territory of New Guinea
The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV)
of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples,
Recalling its previous resolutions concerning Papua
and the Trust Territory of New Guinea, in particular
resolution 2590 (XXIV) of 16 December 1969,
Having considered the report of the Trusteeship
Council covering the period from 20 June 1969 to
19 June 197011 and the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Grantinf
()f Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 1
s Commission of Enquiry into South West Africa Affain,
established in 1962 by the Government of South Africa under
the chairmanship of Mr. F. H. Odenda.al.
8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/8023/Rev.1), chapter V.
10 Ibid., Supplement No. 24 {A/8024).
11 Ibid., Supplement No. 4 (A/8004).
12 Ibid., Supplement No. 23 (A/8023/Rev.1), chapter XIV.
