140

General Assembly-l'hirty-fourth Session

--=------------------------

mo ting research and development in developing countries, at their request, so that they may enhance their
indigenous capacities for the exploration and development of their natural resources;
6. Notes the recommendations of the Group of Experts on Mineral and Energy Exploration in Developing
Countries regarding transfer of technology 182 and in
this context requests the organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to take urgent steps
with a view to assisting the developing countries, at their
request, in this area;
7. Takes note of the action taken by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its fifth
session regarding transfer of technology;18 "
8. Requests the Secretary-General to request the
Director-General for Development and International
Economic Co-operation to take the action necessary to
co-ordinate the ongoing activities of the United Nations
system in the field of assistance in technology transfer,
taking into account the relevant recommendations of the
United Nations Conference on Science and Technology
for Development, and to report to the General Assembly
at its thirty-fifth session;
9. Welcomes the programme to accelerate petroleum
production in the developing countries outlined in the
study prepared by the World Bank,1 84 and invites the
World Bank to consider expanding its programme of
assistance to the developing countries in this field, at
their request and within the framework of their national
priorities, particularly in respect of exploration, and to
submit a report thereon to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fifth session;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session on the implementation of the measures referred to in the present
resolution.
J09th plenary meeting
/9 December 1979

34/202.

Economk co-operation among developing
countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VD
of 1 May 197 4, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolutions 3177 (XXVIII) of 17
December 1973, 3241 (XXIX) of 29 November 1974,
3442 (XXX) of 9 December 1975, 31/119 of 16 December 1976, 32/180 of 19 December 1977 and
33/195 of 29 January 1979, as well as resolution 127
(V) of 3 June 1979 of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development185 on economic co-operation
among developing countries,
/bid., para. 12.
See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.Il.D.14),
part one, sect. A, resolution 112 (V) and decision 113 (V).
m See E/1979/93.
1H See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14),
part one, sect. A.
182
1 s3

Recalling further the decisions taken by the Conference on Economic Co-operation among Developing
Countries, held at Mexico City from 13 to 22 Septemher 1976,1 8 "
Recalling the Buenos Aires Plan of Action for Prorooting and Implementing Technical Co-operation
among Developing Countries187 and the resolutions
adopted by the United Nations Conference on Technical
Co-operation among Developing Countries, 188 and reaffirming that technical co-operation is a basic instrument for the promotion of economic co-operation among
developing n•imtrie~,
\'oi:•·r: , " ,\usions taken by the Fourth Ministerial
Ml:dillg ul llw Group of Seventy-seven, held at Arusha,
United Repuhlic of Tanzania, from 12 to 16 February
1979, and in particular the Arusha Programme for Col189
lective Self-Reliance and Framework for Negotiations,
Noting also the decisions taken by the non-aligned
countries on economic co-operation among developing
countries, particularly the Action Programme for Economic Co-operation, adopted at the Fifth Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Colombo from 16 to 19 August 1976, 190
and resolution 7 containing policy guidelines on the reinforcement of collective self-reliance between developing countries, adopted by the Sixth Conference of Heads
of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held
at Havana from 3 to 9 September 1979, 101
Mindful that economic co-operation among developing countries is a key element in the strategy of collective
self-reliance and an essential instrument for promoting
structural changes contributing to a balanced and equitable process of global economic development, wherein
the developing countries will enhance mutual economic
co-operation in order to increase one another's capabilities and meet their development needs,
Recognizing that, while the efforts of the developing
countries play a decisive role in achieving their development goals, however much the developing countries
mobilize their own resources in the pursuit of their economic and social objectives it would not be possible for
them to achieve such objectives without concomitant
action on the part of developed countries and the institutions of the international community,
Reaffirming that the efforts of the developing countries to promote economic co-operation among themselves do not diminish the responsibilities of all other
countries to establish a just and equitable system of international economic relations,
Recognizing that in the context of international economic co-operation the achievement of the goals of
greater economic co-operation among developing countries will make an important contribution to the establishment of the new international economic order,
1. Welcomes the initiative of the developing countries in adopting, at the Fourth Ministerial Meeting of
the Group of Seventy-seven, the First Short MediumTerm Action Plan for Global Priorities on Economic
186 Official Records of the Trade and Development Board,
Sixteenth Session, Second Part, Annexes, document TD/B/628.
187 See Report of the United Nations Conference on Technical
Co-operation among Developing Countries, Buenos Aires, 30
August-12 September 1978 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.78.II.A. l l and corrigendum), chap. I.
188 /bid., chap. II.
1 8 9 Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14), annex VI.
1 90 See A/31/197, annex III.
191 See A/34/542, annex.

V.

Resoludons adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Co-operation among Developing Countries, 192 which is
expected to make a significant contribution to the promotion of economic co-operation among developing
countries;
2. Welcomes also the Action Programme for Economic Co-operation 100 and the resolution containing
policy guidelines on the reinforcement of collective selfreliance between developing countries, 101 which are
expected to make a significant contribution to furthering
economic co-operation among developing countries;
3. Urges the developed countries and international
organizations to provide appropriate support and assistance to the process and activities of economic cooperation among developing countries, notably in
fulfilment of the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, bearing in mind the Arusha Programme189 and its principles and objectives of economic
co-operation among developing countries, namely, that:
(a) Economic co-operation among developing countries is a basic component of the efforts towards the
establishment of the new international economic order
and as such is based on common interests and cooperation among all States;
(b) Economic co-operation among developing countries, being a matter that chiefly concerns the developing
countries, should be devised and implemented by them
at the subregional, regional and interregional levels, and
appropriate, concomitant support action on the part of
the developed countries and organizations of the international community is needed to contribute to its
implementation;
4. Urges all countries, in particular the developed
countries, and international organizations to contribute
fully to the implementation of the recommendations on
economic co-operation among developing countries contained in resolution 127 (V) of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development;185

5. Urges developed countries and international
financial institutions, in their bilateral and multilateral
development assistance programmes, to take action to
enable developing countries to participate effectively in
the execution of bilateral and multilateral projects
financed in developing countries through the greatest
possible use of their own capabilities;
6. Further urges the developed countries to contribute to the implementation of projects of economic
co-operation among developing countries through the
United Nations development system;
7. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to undertake, as a matter of priority, the necessary preparations
for convening a special session of the Committee on
~cono~c Co-o~eration among Developing Countries,
m particular takmg measures to prepare for holding the
three preparatory meetings of governmental experts
from developing countries, as well as other meetings of
governmental experts that may be requested by other
regional groups, referred to in paragraph 13 of resolution 127 (V) of the Conference;
8_. Also requests the Secretary-General of the United
N ahons Conference on Trade and Development, within
the framework of the mandate of the Conference and in
192 Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14), annex VI,
sect. II.

141

the light of its key role in economic co-operation among
developing countries within the United Nations system,
to intensify further its efforts in support of relevant programmes of economic co-operation among developing
countries and to maintain close co-operation, where appropriate, with other United Nations organizations and
the specialized agencies as well as with the regional intergovernmental organizations of the developing countries;
9. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on economic co-operation among developing countries;198
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
include in the medium-term plan of the United Nations
an intersectoral presentation of the activities envisaged
for implementing the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations on economic co-operation among developing
countries and to promote the same kind of intersectoral
presentation on a system-wide basis;
11. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, in accordance
with established procedures and practices, to support
measures of economic co-operation among developing
countries, including-as requested-the continued provision of the necessary Secretariat support services and
other suitable arrangements to facilitate the holding of
meetings by the developing countries in pursuance of the
objectives of economic co-operation among developing
countries;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to include a
review of developments regarding economic co-operation among developing countries, taking into account the
implementation of the present resolution, in his analytical
report to the General Assembly at its special session in
1980 on the implementation of the decisions taken regarding the establishment of the new international
economic order called for in Assembly resolution 33/
198 of 29 January 1979.
I 09th plenary meeting
I 9 December I 979
34/203.

United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries 10 •

The General Assembly,
Noting the request contained in paragraph 11 (e) of
resolution 122 (V) of 3 June 1979 of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, 196 in which the
Conference emphasized the special importance of the
action to be taken and invited the General Assembly to
convene a United Nations conference on the least developed countries, in order to finalize, adopt and support
the Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s,
Expressing deep concern at the gravity of the economic. and social situation of the least developed
countries,
Emphasizing that the special and pressing problems
facing the least developed countries should be taken
fully into account in the formulation of the strategy for
the third United Nations development decade,
Bearing in mind the need for full implementation of
the Comprehensive New Programme of Action for the
193

A/34/546.

194 See also sect. I, foot-note 11.
195 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on

Trade and Development, Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14),
part one, sect. A.
