asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6855

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6855th meeting
Wednesday, 7 November 2012, 10.35 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Musayev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Berger
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Karev
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. M’Beou
Mr. McKell
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-57681 (E)

*1257681*

S/PV.6855

International Criminal Court (ICC) intervention was, at
that time, the only way to establish justice for victims
of the Gaddafi regime’s crimes.

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Libya to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: I am honoured to present the fourth
briefing on the activities of the Office of the Prosecutor
in furtherance of resolution 1970 (2011). As this is
my first opportunity to address the Security Council,
allow me to express my gratitude for the Council’s
swift, unanimous action in referring the situation in
Libya to the Office of the Prosecutor so as to ensure
accountability for the most serious crimes. Last
month’s dialogue session, held under the Guatemalan
presidency, on the relationship between the Council
and the Court is yet another example of the Council’s
commitment to fostering understanding and enhancing
relations between the two institutions. I stand ready
to cooperatively work with the Council in our joint
endeavours to promote international criminal justice
and end impunity, in furtherance of our mutual quest
for lasting peace.
The situation in Libya remains of serious concern
to me and to my Office. The Council will recall that
following its referral, and after the Office investigated
and presented its evidence to the Chamber, on
27 June 2011, the Judges issued three arrest warrants for
Muammar Al-Qadhafi, Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
Abdullah Al-Senussi. Libyan members of the National
Transitional Council informed the Office in April that
the warrants had played a crucial role in delegitimizing
Al-Qadhafi, Saif Al-Islam and Al-Senussi, at a time
when the opposition was struggling to draw attention
to the commission of serious crimes in Libya. No
investigations of these crimes could conceivably
have been undertaken by the Al-Qadhafi regime, and

2

A lot has happened since the Council referred the
situation to the ICC. Both Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi have been arrested and are
in detention. The Libyan authorities have challenged
the admissibility of the case against Saif Al-Qadhafi
and have indicated their intent also to challenge
the admissibility of the case against Al-Senussi in
the near future. On 9 and 10 October, the judges of
Pre-Trial Chamber I convened a hearing to receive oral
submissions on the Government of Libya’s admissibility
challenge in relation to the case against Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi. The Court heard from the Prosecution, the
Defence and legal representatives, as well as the Libyan
authorities, who asserted that they were investigating
the same conduct as that investigated by my Office and
that is now before the International Criminal Court.
The Pre-Trial Chamber will decide in due course on
the merits of the admissibility challenge as to whether
the case should be heard before the International
Criminal Court or in Libya. My Office appreciates the
commitment of the Libyan authorities to respect the
judicial process and will continue to engage with them
within the limits prescribed by the Rome Statute.
It is worth recalling and emphasizing that the
Rome Statute gives national institutions the primary
responsibility to investigate and to prosecute such
crimes, with the ICC intervening only if they are
inactive or unwilling or unable to genuinely do so.
Nonetheless, as the Appeals Chamber has previously
upheld, a State challenging admissibility must provide
the Court with evidence of a sufficient degree of
specificity and probative value that demonstrates that
it is indeed investigating a case.
Pursuant to its stated policy, my Office promotes
and encourages genuine national proceedings to combat
impunity for the most serious crimes of international
concern. We await the Court’s ruling on Libya’s
challenge. Should it ultimately succeed, my Office
will monitor the proceedings and will cooperate with
Libya, to the extent that my mandate permits, in order
to ensure that they remain genuine. If, on the other
hand, the Court rules that the case should be heard
before the ICC, I will count on Libya’s full support and
cooperation to ensure that the proceedings of the Court
are both successful and seen to be successful by the

12-57681

S/PV.6855

Libyan public, who are the first and most important
audience for any such proceedings at the ICC.

international crimes and no impunity for crimes,
regardless of the perpetrator or the victim.

Let me also emphasize the ever-present need for
complementary and mutually supportive approaches to
addressing accountability generally, involving the full
range of transitional justice mechanisms. In that regard,
I encourage international support and assistance to
enhance Libya’s capacity to deal with past crimes and
to promote the rule of law.

My Office continues to collect evidence in relation
to a possible second case in Libya. No decision has
yet been taken as to the focus of that second case.
We continue to collect information on allegations of
rape and sexual violence, which targeted both men
and women; allegations against other members of the
Al-Qadhafi Government for crimes committed during
the events of 2011; and allegations of crimes committed
by rebels or revolutionary forces, including against the
residents of Tawergha, individuals hors de combat and
detainees. I will take a decision on the direction of a
possible second case in the near future.

I wish to thank the Government of Libya for its
commitment to working with the ICC and for its active
engagement in the judicial process. I encourage the
Government to redouble those efforts in the interests of
justice. My Office appreciates the challenges inherent
in the historic political transition under way in Libya.
I believe that all sides would agree that justice must
remain a key element of that transition.
Looking beyond the cases currently before the
Court, there remains much that my Office and the
Government of Libya can do together to make justice
a reality for Libya’s victims. I call on the international
community, in particular the Council, to intensify its
efforts to assist the Government of Libya in any way
that it can in order to combat impunity and to reinforce
a culture of the rule of law. I believe that, by working
together, we can help to address the threats to Libya’s
security, both from within and from outside, that have
been created by past and ongoing criminality. I also
believe that we can show the Libyan people that the
world is committed to assisting them in their efforts to
secure justice and lasting peace.
My Office understands that the Government of
Libya has committed to a comprehensive strategy
to address all crimes and to end impunity in Libya.
I encourage the Government of Libya to make that
strategy public and to work with key partners to receive
feedback on the strategy and to seek out the views and
the concerns of victims in Libya. The early finalization
of the strategy will be yet another milestone on Libya’s
path to democracy and the rule of law.
My Office takes note of Law 38, which grants
amnesty at the national level for acts made necessary
by the 17 February revolution, as well as Law 35,
which purportedly ensures that any act found to be in
contravention of international law and human rights
covenants will not be exempt. I encourage the new
Libyan Government, scheduled to be sworn in in the
coming days, to ensure that there is no amnesty for

12-57681

My Office also continues to assess the security
situation in terms of its potential impact on the Office’s
ongoing investigations. It appreciates the Government
of Libya’s commitment to ensuring the Office’s security
while it operates on the territory of Libya.
Given its limited resources and ever-increasing
workload, my Office can only do so much to help
Libya to move forward. The fate of the Libyan people
is in their hands. I look forward to continuing dialogue
with the Libyan Government and other key partners to
ensure transparency in this essential and ongoing legal
process.
The President: I thank Prosecutor Bensouda for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at this Council meeting to reiterate my thanks and
congratulations to Ambassador Rosenthal and to the
entire delegation of Guatemala for having effectively
executed the presidency of the Council last month in an
outstanding manner. I would also like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and your entire delegation on your
assumption of the presidency for this month. You can
count on our full backing and support in carrying out
your tasks.
I would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, for
her fourth report on the implementation of the relevant
section of resolution 1970 (2011) and for the additional
information that she has provided us today. As this
is her first time to address the Council, on behalf of
my Government, I would like to welcome her and to

3

S/PV.6855

congratulate her on her appointment. I assure her that
Colombia is fully ready to contribute to her work and to
cooperate as far as we can in the successful fulfilment
of her mandate.
The fourth report contains an update on the status
of proceedings that originated from the Council’s
referral to the Court through resolution 1970 (2011).
We appreciate the information about the investigations
under way that could give rise to the opening of a second
case related to gender crimes, as well as those relating
to possible crimes committed by the rebel forces.
My delegation believes that a fundamental aspect at
this stage is the actual implementation of the necessary
cooperation with the International Criminal Court on
the part of all of the actors involved, including States
parties and non-parties to the Rome Statute, INTERPOL
and the United Nations Commission of Inquiry.
We take particular note of the fact that with respect
to the two legal proceedings under way for the crimes
of murder and persecution for political reasons — the
case against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and the case
against Abdullah Al-Senussi — the Government of
Libya has expressed a clear willingness to cooperate
with the Court. We feel that it is very positive that
the country’s authorities have made a commitment to
moving forward with national proceedings that would
satisfy the admissibility requirements of the Rome
Statute.
However, a reading of the report clearly indicates
that those good intentions have not been reflected
in practical steps that would allow us to promote the
necessary actions. Specifically, although the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court has received
authorization to move forward with investigations
on the ground and to collect evidence that comes
from spontaneous sources, the episode involving the
unjustified detention of four Court officials last June
shows that there is still much that remains to be done
for the Government to deliver on their commitments.
Likewise, due to the difficulties we have seen in
the formation of the new cabinet and in the timely
appointment of competent authorities, including those
appointed to liaise with the Court, the proceedings
on the admissibility of the case against Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi has not been able to move forward in a
satisfactory manner. In particular, the judges involved
in the process on admissibility still do not have all of
the necessary information to conduct an appropriate

4

assessment of the circumstances in which the principle
of complementarity could apply in this case. We must
thus presume that for the same reasons the Libyan
authorities have not yet been able to present a challenge
to the admissibility of the case against Abdullah
Al-Senussi, as was repeatedly announced.
It would seem therefore that the institutional
weaknesses that have been mentioned have seriously
affected Libya’s interaction with the International
Criminal Court, and that undermines the effective
application of the Rome Statute and the relevant
Council resolutions.
We believe that the international community,
including the Court itself, must make an additional
effort to provide assistance to the Libyan authorities
so that they can acquire the technical and logistical
ability that would enable them to move forward with
the required investigations and proceedings. In the
particular circumstances of Libya, we believe that
the best way to ensure accountability and the end of
impunity would be for the Libyan courts to be able to
effectively carry out the respective trials, for which we
believe there is the necessary political will.
For all the foregoing reasons, we are convinced that
the unwavering support of the international community
and the timely provision of technical assistance are
increasingly important so that the Libyan authorities
can stay on the adopted course. That should ensure that
the serious crimes committed in Libya that have been
condemned by the Security Council and global public
opinion will not go unpunished.
Mr. M’Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): Allow me
to begin, Mr. President, by congratulating you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of November. You can obviously count on
the cooperation of our delegation. We also congratulate
Ambassador Gert Rosenthal of Guatemala, who carried
out his duties as President of the Council last month
with distinction.
I would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her briefing, which provides information on the
situation in Libya before the Court from the point
of view of both cooperation and the principle of
complementarity.
With respect to cooperation, Togo is pleased
with the willingness of States parties and non-parties
to the Rome Statute, as well as international and
12-57681

S/PV.6855

non-governmental organizations, to help the ICC in the
framework of its investigations of the alleged violations
in Libya.
While appreciating the cooperation between Libya
and the ICC, Togo hopes that the renewal of the mandate
of the person in charge of liaising with the ICC will
make possible full cooperation between the Office of
the Prosecutor and the Libyan Government. My country
believes that, in the spirit of the debate on 17 October on
the relations between the Security Council and the ICC
(see S/PV.6849), ways and means should be explored to
find a solution that would promote the implementation
of cooperation requests, pending or future.
We take note of the commitment, often repeated,
of the Libyan Government to proceed to a fair and
equitable trial for those responsible for alleged serious
human rights violations and violations of humanitarian
law, and we note that the Government affirms that the
investigations that it has carried out have allowed it
to obtain a great deal of evidence that will constitute
a set of charges identical to what the ICC Prosecutor
has presented. The Togolese Government hopes that
appropriate arrangements will be made to guarantee
that the alleged perpetrators of crimes will have
an equitable trial in accordance with international
standards.
Furthermore, Togo is concerned about the
information it has received on acts of torture or other
forms of mistreatment of the detainees and urges the
Libyan Government to make every effort to put an end
to it.
With respect to the principle of complementarity,
Togo believes that the prosecution and trial of those
responsible for the crimes in question is up to the
Libyan authorities first and foremost. My country is
convinced that there could not be any reconciliation or
stabilization in Libya unless light is shed on the crimes
in an equitable trial, so that the perpetrators can be held
accountable for their actions both before the ICC and
before national courts, in accordance with the principle
of complementarity that is the very foundation of the
ICC.
However, it would seem that for the time being the
Libyan judicial system is still under construction. Of
course, the expected decision of the Pre-Trial Chamber
on the admissibility challenge in the Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi case is not an assessment of the Libyan
judicial system in general. But that decision, which will

12-57681

deal with the determination of the Libyan authorities
to deliver justice, could be an indicator as to the ability
of the system itself to guarantee an equitable trial,
ensuring, inter alia, everyone’s right to a defence as
well as the protection of witnesses. That is why we hope
that cooperation between the Libyan authorities and the
Office of the Prosecutor will make possible, in the final
analysis, the judicious implementation of the principle
of complementarity so as to guarantee an equitable trial
for the detainees sought by the ICC.
Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
First of all, Mr. President, I wish to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We would like to tell you, Sir, that you can
count on our full support. We also wish to thank the
delegation of Guatemala for its successful leadership
in October.
We thank Ms. Bensouda for her briefing and for
the fourth report on the investigation of the situation in
Libya pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). We support
the efforts of the International Criminal Court (ICC) to
bring to justice those involved in committing serious
crimes during the events in Libya. However, judging by
the report, the work in that area has started to become
bogged down recently.
We are of the view that instituting proceedings
against people who have committed the most serious
crimes under international law is undoubtedly a
matter for the State in question. The jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court complements but does
not replace national jurisdiction. In the case of Libya,
specifically, it is becoming increasingly clear that the
continuing effects of the crisis in that country are a
serious obstacle on the path to achieving national justice.
Attempts to impose alien models of State-development
and State-building on Libyan society and to impose
values that disregard local political and legal traditions
and culture have resulted in a serious absence of
stability and lack of viable Government institutions and
of the rule of law in general.
The local revolutionary military leaders who
seized power on the ground understand the rule of law
each in their own way and, to put it mildly, extremely
specifically. They have no wish to submit to the central
authorities, which are simply not in a position to
bring them under their control. A stark example of the
inability of the official Libyan authorities to uphold the
rule of law was the detention in June for almost a month
in Zintan of a group of ICC officials, which is a matter
5

S/PV.6855

of serious concern to us. We seriously doubt that in such
circumstances the country’s authorities can ensure fair
legal proceedings that meet high international standards
in the case of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah
Al-Senussi. Nor do we completely understand what
prevented Libya from sending the ICC confirmation on
the progress of the national investigation into those two
individuals. We believe that the Prosecutor and Judges
of the International Criminal Court should investigate
this situation carefully.
We regret that during the past six months the
ICC has also been unable to make any progress with
the investigation of the alleged crimes committed by
officials of the States that participated in the operations
in Libya under NATO’s leadership. We believe that
it is important that the ICC continue to assess the
information received through the United Nations
International Commission of Inquiry on Libya from
non-governmental humanitarian organizations and
other channels.
We welcome the Prosecutor’s information on the
ongoing ICC consideration of additional materials
that could serve as a basis for instituting new criminal
proceedings within the framework of the Libyan
dossier. We emphasize the importance of conducting an
objective investigation into wrongful acts committed
by any participants in the events in Libya. It has already
been established that crimes were committed both by
representatives of Muammar Al-Qadhafi’s regime and
by the rebels. We look forward with interest to the
results of the Prosecutor’s analysis of the actions of
Al-Qadhafi’s opponents, including those involved in
the extra-judicial killing of the former Libyan leader.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
listened attentively to the briefing by Ms. Bensouda.
The new Government of Libya has been established,
signifying a new step in Libya’s political transition
process, which China welcomes. The formation of the
new Government has paved the way for the general
election next year. It is a positive indicator of the
Libyan people’s efforts to achieve stability, to proceed
with national reconciliation and to undertake economic
reconstruction.
China hopes that Libya’s new Government can
rally the entire nation and proceed actively with the
political transition process, based on the road map
and the timetable outlined for the transition, with the
goal of achieving long-term stability and prosperity.

6

The international community should continue to assist
Libya’s new Government and its people in those efforts.
China’s position on the International Criminal
Court (ICC) remains unchanged. We hope that the
relevant actions of the ICC, in accordance with the
Security Council’s resolutions, can play a constructive
role in promoting Libya’s transition and reconstruction
processes.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): I would first like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of November. I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Guatemala and his delegation for the
manner in which they steered the work of the Council
in October.
Allow me to begin by expressing a warm welcome
to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, to congratulate her on her
assumption of her post and to thank her for her report
and the statement she made this morning.
South Africa supported and sponsored resolution
1970 (2011), which referred the situation in Libya to
the International Criminal Court, because we were
concerned that crimes against civilians were being
committed in the midst of the conflict in Libya and
wanted to see that the perpetrators would be held
accountable for their crimes. Our support for the referral
was based on our belief that the fight against impunity
and the promotion of justice are objectives that must be
pursued in our collective efforts to find enduring peace.
The referral was made in February 2011; the decision
to initiate prosecutions was made within weeks of
the referral. By June 2011 the Pre-Trial Chamber had
issued arrest warrants against Muammar Al-Qadhafi,
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi. To
date, however, actual justice remains elusive. Indeed,
while there was a flurry of justice-related activities in
the early days, it appears that the wheels of justice began
to grind more slowly with the end of the conflict. For
us, the need for justice does not end with the cessation
of hostilities. If that were so, justice would not be an
end in itself but only a means to an end.
We have taken note of the admissibility challenge
initiated by Libya before the Court. South Africa,
as a focal point on complementarity, encourages
domestic prosecution as the first option for ensuring
justice. In particular, as a court of last resort, the
ICC should intervene only where a national system

12-57681

S/PV.6855

is genuinely unable or unwilling to prosecute. In that
context, we would be grateful if the Prosecutor could
share with us what the general attitude of her Office
is to the admissibility challenge initiated by Libya.
Does the Office of the Prosecutor believe that the
complementarity test has been met? Was the submission
filed by the Office of the Prosecutor supportive of the
admissibility challenge, or did it challenge the claims of
inadmissibility? In her answers to those questions, we
would be grateful, in the light of the inactivity test of
the Court, if the Prosecutor could share whether, to her
knowledge, prosecutions of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
have been initiated in Libya, particularly as concerns
Law 38, to which she referred this morning.
My delegation has stressed, since the first report
presented by the Prosecutor, that we should call for
investigations by the Office of the Prosecutor to cover
all criminal acts committed by all participants in the
conflict. We have noted that the Office of the Prosecutor
continues to analyse information relating to atrocities
allegedly committed by the rebel forces, as outlined in,
among other things, the report of the United Nations
International Commission of Inquiry in Libya. We hope
that the analysis will be speedily completed, and we
applaud the Prosecutor’s comments to the effect that a
decision will be made in the near future.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America):
Allow me first to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month, and to assure you of my delegation’s
full cooperation. I would also like to express sincere
appreciation to Ambassador Rosenthal and the
delegation of Guatemala for their excellent leadership
of the Council last month.
I would also like to thank Ms. Bensouda for her
briefing and to welcome her today as she provides
her first report to the Council as Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). The United States
looks forward to continuing our active engagement with
the Office of the Prosecutor and the ICC, consistent with
our law and policy, in order to advance accountability
for the most serious crimes of international concern.
The United States congratulates the Government
and people of Libya on the positive steps they have taken
to put in place a democratically elected leadership,
including the recent formation of a new Cabinet. This
is the first time an elected body in Libya has formed
a Government, and we continue to support the Libyan

12-57681

people as they work diligently to build a country that is
representative of all its citizens and fully respects the
rule of law. We look forward to working closely with
the new Government, including Minister of Justice
Margani.
As Libyans chart the country’s future, justice and
accountability issues will remain central to the success
of Libya’s transition and essential to securing lasting
peace. In this context, we continue to urge Libya to
adhere to its international obligations, including under
resolution 1970 (2011), and to continue its cooperation
with the ICC.
The cases involving Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
Abdullah Al-Senussi will unfold against the backdrop
of Libya’s transition to democracy. This is an important
moment for both Libya and the ICC as they work
together within their respective roles towards fostering
and ensuring accountability during this historic
transition.
We recall our comments last month at the Council
debate on peace and justice and the role of the ICC (see
S/PV.6849) that the Council’s referral of situations to
the ICC and subsequent developments highlight why
we should consider ways to improve cooperation and
communication between the Security Council and the
Court. For example, the Council should continue to
monitor the developments and situations it refers to
the Court and the challenges that may be faced by ICC
personnel in conducting their work. States should look
for appropriate ways to ensure that Court staff are able
to undertake their work safely and effectively.
Furthermore, we note the Prosecutor’s statement
that many requests for assistance to a variety of parties
have yet to be fully executed. In resolution 1970
(2011), the Council decided that Libyan authorities
shall cooperate fully with and provide the necessary
assistance to the Court and Prosecutor, and also
urged all other States and concerned organizations to
cooperate fully. The United States has endeavoured to
respond positively to informal requests for assistance in
the Libya situation, consistent with our law and policy.
We also remain deeply concerned by allegations of rape
and sexual violence documented by the United Nations
commission of inquiry and look forward to further
reports by the Office of the Prosecutor about its efforts
in this regard.
Regardless of the outcome of the admissibility
proceedings before the ICC, Libya will need to bolster

7

S/PV.6855

domestic accountability structures and processes to
create a robust and fair system of justice at home. After
40 years of dictatorship, no one has a better appreciation
for the importance of due process and the rule of law in
Libya than Libyans themselves. The new Government
must work to combat impunity for perpetrators of serious
crimes regardless, of their affiliation or the nature of
their crimes; to ensure a comprehensive programme of
transitional justice consistent with Libya’s international
human rights obligations; and to commit to measures
aimed at assisting victims.
The United States stands ready to assist Libya as
it works to reform its justice sector, strengthen the rule
of law and advance human rights and international
law. We look forward to working with the international
community to ensure adequate support to Libya as it
undertakes these critical tasks.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month, and by
assuring you of our full support. I also congratulate
Ambassador Rosenthal of Guatemala and his delegation
on their excellent leadership of the work of the Council
during the month of October.
I would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her briefing and for presenting the Court’s fourth
report to the Security Council pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011). I would also like to take this opportunity
to congratulate Ms. Bensouda on her assumption of the
position of Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, and to wish her every success in fulfilling this
highly responsible duty.
Azerbaijan is not a party to the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court. Nevertheless,
we proceed from the strong understanding that
protecting civilians, upholding rights and insisting
on international accountability all contribute to the
maintenance of international peace and security and
are thus responsibilities of the international community
as a whole.
Libya is undergoing a fundamental transition
to democratic statehood. It is clear that the efforts to
restore peace, security and stability in Libya are not
unchallenged. We commend the Libyan authorities for
their engagement in the judicial process with the ICC
and for permitting the conduct of investigative activities
on their territory, in particular to collect evidence from

8

voluntary sources. We take positive note of the formal
renewal by the Libyan General National Congress of
the mandate of its focal point to the ICC.
We note that the Government of Libya is
investigating the same cases as those selected by the
Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC. The report of the
Prosecutor clarifies that admissibility analysis should
be based on an assessment of whether the national
authorities have investigated or prosecuted or are
investigating or prosecuting such cases generally. In
this regard, we note that the Government of Libya has
clearly expressed its commitment and desire to ensure
an effective and genuine investigation and fair trials,
consistent with the highest international standards.
We also commend the Libyan authorities for their
continued efforts towards strengthening the rule and
reforming the country’s national judicial system. At the
same time, it is obvious that the Government of Libya
should continue cooperating with the ICC and provide it
with all necessary information that might be needed by
the Court’s judges to properly assess the admissibility
challenges.
We take note of the Prosecutor’s update on the
continued analysis of the information gathered to
determine whether Rome Statute crimes occurred in
relation to reported gender crimes and crimes allegedly
committed by different parties in Libya since February
2011.
The Government of Libya has committed to a
comprehensive strategy to address all crimes and end
impunity in the country. The activation of the strategy
will undoubtedly demonstrate that justice remains a
key priority underpinning efforts to ensure peace and
stability in Libya and reaffirming the rights of victims
to seek resolution within the national legal system.
We support the call made by the Prosecutor on the
international community to step up its efforts to assist
the Government of Libya in combating impunity and
reinforcing a culture of the rule of law.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to take this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and to assure you of our full support. I join
previous speakers in thanking Ambassador Rosenthal
and his team for their work presiding over the Council
last month.

12-57681

S/PV.6855

I thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda for her report and her
briefing today. The points that she made today reflect
the situation in Libya well. As Ms. Bensouda noted, the
country is in transition after 42 years of dictatorship.
Pro-Al-Qadhafi militias remain active. Not all
areas are under control. Tragic events, including the
assassination of the United States Ambassador, have
shaken the country. But the Libyan authorities have
persistently reiterated their commitment to pursuing
the democratization of the country, and the Council is
committed to helping them. Libya has asked to try Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi itself.
That is an option created by the Rome Statute. It is also
a tribute to that post-conflict country that it has thus
endeavoured to shoulder its responsibilities.
We are pleased that the Libyan Government
has chosen to avail itself of its right to challenge the
admissibility of the case before the International
Criminal Court (ICC), in full conformity with the
Statute. As the Prosecutor has reminded us, the final
decision on the case of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi will
end up before the judges of the ICC, whose decisions
will have to be implemented. Libya’s respect for its
international obligations, in particular the provisions
of resolution 1970 (2011), is a key indicator of its
commitment to the rule of law. It serves as a lesson
for other countries, such as the Sudan, that refuse to
engage in judicial processes of the Court, contrary to
Security Council decisions.
I will not comment further on the inadmissibility
proceedings now being considered by the judges; the
decision is up to them. But we have no doubt that Libya,
in conformity with Council resolution 1970 (2011), will
comply with their conclusion.
With respect to the persons detained by militias,
the Prosecutor has noted atrocities committed against
Tawergha civilians, who were targeted by violence in
Misrata.
We welcome the Prosecutor’s discussions with
the Government on a global strategy to bring an end
to crimes and impunity in Libya. That means that
perpetrators must be prosecuted and must benefit from
all of the guarantees of a fair trial.
The Prosecutor has also indicated that she will
continue her inquiry into alleged crimes of sexual
violence committed in Libya by Al-Qadhafi’s forces
between 15 February 2011 and the end of the conflict.

12-57681

We commend the attention paid to the dignity of
victims.
France was one of the sponsors of resolution 1970
(2011), which remains an example of the ability of the
Council, and the international community as a whole,
to act rapidly and in unity. In view of the atrocities
committed by Libyan leaders, members of the League
of Arab States, the African Union, the European Union
and the Organization of the Islamic Conference all
came together to condemned the atrocities.
Resolution 1970 (2011) referred the situation in
Libya to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court and made up the heart of the process that
unambiguously marked the total isolation of criminals
regardless of rank. It enabled thousands of human lives
to be saved.
Lessons must be drawn from our experience
in Libya. First, given the atrocities committed, the
international community and the Council can make use
of an impartial, independent judicial institution that is
permanent and immediately operational, in order to
identify the main perpetrators of crimes.
After Libya’s example, it has been noted that
inaction is more than ever inexcusable. At a time when
the Syrian authorities are perpetrating violence against
civilians, the Council must reiterate its message on
the primacy of the rule of law and the fight against
impunity at every opportunity.
In order to be effective, we must regain our clarity.
It is not the threat of the ICC that contributes to violence.
It is the hope retained by criminals that they will avoid
the hand of justice. Hesitation and silence on our part
do not help to save lives.
The second lesson is that the International
Criminal Court has demonstrated its ability to swiftly
act in Libya. I wish to pay tribute to Ms. Bensouda,
her predecessor, Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, and their teams,
whose work has enabled us to understand the workings
of the violence in Libya.
An examination of the arrest warrrants on crimes
against humanity shows descriptions of planned and
systematic attacks against civilians and the methods
used, including forced disappearance, arbitrary
detention and torture, which were used to crush all
forms of opposition. After the fact, the international
community sometimes tends to forget history. The
arrest warrants, which expose the orders that were

9

S/PV.6855

given to terrify and assassinate civilians, are there to
prevent such rewriting of history.
The third lesson is that the Council must be more
rigorous. It must improve its planning efforts as well
as its cooperation with the ICC when it becomes so
involved. That is also a lesson that my delegation would
like to take away from the Council’s open debate on its
interaction with the ICC (see S/PV.6849), organized by
the Guatemalan presidency. We must be able, perhaps
by modifying the terms of reference of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals and as part
of the sanctions committees, to better manage questions
of cooperation and non-cooperation.
The process initiated by resolution 1970 (2011)
must run its course. The fight against impunity is
crucial for a country such as Libya that has chosen the
direction of the rule of law. That is what the Council
has also underscored in resolutions 1973 (2011), 2009
(2011) and 2040 (2012). Continuing that process
requires both Libya’s full cooperation with the Office
of the Prosecutor and the full support of the Council,
the Secretariat and Mr. Tarek Mitri, Head of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya, in the efforts of the
ICC.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We congratulate
you, Mr. President, and India, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. We also thank Ambassador
Rosenthal and his delegation for their able stewardship
of the Council last month.
I would like to thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, for her briefing. We have taken note of the
ICC Prosecutor’s fourth report to the Security Council
in relation to resolution 1970 (2011).
Pakistan is not a signatory to the Rome Statute,
and thus is not a member of the International Criminal
Court. However, we recognize the rights and obligations
of the States members of the ICC.
The situation in Libya has evolved significantly
since the last briefing to the Council by the ICC
Prosecutor (see S/PV.6772).
We congratulate the Libyan people on the elections
and the formation of a new Government. That marks an
important step towards the recovery and rehabilitation
of the country from the conflict of the past year.

10

Libya continues to face some daunting challenges.
We are confident that the new elected Government,
with the broad support of the people, will be able to
overcome those challenges.
The Government needs to forge consensus for a
national security architecture, to disarm and reintegrate
the revolutionary brigades, to deal with cases of
conflict-related detainees and to contain the adverse
impact of weapons proliferation.
The path ahead for Libya is reconciliation, not
retribution or revenge. The international community
must continue to extend all possible assistance in that
regard.
The Libyan people have expressed their intent to
try Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi
before Libyan courts. We hope that the request of
the Libyan authorities to try those individuals will
be considered positively, in accordance with the
complementary nature of the Court’s jurisdiction.
Pending a decision on the admissibility challenge,
investigations by the Office of the Prosecutor in the case
of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi remain suspended. Libya
is undergoing a transition phase, and its Government
may need time to submit the necessary information.
We appreciate the engagement of the Libyan
Government in the judicial process of the ICC. Sharing
information about its legal system with the Court
would strengthen its own position on the admissibility
challenge. The Government must also ensure that the
trials of those individuals, if they are conducted in
Libya, be in accordance with due process and Libya’s
international obligations.
The Office of the Prosecutor has made some progress
in investigating other alleged crimes committed in
Libya. In that context, we underline the importance
of conducting thorough and impartial investigations,
regardless of which side perpetrated the crimes.
The ICC is a court of last resort. Strengthening
the judicial system at the national level is a better and
more sustainable way to end impunity. Formulating a
comprehensive justice strategy to address the crimes
that occurred in Libya would underpin efforts to ensure
peace and stability in the country. At the same time,
healing wounds, fostering national unity and ensuring
social and political stability are important imperatives.

12-57681

S/PV.6855

In conclusion, we underscore Pakistan’s fullest
support for the well-being and prosperity of the people
of Libya.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
important briefing, and we welcome the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, to the Council. We are grateful for the
presentation of the fourth report to the Security Council,
in accordance with resolution 1970 (2011), as well as for
the additional information shared with us today.
In the context of Libya’s complex transitional
process, we welcome the progress made by the Office
of the Prosecutor in the cases against Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi. We trust
that, as the transitional process advances, stronger
institutions will develop that will allow Libya to forge
a State that guarantees human rights, the rule of law
and the end of impunity. We therefore believe that it
is extremely important to maintain our cooperation
with the International Criminal Court and the Office
of the Prosecutor. It is crucial that those entities receive
the necessary support and assistance from all States,
including those that are still not party to the Rome
Statute.
Similarly, we believe that the Libyan authorities
have an obligation to respect the work of the Court
and the Office of the Prosecutor. To that end, we must
ensure that they will be able to work without hindrance
or restriction. Those assurances are all the more
important given the incident involving several Court
officials who were detained by the Libyan authorities
while on an official mission.
We appreciate the work done thus far by the
Office of the Prosecutor of the Court, but we also
see the involvement of the Libyan authorities in the
process and their interest in it as a positive sign. We
eagerly await the decision that the Court will take on
the challenge presented by the Government of Libya
on the admissibility of the case against Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi. We believe that this situation will make
it possible to determine the impartiality, independence
and capacity of the Libyan judicial system to respond
to those challenges. In any case, whatever the ultimate
decision of the Court will be on the admissibility of this
case, we agree with Ms. Bensouda that the Office of the
Prosecutor must remain informed on all the steps and
decisions that are taken on that matter.

12-57681

As for the investigations on other crimes committed
in Libya, we believe it important for the investigations
of human rights violations and crimes against humanity
in Libya, regardless of their perpetrators, to continue.
We are extremely concerned by the gender crimes that
took place during the conflict, and we hope that the
investigations of those crimes can help to deliver justice
to the victims of such serious offenses.
Lastly, and as expressed by our Minister for
Foreign Affairs in the open debate on 17 October
under the Guatemalan presidency of the Security
Council (see S/PV.6849), we reiterate our support for
and commitment to the International Criminal Court
and the Office of the Prosecutor. We believe that it is
necessary to take the necessary measures and to step
up international cooperation in order to bring an end
to impunity and to ensure that those responsible for
atrocious crimes be brought to justice. We believe
that cooperation is key if the Council is to be able to
support its own decisions and to provide a follow-up to
its referrals to the Court.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like to make a brief but sincere statement
expressing our appreciation and congratulations to you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council this month, and to wish you every success
in the implementation of the Council’s intensive
programme of work. We address the same sincere words
to Ambassador Gert Rosenthal and his team for the able
manner in which they conducted our work last month.
Finally, I would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda for
her clear and comprehensive briefing on developments
in the implementation of resolution 1970 (2011).
I would like to express our sincere pleasure in
seeing the brotherly Libyan people take one step after
another on the road to establishing modern, democratic,
independent and credible Libyan institutions.
Multilateral and transparent elections have taken place
in Libya after 40 years of tyranny. A Government has
been established that enjoys the confidence and trust of
the people and that is leading the Libyan people once
again to establish a democratic State that meets the
aspirations of all its citizens.
While we stress our full support for and readiness
to cooperate with the new Government in the
implementation of its urgent tasks in extremely fragile
security conditions, we appeal to the international
community, represented by the Council, and to the

11

S/PV.6855

United Nations Support Mission in Libya to provide the
necessary assistance to that new Government so that it
may be able to meet the challenges facing it, particularly
with regard to problems of security, arms, border
control, the integration of fighters, displaced persons
and refugees, and the creation of a system capable of
establishing peace, stability, national reconciliation
and human rights.
The new Libyan authorities, beginning with the
National Transitional Council and the General National
Congress, have repeatedly reiterated their readiness to
work and cooperate with the International Criminal
Court (ICC) to establish justice for the victims of
atrocious crimes, as reflected in the report of the
Prosecutor on the implementation of resolution 1970
(2011). The scope of that cooperation has widened
through the investigation missions that have visited
Libya, the encounters between the ICC Prosecutor
and high-level Libyan officials, and the coordination
between the two parties in dealing with the ICC officials
who were arrested by a brigade in Zintan.
Libya has formally expressed its intention to address
attacks against Libyan nationals without distinction. It
has also become involved in launching justice reform
by enacting laws that guarantee the independence of
the judiciary, the formation of a national reconciliation
commission and fact-finding inquiry, and transitional
justice.
Libya is also endeavouring to focus its investigations
on high-level officials accused by the independent
International Commission of Inquiry and has laid the
foundations of a general plan to establish transitional
justice, national reconciliation and civil peace.
With regard to the trial of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and other members of the Al-Qadhafi regime, the
Libyan authorities have reiterated that the Libyan
judiciary is capable of conducting fair and just trials of
those accused, in accordance with international criteria,
guaranteeing the accused their right to self-defence
and enabling the Libyan people to find the truth and
deal with their painful past. The request of the Libyan
authorities to conduct national trials of Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and others, and its commitment to ensuring
that these trials will be serious and effective, reassure
us that no one in Libya who has committed violations
of human rights or atrocities will be able to enjoy
impunity. This has been the position of the Security
Council in granting Libya the right to conduct its own

12

trials of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi in accordance with
international judicial standards and the statute of the
International Criminal Court.
The conduct of the trials by the Libyan national
authorities is necessary for the following substantive
reasons. First, the Libyan judiciary respects
international judicial standards and the basic tenets of
human rights and fundamental freedoms. Secondly, it
is capable of trying people for crimes against humanity
and violations of human rights in a manner that
ensures justice, fairness and victims’ rights. Thirdly,
it is capable of trying other crimes and establishing
all necessary measures to prevent impunity or the
commission of such crimes in the future. Fourthly, it
is capable of doing the work necessary to achieving
national reconciliation in Libya so that it can overcome
the painful past and lay the foundations of a new State.
The Libyan people are now more determined than
ever to establish a democratic State that respects the
rule of law and is capable of rejoining the international
community and the Council in applying the highest
standards of justice and fairness in order to meet the
aspirations of all factions of the Libyan population for
the security, stability and prosperity of the region.
In conclusion, I would like to express our readiness
to cooperate with our brothers in the new Libya and to
share with them our experience in the field of judicial
institutions, transitional justice, dealing with the past
and achieving national reconciliation so as to enable it
to remain an effective member of the Maghreb region
and to face the challenges of secession and terrorism
that threaten the Sahara and the Sahel region.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Let me first
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. We wish you every success,
and you know that you can count on our full support.
Allow me also to reiterate our thanks and appreciation
to Ambassador Rosenthal and his team for their able
stewardship of the Council last month.
I thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Ms. Bensouda, for her report and
comprehensive briefing. We fully share the objectives
she stated and the proposed method to pursue. I would
also like to commend her for the work under way to
investigate all facts and evidence relevant to assessing
criminal responsibility under the Rome Statute
following the referral of the situation in Libya to the ICC.
In this regard, we encourage close cooperation between

12-57681

S/PV.6855

the Prosecutor’s office and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in all
that concerns the work of the independent international
commission of inquiry, as well as the further support
that can be provided to ensure the effectiveness of the
investigations by the Prosecutor.
We also welcome the contacts that the Office
of the Prosecutor continues to hold with the Libyan
Government and the continuing efforts to ensure that a
good level of cooperation is preserved. We will follow
very closely the consideration that is being given
by the Court to the reported incidents in Libya with
Court employees, including with the aim of preventing
incidents such as these from occurring in the future.
It is indeed crucial that those in the Court who are
involved in the investigations in the field are able to
do their work effectively and in appropriate conditions.

person has the right to a fair trial. Cases of arbitrary
arrest and enforced disappearances must stop and be
accounted for, and we welcome the continuing efforts
of the Prosecutor to address these important issues.
In conclusion, we look forward to a full and complete
investigation of allegations of all serious crimes
committed in Libya, and encourage the Prosecutor
and her Office to continue their investigative efforts in
cooperation with the Libyan authorities. We also stress,
as the Prosecutor does in her report, the need for a
comprehensive strategy on the part of Libya to address
these crimes. What is important is to ensure that justice
is done, that no impunity is condoned, and that those
responsible for such serious crimes are brought to
justice and given a fair trial.

Portugal stresses the importance of accountability
and the need to fight impunity for serious violations of
human rights. These are universal goals that guide the
United Nations and are at the core of the international
community’s concerns. We thank the Prosecutor for her
update on the ongoing cases.

Mr. Berger (Germany): I would like to thank the
Prosecutor for presenting her report. Since this is the
first time that Ms. Bensouda has briefed the Council,
please allow me to congratulate her on the assumption
of the post of Chief Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). We are convinced that the
Office of the Prosecutor is in good hands, and we wish
her every success.

We will closely follow future developments on
these procedures, bearing in mind the important
role the Statute confers on the Court in deciding
the admissibility of the case against Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi following the procedural challenge filed by
the Libyan Government. We fully trust the Court in its
evaluation of the situation with a view to ensuring the
trial is undertaken in full compliance with international
standards. Likewise, we have similar expectations
concerning the case against Abdullah Al-Senussi and
the need for his prompt presentation to justice.

We commend Libya on the progress achieved
during the first year of liberation from the Al-Qadhafi
dictatorship. The recent approval of the new Cabinet
of Prime Minister Zeidan in the first elections for
decades is an important step in the transition process.
No one expected this transition to be easy and without
challenges after decades of systematic destruction of
political institutions by the former regime. The Prime
Minister and his Government should therefore receive
all the support they need, and we look forward to
working closely with them.

We also thank Ms. Bensouda for the information
provided on ongoing investigations, including on
gender crimes and the pattern of rapes identified in the
report of the commission of inquiry, and we stress in
this respect the concern of the Office for ensuring, in
its investigative efforts, the protection of victims, thus
preventing situations in which victims could be further
victimized through exposure and possible retaliation.

Let me now turn to the points that were raised by
the Prosecutor. I would like to address four issues.

Violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law are precisely that — violations
and crimes —regardless of whoever may be found
responsible for them. Acts of retaliation, such as
those against civilians mentioned in the report, are
inadmissible. Let me once again stress that every

12-57681

First, on cooperation, we fully support the
Prosecutor’s call on all concerned to fully cooperate with
the ICC and thereby contribute to the implementation
of resolution 1970 (2011). We are mindful that the
resolution explicitly demands full cooperation with the
ICC from the Libyan authorities. We therefore encourage
Libya to meet its obligations without preconditions or
restrictions. In that context, we appreciate the renewal
of the mandate of the Libyan focal point to the ICC on
11 September.

13

S/PV.6855

Secondly, with regard to the admissibility
challenge presented by Libya in the case of Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, Germany reiterates its view that
the ultimate decision on the matter is to be made by
the ICC Pre-Trial Chamber. It is in the interest of all
to establish clarity on the issue of jurisdiction as soon
as possible. We therefore urge the Libyan authorities
to swiftly supply the Pre-Trial Chamber with copies
of the evidence that was presented orally during the
public hearing held on 9 and 10 October. We expect
all concerned to fully accept and implement the
forthcoming decision by the ICC.
Thirdly, on the more general point of how potential
future referrals by the Council should be worded,
Germany regrets that, despite a clear legal obligation to
allow for the full application of the Rome Statute to all
activities undertaken by the ICC and its staff under the
Statute, some staff members of the ICC were detained
in Libya in June. We are therefore of the view that future
referrals should explicitly highlight the privileges and
immunities enjoyed by ICC staff.
Fourthly, Germany remains very concerned about
reports, including by the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry, regarding gender-related
crimes that were committed in Libya. We fully share
the view of the Prosecutor that such crimes may well
fall under the Rome Statute and that the ICC therefore
has the full authority to investigate and, if needed, to
prosecute the perpetrators of those heinous crimes.
Finally, I wish to reiterate Germany’s readiness to
support ongoing investigations following requests for
cooperation.
Mr. McKell (United Kingdom): Let me thank the
Prosecutor for her report on the situation in Libya. It is
just over one year since the end of the conflict in Libya
and the declaration of liberation from the misrule of the
Al-Qadhafi regime. Despite recent security challenges,
the political transition in Libya is continuing and the
country is fast getting back on its feet.
After 42 years, the fundamental building blocks for
Libya’s successful political transition are continuing
to develop. Libyan Prime Minister Ali Zeidan has
appointed his new Government, including a new
Minister of Justice. Civil society is flourishing and
the economy is restarting. The 2012 budget projects
a surplus, the stock market has reopened and oil
production is back to near-pre-conflict levels. The
international community continues to play a role to

14

support the political transition, providing technical
assistance to meet Libya’s needs.
The General National Congress and the recently
appointed Libyan Government are leading the process
of building a new peaceful and prosperoud Libya. In
his address to the General Assembly last month, the
new President of the Libyan General National Congress
reiterated the determination of the Libyan people to
ensure that human rights are respected (see A/67/PV.13).
We urge the Libyan authorities to ensure that they meet
those public commitments. In that regard, we welcome
the close cooperation with the Human Rights Council’s
Commission of Inquiry, which has now completed its
work. The Libyan Government should investigate and
hold to account all those guilty of abuses, and press
forward with the implementation of the Commission’s
recommendations.
Addressing security and transitional justice is
the immediate challenge for the Libyan Government.
We stand ready to assist the Libyan Government in
building up accountable and transparent security and
justice institutions to improve security and address
outstanding issues.
The United Kingdom is a strong supporter of the
International Criminal Court. We note the detailed work
of the Prosecutor and her Office during visits to Libya
over the past year, and we thank her and her staff. Their
efforts have played an important part in challenging
impunity and bringing accountabilty to a country where
it has been sadly lacking for some time. The United
Kingdom fully supports the ICC’s investigations into
crimes against humanity, including those involving
sexual violence. We believe that there is more that can
and must be done to combat the issue, particularly to
address the culture of impunity for such crimes that
has been allowed to develop. We are exploring options
to support the development of capacity within Libya
to address the issue, as part of the Foreign Secretary’s
initiative to prevent sexual violence.
Libya’s continuing cooperation with the ICC
in relation to the arrest warrant issued against Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi for suspected crimes against
humanity is essential. We note that the Libyan
authorities have submitted an admissability challenge
setting out the ongoing Libyan investigations into his
alleged crimes and that the Prosecutor and her Office
have suspended their investigations pending a ruling
from the ICC judges on the case. We encourage the ICC

12-57681

S/PV.6855

and the Libyan Government to work together to address
matters arising out of the events in June. But, generally,
we are pleased that Libya and the ICC are continuing
to engage constructively on issues relating to the ICC
proceedings. It is important that the detention of both
Abdullah Al-Senussi and Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi be
in accordance with international law, that they have
access to legal advisers and that any potential trial held
in Libya be consistent with Libya’s international human
rights obligations.
The authorities of the United Kingdom have played
a part in the ICC investigations so far by providing the
fullest support as and when requested to the Prosecutor
and her team of investigators. We will continue to do
so.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of India.
I too would like to join others in thanking the
Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her briefing today.
Let me state at the outset that India is not party to the
Rome Statute, for reasons that are well known and need
not be reiterated here. However, we support the rights
and obligations of the States that are members of the
International Criminal Court (ICC).
India strongly condemns all acts of violence
committed against civilians. We believe that the right
to life is one of the fundamental rights and should be
the foundation of any social order. It is the obligation
of all States to take appropriate measures to protect the
lives of their citizens while maintaining social order.
The States concerned must also bring to justice those
responsible for violations of that right. During the
conflict in Libya there were deaths and destruction on
a massive scale committed by parties to the conflict.
In the post-conflict scenario the proliferation
of weapons has emerged as a major problem, posing
a threat to stability in Libya and in the larger region.
The Libyan Government has to confront that challenge
by undertaking an inclusive political process aimed at
achieving national reconciliation, peace, security and
stability in the country. In that connection, we welcome
the progress achieved towards establishing democracy
in Libya, and we commend the people and Government
of Libya for holding elections to the National Congress.
We hope that peace, stability and socioeconomic
development will soon return to Libya.

12-57681

The international community, including the
Security Council and the ICC, should fully assist the
Libyan authorities in that process. Such an inclusive
approach to national reconciliation, anchored in State
sovereignty, is the only way to overcome the problems
that Libya is currently facing. We have noted the
Prosecutor’s comments today, and we expect that she
will carry out a thorough and impartial investigation of
the situation in Libya in an impartial and transparent
manner. The Council referred the situation in
resolution 1970 (2011), and a report on the investigation
of the situation is important. All those responsible for
committing crimes should be held accountable. Political
or other non-judicial considerations should not exempt
anyone from prosecution for crimes committed.
Last but not least, it is also important to ensure that
all actions by the ICC Prosecutor fall strictly within
the ambit of resolution 1970 (2011), particularly its
paragraph 6, which concerns the States that are not
parties to the Rome Statute.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I should like also to commend your
predecessor, the representative of Guatemala, and
the members of his team for their outstanding work
last month. Let me also thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for the information that she has provided to the Council.
I should like to congratulate her on her assumption
of her important post and wish her every success in
discharging her mandate.
The Libyan delegation explained to the Council,
on 16 May 2012 (see S/PV.6772), the Libyan
Government’s plans to deal with the different aspects
of the implementation of the judicial system and the
restoration of peace and stability to the country, as well
as the upcoming trials, which will be a top priority for
us. We will deal with every case irrespective of the
identity of the victim or the accused.
I should like to reiterate that those plans are
still valid. As we have already underscored, the
Libyan judicial authorities will initially focus their
investigations and trials on the leaders and high

15

S/PV.6855

officials of the Al-Qadhafi regime, as they are the main
perpetrators of the serious crimes committed, given
that they were the ones who ordered or orchestrated
them. Those leaders include Saif Al-Qadhafi, Abdullah
Al-Senussi, Al-Baghdadi Al-Mahmoudi and Abuzed
Dorda, all of whom are in detention in Libya. Some
of them have already been interrogated at length, and
progress has been made in that respect. The trial of
Saif Al-Qadhafi was due to start, but, because of the
investigation into his actions, it was postponed so as
to enable the Libyan judicial authorities to give full
consideration to his case.
Other leaders of the old regime fall into that same
category, but they are currently outside the country. In
that regard, the Libyan judicial authorities are seeking
to persuade the States where they are located to arrest
them and deliver them to the Libyan authorities, so
that they can be put on trial. We hope that the States
concerned will cooperate with us and that those same
States will understand that it is incumbent upon them
to comply with Libya’s request, in line with paragraph
3 of resolution 2040 (2012), which “urges all Member
States to cooperate closely with the Libyan authorities
in their efforts to end impunity for such violations”.
I should like to take this opportunity to underscore
the fact that the Libyan Government is under
considerable pressure by the country’s people to cease
all cooperation with certain States until they hand over
those leaders of the Al-Qadhafi regime who are on their
territory. The Libyan Government believes that it will
have to do so if the extraditions are not carried out.
We believe that the close cooperation that
exists between the ICC and the political and judicial
authorities in Libya is of pivotal importance. That
cooperation has, incidentally, just been underscored
by the Prosecutor in her report and in her briefing.
The Libyan judicial authorities are awaiting a positive
decision by the Pre-trial Chamber judges pertaining to
the admissibility challenge submitted by the Libyan
Government in the case of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi.
The Libyan judicial authorities also intend in the
coming days to submit an admissibility challenge in the
case of Abdullah Al-Senussi.
We would like to reaffirm here the determination of
the Libyan authorities to guarantee the protection of the
rights of the accused and to respect the necessary legal
procedures while ensuring that the trials are carried out
in conformity with international law and criteria.

16

The Libyan authorities have taken note of some
criticisms made by human rights organizations. We
have also listened to the comments from the members
of the Council. In any case, the Libyan authorities are
not neglecting any allegation pertaining to human
rights violations, irrespective of who the perpetrators
may be. The Libyan authorities are firmly determined
to establish the rule of law and create a comprehensive,
fair and effective judicial system. To that end, the
Libyan authorities have drafted a comprehensive
strategy to ensure the end of impunity and to achieve
national reconciliation. However, the implementation
of that strategy is facing numerous challenges.
There is also a delay in the formation of the new
Government following the election of the National
Congress. The Libyan authorities are also aware of the
fact that there are on occasion inadmissible delays in
the trials of detainees. However, the delays of which
we are accused are due to the situation regarding the
reform of the judicial system and security reforms and
to our desire to expand the rule of law throughout all of
our territory.
I am certain that members understand the scale of
the challenges facing us and the range of complex and
interrelated problems that the Libyan Government is
encountering. Those issues require wise and cautious
solutions that take all the various aspects into account
and that seek to improve the security situation, to
achieve justice, to build State institutions, to provide
essential services, to relaunch the economy and to meet
the citizens’ needs.
Certainly, the Libyan Government vitally needs the
understanding and assistance of the Council and of the
international community, as well as international aid,
in order to achieve those goals. I am glad to note today
the willingness of all States to provide assistance to
Libya at this difficult time.
The President: I now give the floor to Prosecutor
Bensouda to respond to the comments and questions
raised.
Ms. Bensouda: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this second opportunity. I would also like to take the
opportunity to thank members of the Council for their
support in this process.
There was a specific question raised by the
representative of South Africa regarding the process
that is currently ongoing at the International Criminal

12-57681

S/PV.6855

Court, namely, the challenge of admissibility by Libya.
I can only say here that the judges will decide that. I
believe that many members have already commented on
the matter. Of course, it is not my place to prejudge the
judges’ decision.
However, I can say that my Office finds it positive
that the Government of Libya is engaging in the judicial
process. I think that that is very positive. As a policy,
my Office has always encouraged and supported
national proceedings. The test set by the Court is clear.
The Court requires evidence of a sufficient degree of
specificity and probative value to demonstrate that

12-57681

Libya is indeed investigating the case. I believe that
Libya is aware of its obligations. The burden of proof of
course remains with the Government of Libya.
The process in which we are engaged is ongoing.
I believe that the dialogue between the Court and the
Government of Libya will also be ongoing.
The President: There being no more names
inscribed on the list of speakers, the Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

17
