S/PV.9205

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9205th meeting

Wednesday, 30 November 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Agyeman. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ghana)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Mr. Asokan
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Syed
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-71516 (E)
*2271516*

S/PV.9205

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Expression of sympathy on the passing of former
President Jiang Zemin
The President: At the outset of the meeting,
on behalf of the members of the Security Council,
I should like to express our deepest sympathy to the
Government and the people of China on the passing of
former President Jiang Zemin.
Former President Jiang Zemin will be remembered
by the international community for his dedicated
contribution to global peace, security and development
and for his role in China’s reforms, its opening up,
modernization and economic development. His passing,
as we understand it, is a great loss to China and to the
international community.
On behalf of the Council, I ask that all here stand
and observe a minute of silence in memory of former
President Jiang Zemin.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
The President: I now call on the representative of
China.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank the Security Council for this special moment
of silence.
The passing of Mr. Jiang Zemin, former General
Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of China and former President of China, is an
incalculable loss to the Communist Party of China, the
Chinese Government and the Chinese people. During
his tenure as China’s top leader, he made outstanding
contributions to the advancement of the cause of
socialism with Chinese characteristics, as well as to
the promotion of friendly and cooperative relations
between China and the rest of the world.
I will convey to the Chinese Government, the Chinese
people and the family of Mr. Jiang Zemin the sympathy
and condolences just expressed by the President of the
Council on behalf of all Council members.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
2/8

30/11/2022

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2022/881, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Mexico.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, China, France, Gabon, Ghana,
India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, Norway, Russian
Federation, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2663 (2022).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): At the outset, on behalf of
my delegation, may I extend our condolences to the
Government and the people of China on the passing of
their former President, Jiang Zemin.
I would also like to strongly commend Ambassador
De la Fuente Ramírez and his team for their efforts
in guiding the work to a successful conclusion of the
comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004). It was
a difficult and challenging role, and his work and that
of his team was exemplary in guiding progress by the
Committee established pursuant to the resolution. His
diplomacy, professionalism and patience resulted in the
adoption of resolution 2663 (2022) today.
Ireland attaches great importance to resolution 1540
(2004), which forms an essential part of the global
non-proliferation architecture. The full implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) can ensure that non-State
actors are prevented from acquiring and using weapons
of mass destruction. That is why we supported and
welcome the adoption of the resolution today, which
provides a renewed mandate for the 1540 Committee.
Building on resolution 1540 (2004) and its successors,
it will provide an important basis for the work of the
1540 Committee over the next 10 years.
The full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
remains essential, and we encourage States to continue to
take seriously their responsibilities under the resolution.
The 1540 Committee and the Group of Experts do vital
work in that regard. Similarly, international and regional
22-71516

30/11/2022

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

organizations and civil society, including academia and
the private sector, also have a significant contribution to
make in helping to ensure the robust implementation of
the resolution.
It is important that, under its new mandate, the
Committee look at the key challenges in this area. That
includes the evolving nature of the risks of proliferation
arising from rapid advances in science, technology and
international commerce. We would also point to the
need to identify and prevent the financing of activities
involving the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery by non-State actors.
Finally, the reference to the need for the Committee
to address the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women is welcome. However, we hope to see further
work by the Committee to come into line with other parts
of the disarmament and non-proliferation architecture,
as well as the wider United Nations agenda on this issue.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): We voted
in favour of resolution 2663 (2022), as the United
Kingdom is steadfast in its commitment to preventing
the proliferation of chemical, biological and nuclear
weapons and their means of delivery. Resolution 1540
(2004) remains a key pillar of the non-proliferation
framework. We call on all States to implement their
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004) in full.
We pay tribute to the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and to his
team in guiding us through the review process and to a
new 10-year mandate for the Committee. We thank the
Group of Experts and its Coordinator for their support to
the Committee in its work.
The obligations set out in resolution 1540 (2004)
remain as relevant as ever, but the context in which
States are implementing them has changed since 2004.
We are disappointed that, due to the resistance of one
Council member, the new mandate did not go further in
strengthening the 1540 Committee’s support to Member
States as they implement the resolution, including on the
important issue of proliferation financing.
We look forward to continuing cooperation with
all Council members through the 1540 Committee. The
risks of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
to non-State actors are grave. Collectively, we must
redouble our efforts to address them.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me join you, Mr. President,
and colleagues in expressing our condolences to the
Government and the people of China on the passing of
former President Jiang Zemin.

S/PV.9205

We welcome today’s adoption of resolution 2663
(2022) and thank Mexico for the effort and commitment
in advancing the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), as well as for their
very patient efforts and the leadership shown to achieve
consensus. In that regard, the adoption of resolution
2663 (2022) today sends the right message, with a
new mandate for the 1540 Committee to meet current
challenges and make it more effective in the future. My
country attaches special and continued importance to the
implementation of treaties on arms control, disarmament
and non-proliferation. We remain fully committed to
strong international cooperation in order to prohibit
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
the materials necessary for the development of such
weapons by non-State actors, and resolution 1540 (2004)
is an essential element of the global non-proliferation
architecture. Needless to say, its full and effective
implementation remains essential.
The fight against threats of proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction is a long-term and continuous task. We
need to maintain our focus and always adapt and improve.
And in that regard, we regret that improvements proposed
to the text were not agreed. The proper implementation
of the resolution requires close cooperation between the
1540 Committee and its Panel of Experts, primarily in
the area of assistance to Member States. We welcome the
support and contribution of regional and international
organizations and the involvement of representatives of
civil society, industry and academia.
Lastly, we also support the strengthening
of the meaningful participation of women in the
decision-making process for the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I would like to once again thank you, Mr. President,
and other members of the Security Council for offering
their condolences on the passing of former President
Jiang Zemin of China.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) and their means of delivery is a matter
of concern with regard to world peace, security
and stability. Thanks to the unrelenting efforts
of the international community, the international
non-proliferation regime has seen improvement over the
long term and the non-proliferation process has made
increasingly significant progress. At the same time, we
continue to see a dire international non-proliferation
situation, in which the risks and challenges related
to the acquisition of WMDs by non-State actors

22-715163/8

S/PV.9205

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

remain. The unfair and unreasonable aspects of the
international non-proliferation regime remain striking,
while the right of the majority of developing countries
to the peaceful use of science and technology continues
to be subject to many restrictions.
Resolution 1540 (2004) was the first Council
resolution dedicated to non-proliferation and is
important for strengthening the implementation of the
international non-proliferation regime and advancing
the international non-proliferation process. Since its
establishment in 2004, the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) has done a great
deal of constructive work pursuant to its mandate and
has effectively promoted international cooperation
on non-proliferation. The current situation makes the
Council’s adoption of resolution 2663 (2022), which
extends the mandate of the 1540 Committee for 10
years, exceptionally significant. Looking ahead to the
next 10 years, the Committee should remain aware of its
priorities, develop reasonable plans, improve efficiency
and promote the implementation of the resolution.
We would like to propose the following. First, the
Committee should adhere to the mandate conferred
upon it by the resolution, closely focus its work on
the core purpose of preventing non-State actors from
engaging in proliferation activities and appropriately
address the evolving risks related to proliferation.
Secondly, the Committee should support States
in setting priority objectives and areas in order
to implement the resolution, in accordance with
their international obligations and country-specific
circumstances, and it should respect the leading role of
States in non-proliferation efforts.
Thirdly, the Committee should fulfil all its
responsibilities, especially by stepping up its
contribution in terms of technical assistance
and international cooperation and effectively
helping developing countries to strengthen their
non-proliferation capacity-building.
Fourthly, while effectively addressing the risks
of proliferation, the Committee should fully respect
the right of developing countries to the peaceful use
of science and technology, without discrimination, as
well as international cooperation, in order to strike
a better balance between security and development.
Non-proliferation is a long-term task that the
international community faces, and the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) will also involve a long-term
process. We hope that all parties will abide by our
shared, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable
4/8

30/11/2022

security concept, take advantage of the extension of
the 1540 Committee’s mandate as an opportunity
to jointly promote the comprehensive and effective
implementation of the resolution, and jointly strengthen
global non-proliferation governance. China will also
continue to make efforts and contributions to that end.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): At the
outset, I would like to offer the sincere condolences of
the United Arab Emirates to the People’s Republic of
China on the passing of former President Jiang Zemin.
His tenure will be remembered for China’s economic
prosperity and stability. Under his leadership, China
galvanized international efforts to promote global
development and uphold the rights of women by hosting
the Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing in
1995. His legacy lives on.
Turning to the adoption of resolution 2663 (2022), I
would like to thank Ambassador De la Fuente Ramírez
and the Mexican delegation for their able leadership
and tireless efforts as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), leading
the comprehensive review of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and achieving the adoption
of the landmark resolution 2663 (2022). The United
Arab Emirates welcomes the unanimous adoption of
the resolution, which enhances the work of the 1540
Committee and its essential role in further assisting
Member States in the implementation of resolution 1540
(2022) and builds upon the outcomes of the most recent
comprehensive review, including the deliberations
of Member States and other stakeholders during the
Committee’s open consultations.
The United Arab Emirates also takes this
opportunity to highlight its view of the importance of
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women
in all disarmament and non-proliferation activities and
discussions consistent with the Council’s women and
peace and security commitments.
While recognizing that the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is a long-term
endeavour, the United Arab Emirates believes that,
with the support of its Group of Experts, the successful
mandate renewal of the 1540 Committee for another 10
years will provide the Committee with the necessary
framework to address the continually evolving nature
of the risks of proliferation within its mandate.
Ms. Syed (Norway): At the outset, on behalf of our
delegation, let me also convey our deepest condolences
on the passing of former President Jiang Zemin
of China.
22-71516

30/11/2022

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Norway would like to thank Mexico for its efforts
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) in moving the Committee’s
work forward over the course of the past two years. We
are very supportive of the professional manner in which
work has been undertaken by the Chair, including in
the context of the Committee’s comprehensive review
and its mandate renewal. We appreciate that Mexico
has strived to hear all voices and pursue an inclusive
and balanced approach throughout its chairmanship in
the face of a difficult environment.
Norway voted in favour of resolution 2663 (2022)
to renew the mandate of the 1540 Committee. Norway
is working towards balanced, mutual, irreversible and
verifiable nuclear disarmament and to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. The 1540
Committee has an important role to play in reaching that
goal. Norway remains strongly supportive of the role
of the Group of Experts and hopes that the Committee
will begin to review its internal guidelines as soon as
possible in order to allow the 1540 Committee to better
utilize its expertise.
Norway is pleased that the resolution was able to
reflect the importance of the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women with regard to matters related
to non-proliferation. The inclusion of that reference
is based on inputs raised by a cross-regional group
of Member States during the 1540 Committee’s open
consultations. Ensuring the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women is central to harnessing diverse
expertise, sharpening technical assistance and building
new areas for cooperation, capacity-building and
training in relation to the work undertaken by the 1540
Committee. The nineteenth preambular paragraph of
the resolution also reflects the approach outlined in the
Secretary-General’s Agenda for Disarmament and is in
line with resolution 1325 (2000), which recognizes that
women’s participation is of great importance for issues
relevant to international peace and security.
In conclusion, the prospect of the proliferation of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and their
means of delivery is of real and continuous concern,
especially considering the continuously evolving nature
of proliferation risks, including the rapid advances
in science, technology and international commerce.
Therefore, please be assured of our full support for the
work of the 1540 Committee.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, allow me to express our
condolences to our Chinese friends following the

S/PV.9205

passing of the former President of China and General
Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party, Mr. Jiang
Zemin. The name of this outstanding statesman is
inextricably linked with an important period in China’s
recent history, marked by major accomplishments in
economic and social development and the strengthening
of his country’s international standing.
As a co-sponsor of resolution 1540 (2004),
the Russian Federation attaches great importance
to that unique Council instrument in the area of
non-proliferation, which retains its full relevance today.
We are wholly committed to the aims and objectives
of the resolution, which requires all United Nations
Member States to establish and improve national control
systems for nuclear, chemical and biological weapons,
their means of delivery and related materials in order to
prevent their falling into the hands of non-State actors,
including terrorists, which allows us to formulate a
global response to global non-proliferation challenges.
Today an important decision was unanimously taken
to extend for 10 years the mandate of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) . That decision was the result of the
serious efforts, constructive approach and flexibility
demonstrated by all Council members, thanks to which
the document is truly consensus-based in nature. We
are grateful to all partners for their work.
We highly appreciate the efforts of the Mexican
chairmanship of the 1540 Committee. Mexico’s
professionalism has enabled us not only to adopt
resolution 2663 (2022) but also to successfully conduct
a comprehensive review of the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). Mexico assumed the
chairmanship of the Committee almost two years ago
and was able to ensure the proper organization of all
stages of that complex process, including by holding
open consultations of the Committee with Member
States. The outcome of the review and the extensive
consultations allowed for agreement on a report of the
1540 Committee to the Security Council that turned
out to be factual, balanced and consensus-based,
with its provisions forming the basis of the resolution
adopted today.
We trust that with the adoption of a new substantive
resolution, that important subsidiary body of the
Security Council will be able to more effectively carry
out its assigned tasks of monitoring and documenting
national measures to implement resolution 1540 (2004),
as well as coordinating efforts to provide technical
assistance to States upon their request. We are convinced
that the key to the success of the Committee’s work,

22-715165/8

S/PV.9205

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

including in the new areas approved by the members
of the Security Council in resolution 2663 (2022), is
its respect for all United Nations Member States, while
fully taking their interests and needs into account and
providing timely responses to the requests it receives.
We hope that its work will continue in that vein.
For our part, we reaffirm our commitment to
continue constructive cooperation with all partners
and preserve in the Committee the inherent spirit of
resolution 1540 (2004), with a view to ensuring the full
and successful implementation of the resolution by all
Member States. That will allow us to move forward
in addressing global non-proliferation challenges and
combating weapons of mass destruction terrorism.
In conclusion, given that this is the last Security
Council meeting scheduled for November, on behalf
of my delegation I would like to thank the Ghanaian
presidency for its effective, able and professional
leadership of the Council throughout November.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Ambassador De la Fuente Ramírez for his superb
leadership of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) over the
past two years and his constructive and collaborative
work on resolution 2663 (2022) adopted today. His
tenure serves as an example to future Chairs of the
Council’s subsidiary bodies.
The United States voted in favour of the resolution,
which more than any other in the Security Council’s
remit seeks to address the existential threat of
non-State actors potentially acquiring and using
weapons of mass destruction. We also welcome today’s
unanimous renewal of the 1540 Committee’s mandate
for another 10 years. The Committee remains a critical
tool for addressing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their delivery systems. Importantly,
the resolution emphasizes the central role of the 1540
Committee’s Group of Experts, which comprises
exceedingly talented independent experts in the
substantive and technical fields relevant to the work
of the 1540 Committee. They monitor and support
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and its
successor resolutions and assist Member States in
strengthening their implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), consistent with their obligations. With the
new mandate, the Council reaffirms the importance
of transparency and accountability in the work of its
subsidiary bodies by increasing its interactions with all
relevant stakeholders, including civil society, industry
and academia, and by making available technical
6/8

30/11/2022

information resources that Member States may find
useful in their efforts to implement resolution 1540
(2004).
While we are pleased with the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2663 (2022), we were disappointed that
one Council member blocked efforts to make the work
of the 1540 Committee more efficient and effective.
Elements proposed by the Chair in the course of the
resolution’s drafting would have given the Committee
and its Group of Experts the tools they need to support
Member States more equitably, consistently and
promptly in combating the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and their means of delivery to
and by non-State actors. However, we were pleased
to note that thanks to the strong efforts of the Chair,
the resolution calls upon the Committee to review its
guidelines — a review process that we hope will lead to
the enhancement of the Committee’s work that we had
hoped to see in the resolution itself. With regard to those
Committee members from whom we see recalcitrance
and cynicism, we very much hope that future generations
of stewardship of resolution 1540 (2004) and the 1540
Committee grow more agile and more visionary. We
hope that they can guide the Committee towards the
most effective possible disposition and capability in
addressing that gravest of threats.
Today the Council unanimously voted in favour
of a more effective, more transparent and more
accountable 1540 Committee, which will continue to
support Member States in their efforts to combat the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to and by
non-State actors for another 10 years. That success was
not preordained — it is due to the dedication and hard
work of the majority of the members of the Council
and the steadfast and exemplary work of the Chair of
the 1540 Committee. We are very grateful for those
efforts — the stakes could not be higher.
Mr. Asokan (India): India welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2663 (2022) to
extend the mandate of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). As
others have done, I would like to place on record our
appreciation for Mexico for shepherding consensus
on the resolution and its leadership throughout the
comprehensive review process. India voted in favour
of the resolution, as we accord high importance to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and the role
of the 1540 Committee in facilitating it.
With the pronounced threat of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMDs), their means
22-71516

30/11/2022

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

of delivery and related materials, equipment and
technology to terrorist groups and other non-State
actors, the full and effective implementation of the
resolution assumes far greater importance today than
when it was adopted 18 years ago (see S/PV.4956).
Therefore, the Committee should continue to work
with Member States in addressing the rapid evolution
of proliferation risks, particularly the risk of access to
WMDs by terrorist groups and other non-State actors
due to advances in new and emerging technologies.
We hope that with its renewed mandate, which
enhances the Committee’s outreach with Member States
and focuses on refining its assistance mechanism,
including through a regional approach involving
countries with the relevant expertise, the Committee
will be in a better position to assist Member States in
their implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). We
also welcome the strengthening of the Committee’s
cooperation with international, regional and subregional
organizations and other Security Council Committees.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to express my
condolences, on behalf of Mexico, to the People’s
Republic of China for the sad passing of former
President Jiang Zemin.
Mexico thanks the members of the Council for
the support that enabled the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2663 (2022), which renews the mandate of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). As evident from the statements
we have just heard, it has not been a simple process, nor
has it been free of obstacles. No process is.
Nevertheless, in the face of differences in positions,
expressed numerous times, Mexico made every effort
to find solutions that would facilitate convergence,
taking into account the differing points of view of all
delegations. We are therefore pleased that an agreement
was reached and that the Council has extended for
10 years the mandate of a Committee that has as its
main task supporting States in their efforts to prevent
non-State actors from gaining access to weapons of
mass destruction. This extension will also further
strengthen the assistance that States require to fulfil
their obligations.
In substantive terms, this resolution takes into
account the deliberations that took place during
the comprehensive review, which Mexico had the
opportunity to chair and in which all States Members of
the United Nations could participate, if they so desired.
The resolution again provides for two comprehensive

S/PV.9205

reviews over the next 10 years, which is essential if the
Committee is to be responsive to the concerns of the
international community.
For Mexico, a country with a feminist foreign
policy, it is a matter of great satisfaction that, for the
first time, the Security Council is encouraging the
Committee to pay due attention to the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women in all its activities.
In conclusion, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, and the Ghanaian team for the excellent
conduct of our work during November, wish every
success to the Indian delegation in December and thank
the members of my delegation who participated in this
delicate negotiation.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ghana.
In its national capacity, Ghana would like to
reiterate its condolences to the Government and people
of China, as well as to the family of former Chinese
President Jiang Zemin, who passed away earlier today.
We acknowledge his unique contribution to global
peace and development and to China’s unprecedented
progress and prosperity. His legacy will certainly
be remembered.
We welcome the unanymous adoption of
resolution 2663 (2022), which renews the mandate of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), following its comprehensive
review. It is auspicious that this mandate renewal
occurred during our cycle of membership in the
Council, and we believe that the role of the 1540
Committee remains pivotal in dealing with existing
global challenges regarding disarmament and
non-proliferation, especially as it relates to non-State
actors. We acknowledge the dynamic nature of science
and technology and know that, among other factors,
this makes the full and effective implementation of the
1540 mandate a long-term task.
In that regard, as part of efforts to enhance the
implementation of the mandate of the 1540 Committee,
Ghana notes that the holding of periodic open briefings
for Member States and international regional and
subregional organizations, as stipulated in the resolution,
would be useful. Such meetings would present essential
opportunities for the voluntary sharing of experiences
on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
among Member States, as well as recommendations
on practical ideas for its improvement, while exploring

22-715167/8

S/PV.9205

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

30/11/2022

more ways in which the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004) can be addressed at the national level.

the Group of Experts for their continuous joint efforts
in assisting the Committee in carrying out its mandate.

We also believe that the effectiveness and
efficiency of the Committee’s mechanism for matching
offers and requests for assistance constitutes an
indispensable aspect of the Committee work necessary
for the accomplishment of the resolution’s ultimate
goals. Additionally, the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in the implementation of
disarmament and non-proliferation efforts is important
for the ultimate and long-term achievement of the
resolution’s goals.

Since this is the last meeting scheduled under our
presidency, I would also like to thank all delegations for
their cooperation and support, as well as for the kind
words expressed today in this meeting. I also thank
the Security Council Affairs Division for its effective
backstopping of the work of the presidency. We are
equally grateful to the interpreters and the conference
officers, who facilitate the effective functioning of the
Council’s monthly work.

In conclusion, we wish to thank the Chair of the
1540 Committee, Ambassador Juan Ramón de la
Fuente Ramírez, for the open and inclusive manner in
which he conducted negotiations. We also reiterate our
appreciation to the Office for Disarmament Affairs and

8/8

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

22-71516
