A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/144
28 January 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 114 (c)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/48/632/Add.3)]
48/144.

Situation of human rights in Iraq

The General Assembly,
Guided by the principles embodied in the Charter of the United Nations,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1/ and the International Covenants
on Human Rights, 2/
Reaffirming that all Member States have an obligation to promote and
protect human rights and fundamental freedoms and to fulfil the obligations
they have undertaken under the various international instruments in this
field,
Mindful that Iraq is a party to the International Covenants on Human
Rights,
Recalling its resolution 47/145 of 18 December 1992, in which it
expressed its deep concern at flagrant violations of human rights by the
Government of Iraq,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 688 (1991) of 5 April 1991,
in which the Council demanded an end to the repression of the Iraqi civilian
population and insisted that Iraq should cooperate with humanitarian
organizations and ensure that the human and political rights of all Iraqi
citizens were respected,
__________
1/

Resolution 217 A (III).

2/

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
/...

A/RES/48/144
Page 2

Recalling in particular Commission on Human Rights resolution 1991/74 of
6 March 1991, 3/ by which the Commission requested its Chairman to appoint a
Special Rapporteur to make a thorough study of the violations of human rights
by the Government of Iraq, based on all information the Special Rapporteur
might deem relevant, including information provided by intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations and any comments and material provided by the
Government of Iraq,
Bearing in mind the pertinent resolutions of the Commission on Human
Rights condemning the flagrant violations of human rights by the Government of
Iraq, including its most recent resolution, 1993/74 of 10 March 1993, 4/ by
which the Commission extended the mandate of the Special Rapporteur for a
further year and requested him to submit an interim report to the General
Assembly at its forty-eighth session and a final report to the Commission at
its fiftieth session,
Recalling Security Council resolutions 687 (1991) of 3 April 1991, 706
(1991) of 15 August 1991, 712 (1991) of 19 September 1991 and 778 (1992) of 2
October 1992,
Deeply concerned by the massive and grave violations of human rights by
the Government of Iraq, such as summary and arbitrary executions, torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, enforced or involuntary
disappearances, arbitrary arrests and detention and lack of due process and
the rule of law and of freedom of thought, of expression, of association and
of access to food and health care,
Deeply concerned also by the fact that chemical weapons have been used
on the Iraqi civilian population, by the forced displacement of hundreds of
thousands of Iraqi civilians and by the destruction of Iraqi towns and
villages, as well as by the fact that tens of thousands of displaced Kurds
have had to take refuge in camps and shelters in the north of Iraq,
Deeply concerned further by the increasingly severe and grave violations
of human rights by the Government of Iraq against the civilian population in
southern Iraq, in particular in the southern marshes, a large part of which
has sought refuge on the border between Iraq and the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Expressing concern, in particular, at the fact that there are no signs
of improvement in the general situation of human rights in Iraq, and,
therefore, welcoming the decision to deploy a team of human rights monitors to
such locations as would facilitate improved information flows and assessment
and would help in the independent verification of reports on the situation of
human rights in Iraq,
__________
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1991,
3/
Supplement No. 2 (E/1991/22), chap. II, sect. A.
4/

Ibid., 1993, Supplement No. 3 (E/1993/23), chap. II, sect. A.

/...

A/RES/48/144
Page 3

Regretting that the Government of Iraq has not seen fit to respond to
requests for a visit of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in Iraq and noting that, despite the formal cooperation extended to the
Special Rapporteur by the Government of Iraq, such cooperation needs to be
substantially improved, in particular by giving full replies to the inquiries
of the Special Rapporteur about acts being committed by the Government of Iraq
that are incompatible with the international human rights instruments that are
binding on that country,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the interim report 5/ submitted by
the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights and the observations,
conclusions and recommendations contained therein;
2.
Expresses its strong condemnation of the massive violations of
human rights of the gravest nature, for which the Government of Iraq is
responsible and to which the Special Rapporteur has referred in his recent
reports, in particular:
(a)
Summary and arbitrary executions, orchestrated mass executions and
burials, extrajudicial killings, including political killings, in particular
in the northern region of Iraq, in southern Shiah centres and in the southern
marshes;
(b)
The widespread routine practice of systematic torture in its most
cruel forms;
(c)
Enforced or involuntary disappearances, routinely practised
arbitrary arrest and detention, including arrest and detention of women, the
elderly and children, and consistent and routine failure to respect due
process and the rule of law;
(d)
Suppression of freedom of thought, expression and association and
violations of property rights;
The unwillingness of the Government of Iraq to honour its
(e)
responsibilities in respect of the economic rights of the population;
3.
Deplores the refusal of Iraq to cooperate in the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 706 (1991) and 712 (1991) and its failure to
provide the Iraqi population with access to adequate food and health care;
4.
Calls upon the Government of Iraq to release immediately all
persons arbitrarily arrested and detained, including Kuwaitis and nationals of
other States;
5.
Calls once again upon Iraq, as a State party to the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 2/ and to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 2/ to abide by its obligations freely
undertaken under the Covenants and under other international instruments on
_____________
5/

A/48/600, annex.

/...

A/RES/48/144
Page 4

human rights and, particularly, to respect and ensure the rights of all
individuals, irrespective of their origin within its territory and subject to
its jurisdiction;
6.
Recognizes the importance of the work of the United Nations in
providing humanitarian relief to the people of Iraq, and calls upon Iraq to
allow unhindered access of the United Nations humanitarian agencies throughout
the country, including ensuring the safety of United Nations personnel and
humanitarian workers, inter alia, through the continued implementation of the
Memorandum of Understanding signed by the United Nations and the Government of
Iraq;
7.
Expresses special alarm at the repressive practices directed
against the Kurds, which continue to have an impact on the lives of the Iraqi
people as a whole;
8.
Also expresses special alarm at the resurgence of grave violations
of human rights in southern Iraq, which is the result of a policy directed
against the marsh Arabs in particular, many of whom have sought refuge outside
the country;
9.
Welcomes the sending of human rights monitors to the border
between Iraq and the Islamic Republic of Iran, and calls upon the Government
of Iraq to allow immediate and unconditional stationing of human rights
monitors throughout the country, especially the southern marsh area;
10.
Expresses its special alarm at all internal embargoes, which
permit essentially no exceptions for humanitarian needs and which prevent the
equitable enjoyment of basic foodstuffs and medical supplies, and calls upon
the Government of Iraq, which has sole responsibility in this regard, to
remove them and to take steps to cooperate with international humanitarian
agencies in the provision of relief to those in need throughout Iraq;
11.
Urges once more the Government of Iraq to set up an independent
commission of inquiry to look into the fate of tens of thousands of persons
who have disappeared;
12.
Regrets the failure of the Government of Iraq to provide
satisfactory replies concerning the violations of human rights brought to the
attention of the Special Rapporteur, and calls upon the Government fully to
cooperate and to reply without delay in a comprehensive and detailed manner so
as to enable the Special Rapporteur to formulate the appropriate
recommendations to improve the situation of human rights in Iraq;
13.
Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Rapporteur
with all assistance necessary to carry out his mandate;
14.
Decides to continue its consideration of the situation of human
rights in Iraq during its forty-ninth session under the item entitled "Human
rights questions" in the light of additional elements provided by the
Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and Social Council.
85th plenary meeting
20 December 1993
