S/PRST/2007/11

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 April 2007
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5662nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 13 April 2007, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist acts”, the President of the
Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council condemns in the strongest terms the terrorist
attack in Iraq that targeted the democratically elected Council of
Representatives. The Security Council expresses its deep sympathy and
condolences to the victims of this heinous act of terrorism and their families,
and to the people and the Government of Iraq.
“The Security Council underlines the need to bring perpetrators,
organizers, financiers and sponsors of these reprehensible acts of terrorism to
justice, and urges all States, in accordance with their obligations under
international law and relevant Security Council resolutions, to cooperate
actively with the Iraqi authorities in this regard.
“The Security Council reaffirms that terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations constitutes one of the most serious threats to international
peace and security, and that any acts of terrorism are criminal and
unjustifiable, regardless of their motivation, wherever, whenever and by
whomsoever committed.
“The Security Council further reaffirms the need to combat by all means,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, threats to international
peace and security caused by terrorist acts. The Council reminds States that
they must ensure that any measures taken to combat terrorism comply with all
their obligations under international law, in particular international human
rights, refugee and humanitarian law.
“The Security Council reiterates its determination to combat all forms of
terrorism, in accordance with its responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations.
“The Security Council strongly supports efforts to promote national
dialogue, reconciliation and broad political participation in ensuring unity,
peace, security and stability in Iraq. Furthermore, the Security Council
demands that those who use violence in an attempt to subvert the political
process must cease hostilities, lay down their arms and participate in that
process.
07-30612 (E) 130407

*0730612*

S/PRST/2007/11

“The Security Council reaffirms its continued support for the Iraqi people
and Government as they rebuild their country and strengthen the foundations
of sustainable peace, constitutional democracy, and social and economic
progress.”

2

07-30612
