S/PV.7674

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7674th meeting

Tuesday, 19 April 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Mahmoud
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Yoshikawa
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in Somalia

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-10933 (E)
*1610933*

S/PV.7674

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Somalia to
participate in this meeting.
I request that the Protocol Officer escort His
Excellency Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, President
of the Federal Republic of Somalia, to a seat at the
Council table.
Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, President of the
Federal Republic of Somalia, was escorted to a
seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Chinese): On behalf to the
Council, I welcome His Excellency President Mahmud.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Michael
Keating, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia; and Mr. Téte António,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the
United Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Keating.
Mr. Keating: It is an honour to be here with President
Hassan Sheikh Mohamud of the Federal Republic
of Somalia. Allow me to begin by acknowledging
the unfailing cooperation and friendship that he has
extended to me and to recognize his leadership role at
this pivotal moment in Somalia’s history.
The last time I addressed the Security Council (see
S/PV.7614) I had only been on the job for a few days.
I said then that success in 2016 would depend upon
seizing opportunities that political progress could bring
about. Over the past several weeks, the President and
leaders of Somalia have done just that, and progress,
though not irreversible, is being made.
Last week Somalia leaders from all Federal
member states and iterim regional administrations
2/28

19/04/2016

reached agreement on the electoral model to be
used later this year. That significant achievement
paves the way for practical planning. I commend the
statesmanship shown by the National Leadership
Forum, and I welcome the Federal Government’s
engagement of Puntland to address its concerns in the
agreement signed in Garowe on 3 April, which cleared
the way forward. The electoral process envisaged for
2016 will be significantly different to that of 2012. The
electoral college will be 100 times larger. There will
be a genuine choice of candidates. Voting will take
place not just in Mogadishu, but in each of the capitals,
or seats of Government, of the existing and emerging
Federal member states. A two-tier structure made up of
Federal and state-level representatives will implement
the process. And 30 per cent of the seats in Parliament
are being reserved for women.
Much remains to be done in a very short period. For
example, the admirable commitment to reserve 30 per
cent of parliamentary seats for women necessitates the
identification of specific seats, in a balanced manner,
to be contested exclusively by women. Achieving that
commitment in practice will not be easy in a clanbased model, but it could mark a major milestone
in making women’s political empowerment and
leadership a reality. Once the Cabinet has formalized
the National Leadership Forum decision, it will go
to the Federal Parliament. We call upon Parliament
to expedite its endorsement of the model to allow for
timely implementation. And I welcome the continued
commitment by Somali leaders, in line with the
Council’s expectations that there will be no extension
of constitutionally mandated term limits.
The 2016 electoral model will be unique, a one-off.
It is in every sense a midway point between the elections
of 2012, when just 135 electors selected 275 members of
Parliament, and 2020, when all Somalis will have a say.
Work is now under way to that end. Somali leaders have
agreed to adopt a political road map for the period 2016
to 2020, including civil voter registration, boundary
demarcation, the strengthening of independent electoral
bodies and the preparation of the relevant legislation,
including that relating to political parties.
There are many outstanding issues. The
state-formation process in Hiraan and Middle
Shabelle has encountered difficulties and delays.
The international community is eager to support an
inclusive agreement reached among clan leaders in both
regions. We hope that the formation of the next state
16-10933

19/04/2016

The situation in Somalia

administration will take place soon and will set the
stage for agreeing on the status of the Federal capital.
The breakthrough in the electoral process
is generating broader momentum. The technical
review of Somalia’s provisional Federal Constitution
has advanced. The first reading of constitutional
amendments in Parliament took place in February.
Regional consultations are now under way. Politically
contentious issues are scheduled to be discussed at
the next Leadership Forum meeting, to be held in
May. That discussion will immediately precede a 10day National Constitutional Conference, to be held in
Garoowe, Puntland.
That activity amounts to a historic opportunity for
all Somalis to contribute to shaping the political and
legal foundations of their country. Some major issues
may be addressed only after the electoral process, but
there already have been significant developments. The
rule of law and its centrepiece, the Federal Constitution,
will be the strongest guarantees of long-term stability
and democracy in Somalia.
The fact that progress has been taking place amid
great insecurity is another reason that such progress
could be reversible. Too many civilians and too many
soldiers are dying. Al-Shabaab remains a potent threat.
An Al-Shabaab incursion into the coastal area of
Puntland in mid-March highlighted the vulnerability of
the north. It also beamed a spotlight on the recruitment
practices and abuse of children by Al-Shabaab, which
is beyond appalling. The attack was contained thanks
to the swift actions of Puntland’s forces and the support
of the Federal Government.
Although facing significant casualties, Al-Shabaab
continues to carry out repeated asymmetric and
conventional attacks. They will try to disrupt an
electoral process that they correctly view as threatening
their agenda. I pay tribute to the bravery of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and its troops
and to the courage of the Somali security forces and
the Somali people in confronting Al-Shabaab. They
need and deserve our continued support. The trilateral
partnership of the Federal Government, the African
Union and the United Nations remains a cornerstone
of the peacebuilding and State-building endeavour
in Somalia.
I am encouraged by the commitments made by
the AMISOM troop-contributing countries when they
met in Djibouti in February. There is a recognition

S/PV.7674

that command-and-control arrangements and force
headquarters must be strengthened, including by placing
critical enablers under the Force Commander’s tasking
authority. I hope that a new Force Commander will
be in place soon. I have just come from Addis Ababa,
where the first meeting of the African Union-United
Nations Joint Task Force on strengthening AMISOM
was held. It will advance our combined efforts to meet
the shortfall in AMISOM funding, to strengthen its
capacity and to secure the electoral process.
The Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the African Union and I have identified common
strategic objectives, in line with resolution 2245 (2015).
Compacts between me and the Head of the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS), as
well as between the Head of UNSOS and the Special
Representative, are being finalized for the delivery
of support to the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia (UNSOM) and to AMISOM, respectively.
We are committed to implementing the human rights
due diligence policy, to promoting respect for broader
human rights and to following up on allegations and
ensuring accountability. The capacity of UNSOS
itself is being strengthened, including through the
deployment of a team of United Kingdom military
experts beginning this month.
The Federal President is committed to strengthening
Somali security capabilities. I applaud him for that.
It is a complex and sensitive issue, but absolutely
fundamental to State-building and to consolidating
progress. I am therefore pleased that the Federal
Government has developed a national threat assessment
and national security policy. Those have been shared
with the regional authorities within the country.
Hopefully, recommendations will be agreed upon at
the next National Leadership Forum, to be held in May.
Detailed work will still have to be done on financially
sustainable plans for the military, police and justice and
corrections systems.
Political subscription to a national security
architecture must be complemented by police,
justice and corrections models that are appropriate
for Somalia’s unique circumstances and its Federal
future. I am delighted to report that a new policing
model emerged last month from consultations among
the Federal Government and regional states and
administrations. It includes roles and responsibilities at
both the Federal and state levels and accountability to
civilian authorities.

16-109333/28

S/PV.7674

The situation in Somalia

I share the President’s concerns about the
inconsistent payment of salaries to security-sector
personnel. Last month, international security partners
met with the President and the Minister of Finance to
discuss the coordination of salaries and stipends. Timely
and regular pay by electronic means and the transfer
to a unified biometric registration system is the way
forward. There is also scope for greater coherence on
the part of international partners to support the Somali
security sector on the basis of the security architecture
and plans currently under discussion.
Somalia’s economy is dependant upon favourable
weather and the entrepreneurship of its people, including
in the diaspora. Building greater trust and identifying
the mutual benefits to be derived from stronger
relationships between the State and businesses could
yield enormous benefits, including the strengthening of
institutions that can deliver greater security, financial
accountability, a favourable macroeconomic and
regulatory environment and basic services, such as
energy, education and vocational training. Those are in
the interests both of businesses and of young Somalis,
most of whom lack job prospects.
Somalia continues to make progress in economic
management. An anti-money-laundering bill was
signed into law in February. Empty seats on the Central
Bank Board have been filled. While there is still a long
way to go, including tackling corruption and reducing
financial leakage, the current direction is encouraging.
Recognizing that situation, last week the International
Monetary Fund announced its intention to propose a
staff-monitored programme, intended to help Somalia to
establish the track record required to begin the process
of debt relief, and eventually eligibility for concessional
lending from international financial institutions.
The Federal Government is central to moving that
agenda forward. Success would yield benefits for all
parts of the country, helping to attract both public and
private investment in areas that will boost Somalia’s
competitiveness and ability to meet the Sustainable
Development Goals. We are grateful to the Deputy
Secretary-General for calling upon Somalia’s external
creditors to accelerate preparations for in-depth
discussions on eligibility, as outlined at the Spring
Meetings Somalia Roundtable of the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank Group, held in
Washington, D.C., last week.
4/28

19/04/2016

Somalia’s security and prosperity depend upon
success in reversing dependency upon aid and in
addressing the root causes of fragility, conflict and
violent extremism. A comprehensive political strategy
is required that embraces economic investment in the
drivers of growth, job creation and education, including
for girls and women; and in the rule of law, respect
for human rights, and capable security and counterterrorism forces. It is a formidable agenda and requires
commitment both by Somalia’s political and traditional
leaders, as well as concerted support from its neighbours
and international partners. It also requires addressing
short-term realities. One of those is drought, now
affecting Somaliland and Puntland. Droughts in 2011
triggered a famine that resulted in the deaths of some
260,000 people. That must not happen again.
On top of acute food insecurity, continuing
drought could have a negative impact on broader
security — strengthening Islamist jihadists currently on
the back foot in those areas — and increase displacement
and migrant flows. Timely and appropriate action now
will mitigate the possibility of another catastrophe. The
resources needed to tackle the problem are immeasurably
less than the costs later — whether measured in money
or, more important, lives. Somali authorities have
established national and regional drought committees
to raise funds and coordinate the response, but that is
not enough. Humanitarian organizations have received
only $145 million of the $885 million callled for in
the consolidated appeal for 2016. On 31 March, the
Humanitarian Coordinator for Somalia, Peter de Clercq,
launched a call for aid seeking $105 million to step up
drought response. Donors are responding, for which we
are grateful, but so much more is needed.
The challenges faced by Somalis are formidable.
The progress is real, but reversible. The state-formation
and electoral processes remain vulnerable to spoilers.
AMISOM needs more support and cannot stay forever.
We must therefore do our best to make sure that the
progress is not reversed, to get the electoral process for
2016 completed and the elections in 2020 prepared; to
build the national capacity of the Somalis to take over
from AMISOM; and to generate the jobs and revenues
for a sustainable State.
Our — and my — efforts to do that depend in large
part upon the unity of the Council, for which I must
thank members. It also depends upon the coherence
of the broader international community, not only the
African Union but also the Intergovernmental Authority
16-10933

19/04/2016

The situation in Somalia

on Development, the European Union and Somalia’s
principal bilateral partners.
I look forward to the visit of the Security Council
next month and to joining the leaders of Somalia to
ensure a brighter future for all Somalis.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Keating for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. António.
Mr. António: Let me start by thanking you,
Mr. President, and congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and for giving us this opportunity to
address the Council on the situation in Somalia. This is
an opportunity to exchange views on the recent political
and security situation. As the African Union (AU), we
would also like to focus on an update on the operations
of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
I would like to thank Mr. Keating for his very
insightful briefing, as well as for his cooperation on
the ground. I would also especially like to welcome
His Excellency the President of the Federal Republic of
Somalia to the Council.
Since the last briefing by the African Union (see
S/PV.7614), Somalia seems firmly set on the path to
polls later this year. I am happy to note that the dynamic
and proactive relationship that has developed among
Somalia’s Federal and regional leaders in the context
of the National Leadership Forum is allowing for the
enhancement of synergies, mutual accommodation,
collaboration and the consolidation of a common vision
for Somalia.
Earlier this month, with limited intervention by
international partners, Somali leaders met and signed
off on the practical details of the 2016 electoral model,
as stated by Mr. Keating. They unanimously adopted
a joint declaration spelling out the general principles
and guidelines for the implementation of the electoral
model they agreed upon during the January meeting of
the National Leadership Forum. In that respect, the AU
looks forward to the conduct of elections in Somalia by
August 2016, based on that consensual model.
That is a step in the desired direction, and
collaboration, mutual tolerance and readiness will
continue to define the success of the electoral process
and other political aspects in Somalia in accordance
with Vision 2016. As much as it is still below the

S/PV.7674

desired threshold of the one person/one vote model,
we commend the introduction of electoral colleges for
the 2016 elections, which will be significantly larger
than the small number of elders who chose the leaders
of the current central Government and members of the
Federal Parliament four years ago. With the present
electoral model, the 2016 process is anticipated to be
more inclusive and representative. We remain ready to
support the Government and the people of Somalia in
that endeavour.
While we welcome those developments, we also
urge the timely nomination of the other electoral organs
and the completion by the technical committee of the
election implementation plan, including its subsequent
ratification by the Federal Parliament. Somalia now
has three emergent states members of the federation,
each with an elected leader presiding over a cabinet
of ministers and an elected assembly. We urge the
Federal Government to continue to push for the timely
conclusion of the process for the establishment of the
final state of the federation, which will bring together
the two regions of Hiraan and Middle Shabelle. The
empowerment and consolidation of those regional
administrations will bring the Government closer
to the people and make the provision of essential
services — including security, law and order, justice,
the sinking of boreholes and the building of schools,
hospitals and roads — much more possible.
In the fulfilment of their mandate, AMISOM
forces have registered significant gains in Somalia.
The ousting of Al-Shabaab from Mogadishu and the
liberation of a large number of district capitals and
swathes of territory previously under Al-Shabaab
control have significantly contributed to the creation
of levels of stability that allowed for a viable political
process to unfold and governance to take place in the
country. The ongoing Operation Juba Corridor, coupled
with the recent recovery of more territory and towns and
the air strikes by AMISOM partners, have contributed
to degrading Al-Shabaab capabilities and eliminating
several of its top leaders.
Despite those gains, the security situation in Somalia
remains fluid. Al-Shaabab has shown resilience and the
capacity to adapt. It still retains considerable initiative
and capacity to gather intelligence and deploy small,
but highly mobile and effective, teams of fighters who
use suicide bombers, grenades and artillery to attack,
impede the movement of people and goods, slow down
AMISOM activities in the main supply routes, carry

16-109335/28

S/PV.7674

The situation in Somalia

out ambushes and mount complex attacks through
a combined and concomitant use of all those types
of weapons.
In the light of those challenges, the AU has taken
several steps to ensure that AMISOM operational
efficiency is enhanced. The AU convened a summit of
troop and police-contributing countries on 28 February,
hosted by the Government of Djibouti, to address some
of the immediate challenges confronting AMISOM
operations, especially in relation to resources, command
and control and the generation of additional enablers
and support to the Somali national security forces. The
Heads of State and the troop and police-contributing
countries took important decisions and made farreaching commitments on those aspects and signed
the Djibouti Declaration on AMISOM, which set
the foundations for the consolidation of AMISOM’s
mission of stabilizing Somalia.
The African Union and the United Nations have
also formally established the joint working group
meeting, which was formally launched in Addis
Ababa on 15 April. The working group is an outcome
of the meeting of the United Nations-African Union
Joint Task Force on Peace and Security convened in
New York on 22 March. It is expected to strengthen
AMISOM’s operational effectiveness. The working
group is currently meeting in Addis Ababa to discuss
concrete ways to enhance AMISOM’s command and
control, including the possibility of a multinational
sector headquarters in AMISOM’s area of operations,
as well as to enhance the capacity of the AMISOM
force and Mission headquarters. The working group
will formally submitt its technical recommendations in
due course.
AMISOM’s priorities in the third and fourth
quarters of the year are to continue to conduct
defensive, offensive and routine operations in the areas
of its responsibility in Somalia; patrol main supply
routes; escort convoys; and to protect airports, ports,
other critical infrastructure, sensitive sites and very
important persons. The conduct of surprise attacks and
cordon-and-search operations to disrupt enemy plans
and degrade, weaken and destroy its capabilities, and
reduce and eliminate its presence in towns, villages and
remote areas are an essential part of AMISOM’s modus
operandi. That will reduce Al-Shabaab’s ability to carry
out ambushes and grenade attacks against AMISOM
and the Somali national security forces or to place
improvised explosive devices along the main supply
6/28

19/04/2016

routes. Moreover, that will ensure that Al-Shabaab does
not succeed in its attempts to disrupt the upcoming
elections in Somalia later this year, and will make it
possible for the elections to take place in an enabling,
safe and secure environment. To that effect, the Federal
Government of Somalia and AMISOM have set up a
joint committee that has already started to operate.
That will require the enhancement of the effectiveness
of AMISOM and the Somali security forces.
At this juncture, I would like to reiterate four
critical issues that require the Council’s attention in our
collective efforts to enhance AMISOM operations.
First, there is a clear justification for the renewal
of AMISOM’s mandate in the light of the progress
made in the creation of a conducive environment in
the political process, but also the continued security
challenges encountered in Somalia. It is important, as
recommended during the summit of the Heads of State
and Government of the troop- and police-contributing
countries of AMISOM, that the mandate be renewed
and the current authorized AMISOM force of 22,126
uniformed personnel and 70 civilians be supported.
Those are the minimum essential requirements for the
conduct of renewed AMISOM offensive operations
in Somalia. The AU Peace and Security Council will
consider the situation in Somalia on 28 April in Addis
Ababa, with a view to recommending that the Security
Council authorize the renewal of AMISOM’s mandate.
Secondly, AMISOM’s strategy needs to be adapted
to effectively cope with the ongoing and evolving
security challenges. AMISOM strategy must embrace
more targeted operations involving holding, offensive
and pursuit operations. That approach will complement
the territorial offensive operation aimed at recovering
territories from Al-Shaabab by undertaking more
deliberate intelligence-driven operations to further
degrade the capabilities of that terrorist group. The
African Union Commission has directed the AMISOM
leadership to commence planning for this new
strategy and would welcome the Council’s support for
its execution.
Thirdly, the mobilization of resources to ensure
that the salaries of the Somali security forces are paid
in a regular and timely manner and the identification of
funds to fill the gap created by the 20 per cent salary
cut for AMISOM uniformed personnel are important to
raising their morale and keeping them motivated. The
support and capacitation of the Somali National Army
16-10933

19/04/2016

The situation in Somalia

remains a central priority in terms of both lethal and
non-lethal provisions, within a coordinated framework,
in order to facilitate the take-over of primary security
responsibilities by the respective Somali institutions.
Significant achievements are already being registered.
Fourthly, the deployment of operational enablers
and force multipliers are pivotal for the rejuvenation
of AMISOM operations. I welcome the pledges of
helicopters made by Ethiopia, Kenya and Uganda.
The deployment of those helicopters will ensure that
AMISOM can conduct targeted operations as well
as achieve greater flexibility and protection. In that
respect, I would like to urge the Council to facilitate
the finalization of letters of assist, bearing in mind that
reimbursement for the helicopters should be at a level
commensurate with the offensive nature of AMISOM
operations in Somalia.
Finally, I would like to express my gratitude to the
troop- and police-contributing countries, whose men
and women are making immense sacrifices. We would
also like to thank our partners for providing support,
including financial as well as in-kind contributions,
in order to assist AMISOM and the forces of the
Federal Government of Somalia in their efforts to
stabilize Somalia and to create an enabling space for
governance, the distribution of humanitarian assistance
and the building of infrastructure for economic and
social development to take place.
The President: I now call on the President of the
Federal Republic of Somalia.
President Mohamud: I thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council. It is an
honour to do so.
A tragedy has been unfolding in the waters of the
Mediterranean Sea, one that many believe concerns
people from my country and neighbouring countries.
If all the reports are confirmed, it could be the worst
tragedy since the current migration crisis began. We
must make every effort to recover the bodies of those
who perished and to care for those who survived. I
applaud the efforts made by many nations to safeguard
and care for migrants and refugees escaping their
home nations because of the misfortune of insecurity
and hopelessness.
We request that the Governments in the region, and
others that have the capacity to do so, investigate the
crimes that have been committed by those who lure

S/PV.7674

young people to undertake unsafe journeys on the high
seas. The pain, misery and misfortune of all illegal
migration and its painful physical and mental costs
for all concerned will end only when we have peace,
stability and real inclusive economic development in
source countries.
Let me begin by thanking the Council for its longstanding support for peace, stability and development
in Somalia.
It has been almost four years since my Government
was appointed and since Somalia emerged from two
decades of war — two decades without a functioning
Government in place, and without schools, hospitals
or any form of public services. In Brussels in late
2013, I made a pledge on behalf of Somalia to pursue
peace and prosperity. That pledge had been central
to my original six-pillar policy, which provided a
foundation for the subsequent New Deal Compact for
Somalia. At the heart of my Brussels pledge lay the
pursuit of three imperative elements, namely, a secure
Somalia, a democratic Somalia and a progressive and
prosperous Somalia.
In 2013, the Somali Government agreed to pursue
the political transformation of the nation by drafting
and agreeing on a federal constitution, adopting a
federal model of governance and holding democratic
nationwide elections by September 2016. We laid
out that ambitious agenda knowing that we faced the
enormous challenge of trying to transform Somalia
politically while fighting a war against terror on our
own soil and lacking robust capacities or instruments
of State. When we first laid out those historic plans,
Somalia had limited functioning ministries and human
resources, limited domestic revenue streams to speak
of and no domestic planning or management capacity
to drive forward and sustain the desired reforms in
the country.
Along with the necessary political transformation,
we needed to build a secure Somalia. Our national
armed forces were decimated. Our soldiers, police and
security personnel lacked formal training, capacitybuilding or salaries for almost 22 years. Al-Shabaab
had emerged from the conflict, taking advantage of
non-existent State institutions, and began its campaign
of terror in Somalia and neighbouring countries.
Security must provide the conditions for development to
flourish, and Somalia needed development desperately.
We had lost two generations of people who had not even

16-109337/28

S/PV.7674

The situation in Somalia

been able to go to school. There were no jobs, no public
services and very little hope among our young people,
who make up the majority of our population.
Somalia has lived a lifetime over the past four years.
Our transformation has been rapid. Despite all of the
challenges, Somalia has made extraordinary progress,
of which we are proud and which ought to make our
partners proud too. With the end of the constitutionally
mandated terms of the Federal Government and
Parliament, the latter half of 2016 will be a decisive
time for Somalia. Last week, we successfully agreed
the implementation road map for the 2016 electoral
process. That means that we are on track to undergo
the historic first democratic electoral process in 47
years in Somalia. I will not go into all the details of the
2016 election. However, let me draw attention to several
important facts.
First, the process will be uniform throughout
Somalia to ensure national legitimacy. Secondly, a
dispute-resolution process will support the elections to
ensure that we are able to respond to any concerns and
immediately address them to avoid conflicts. Thirdly,
a lower- and an upper-house will be elected. Fourthly,
30 per cent of the seats in the electoral process and
emerging ninth Parliament’s Federal members will
be identified and specifically reserved for women.
In 2012, when my Government was elected, just 135
elders were involved in the selection of our members of
Parliament. In 2016, while elders will still play a pivotal
role, an electoral college of almost 14,000 people will
ultimately make the decision about who will represent
the nation. That is great progress.
We are committed to ensuring that there are no
impediments to the timely implementation of the
electoral process, including with regard to the freedom
of expression, or any extension of the constitutionally
mandated term limits of the legislature and executive.
This year’s electoral process takes us one step closer
to universal suffrage. We recognize the importance of
a clear political vision and path and have engaged in
twin-track planning in support of one-person/one-vote
elections, supported by a capable national independent
electoral commission in 2020. Somalia’s Federal
Constitution sets out the foundation for peaceful politics
in Somalia. We are pushing ahead to complete the
review of priority chapters of the Provisional Federal
Constitution by the end of 2016.
8/28

19/04/2016

Nationwide consultations with Somalis in all
Federal and emerging member states will be essential
to ensuring broad-based consensus and ownership. Our
Government is genuinely committed to that and strongly
believes in its value. During the past three years, we
successfully established three out of the four Federal
member states. We are working hard to complete the
state-formation process in Hiraan and Middle Shabelle
and to reach agreement on clarifying the status of the
region of Benadir, the capital city of Somalia.
While substantial progress has been made on the
security front, with almost 80 per cent of the country
liberated from Al-Shabaab, we acknowledge, with great
sadness and frustration, that the security environment
at present is an inhibiting factor for the development
of both the Government institutions and the people of
Somalia. Furthermore, the current security environment
remains a root cause for the significant humanitarian
situation and the ongoing assistance requirements
in Somalia.
I wish to recognize and commend the valiant efforts
of the Somali national security forces and the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in the fight
against Al-Shabaab. That fight is not over. We cannot,
and will not, quit before it is successfully completed.
Further resources and commitment are needed now
more than ever to chop off the head of the venomous
snake of terror once and for all. We strongly reiterate
the need for international support for reinvigorated
AMISOM and Somali National Army (SNA) operations.
The February Djibouti Declaration was unequivocal
in that partners must continue to provide sustainable
funding for both AMISOM and the SNA forces to fulfil
their mandates. The Declaration was also clear on the
urgent need for a structural overhaul of how AMISOM
is commanded. We must be confident that a central
command structure will be put in place to support a
coordinated and successful offensive in the near future.
My Government has been working hard to
strengthen the capacity and accountability of Somali
security institutions throughout the country so that we
are ready to assume control of our own security and
release AMISOM from its current commitment. We
are in the process of developing financially sustainable
plans for the army — the Gulwaade plan — and
the police — the Heegan plan — under a national
security architecture, which is informed by the public
expenditure review conducted by the World Bank and
the United Nations. Articulating and agreeing on the
16-10933

19/04/2016

The situation in Somalia

State structures that will oversee the development of our
security services has been the focus of my Government
over the past several months. I am very pleased that
the draft national security policy, endorsed by the
National Security Council, is scheduled to be discussed
through consultative meetings in each regional member
state capital. The first meeting will commence next
week, with a culminating national forum scheduled for
mid-May. That includes a reinvigoration of the National
Security Council to include regional representation
at the highest level of decision-making. The national
threat assessment has been completed, and the
national security architecture planning is under way.
Its completion is predicated on the completion of the
national security policy that outlines guiding principles
on Federal and regional security-related institutions’
roles and missions.
International support to the Somali security
sector is essential. My Government has taken steps
to ensure increased transparency in security sector
reform, including enhanced monitoring systems, the
registration of all personnel and their regular payment.
We are pushing ahead with national force integration.
The National Commission for Somali National Army
Integration has integrated four SNA battalions in the
Jubbaland region and one headquarters company of
female soldiers. I am pleased to report elements of
the newly integrated battalions have conducted joint
operations with Danab forces in coordination with the
AMISOM and other international partners. Two more
battalions are in the pipeline for integration by July in
Jubbaland and, thanks to the recently approved United
Nations support package to Puntland, the National
Commission for Somali National Army Integration is
scheduled to start a process for the integration of 3,000
Puntland soldiers within the next month.
However, we cannot ignore the one element that
would have the most rapid and greatest impact on
the development of Somalia’s own forces, that is, the
lifting of the United Nations arms embargo. We have
made solid improvements in weapons and ammunition
management and compliance with notification,
reporting and controls. In the past six months, we
marked more than 4,500 weapons, established a weapon
and ammunition technical working group and agreed
upon the terms of reference for the joint verification
team. We have held consultative meetings to initiate
the drafting of a road map to develop a comprehensive
national framework governing the full life cycle of

S/PV.7674

weapons and ammunition, and we have made significant
improvements in complying with Security Council
arms notification requirements.
Despite that improvement and the calls of
the different Security Council resolutions to our
international partners to provide non-lethal weapons to
Somalia, we are still hindered by the partial embargo.
We therefore request members of the Security Council
for the total lifting of the arms embargo on Somalia.
That will enhance our national capabilities to confront
and defeat international terrorism at home and provide
the best protection for our citizens, while safeguarding
our democratic and developmental future against
violent and radicalized spoilers. The arms embargo,
and indeed the Somalia-Eritrea Monitoring Group,
was put in place for good reasons and in the interests
of Somalia — and we are very grateful for that — but
Somalia has changed dramatically. Those instruments
are outdated and restrictive at best, and misleading and
undermining at worst
Today the threat in Somalia is not so much due to a
lack of institutional capacity or oversight mechanisms,
but to terrorism and violent extremism. Let us focus on
mechanisms that deal effectively with the disastrous,
international phenomenon that is terrorism. If Somalia
is to successfully defeat Al-Shabaab once and for all
and effectively rebuild an inclusive nation, then the
Security Council must support its efforts through all
possible means. We therefore request once again the
complete lifting of the arms embargo and a review of
the mandate of the Somalia-Eritrea Monitoring Group.
Such a review should take place in the light of the
regenerated political, security, economic and financial
progress made by my Government towards the peace
and stability of Somalia. The outcome of the review
should reflect the understanding that Somalia is no
longer at war with itself, but that Somalis are fighting
alongside all concerned Member States to make our
world a safer place for all.
Somalia’s progress is illustrated clearly in the area
of public financial management reform. Today, Somalia
has a working Central Bank, overseen by a functioning
Board of Directors. The offices of the AccountantGeneral and the independent Auditor-General
are functioning. Furthermore, the internationally
recognized Financial Governance Committee of
Somalia is in place, which reports regularly and
publicly and includes representatives of members from
the international financial institutions, including the

16-109339/28

S/PV.7674

The situation in Somalia

World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the
African Development Bank.
In parallel to robust governance and oversight
progress, the public financial management legislative
environment is also being developed. The Federal
Parliament recently ratified three important bills,
namley, the Public Procurement, Concession and
Disposal Bi11, the Anti-Money-Laundering and
Combating the Financing of Terrorism Bill and the
Audit Bill. And the Cabinet has approved the Public
Finance Management Bill.
I draw the Council’s attention to the significance
of Somalia’s first article IV consultation by the
International Monetary Fund in 25 years. The
consultation confirmed Somalia’s 2015 economic
growth of 3.7 per cent. That is clear evidence that
Somalia is on an aggressive path towards reform,
and we are very grateful for the support that our
international partners have provided over the years.
Somalia has agreed with the International Monetary
Fund to a reform programme for the period from May
2016 to April 2017, which focuses on implementing
prudent fiscal policies while strengthening institutional
capacity for macroeconomic financial management.
The programme will enhance governance and economic
statistical capacity, strengthen fiscal discipline, rebuild
capacity for monetary policy management and foster
financial sector development as a basis for supporting
economic growth. It will be a key step in the process
liquidating the arrears and the normalization of relations
with international financial institutions as a whole.

19/04/2016

Generating support for regional economic initiatives,
especially for infrastructure development, will be
essential for regional economic growth and cooperation.
I cannot urge strongly enough the need for a
comprehensive approach to equipping Somali youth
with tools that will enable them to play a positive
role in bringing peace, social progress and economic
prosperity to Somalia. In that regard, in line with
resolution 2250 (2015), on youth, peace and security,
we welcome the development of a national youth policy
and the United Nations Strategy for Youth in Somalia.
The year 2016 marks the final year of the Somali
Compact established in Brussels in 2013. The Compact
has played a crucial role in improving the partnership,
with mutual accountability between the Government
and the international community, and in furthering
the political, security and development progress in
Somalia. We look forward to developing that next
phase of international engagement in Somalia, based
on a shared set of principles and a renewal of the joint
partnerships within Somalia and with its partners.
Work is now progressing on a three-year national
development plan, which will include political and
security elements so that the holistic approach forged
through the Somali Compact is not lost. The principles
that guide the partnership between the Government and
the international community after the Compact ends will
be developed and agreed upon in the corning months.

Those achievements clearly demonstrate that the
Federal Government has developed both the capacity
and the proper oversight mechanisms to handle public
finances responsibly, transparently and in accordance
with international best practices.In addition, last
February, I launched the Open Government initiative
to ensure that information relevant to Government
activities was made available to the public in order to
promote transparency, accountability and participation.

Programmes and resources must be further aligned
to Somalia’s national priorities. In particular, concrete
steps must be taken to deliver more assistance through
country systems, in response to improvements in the
Government’s budget, expenditures and financial
governance systems. I am proud to say that Somalia is
a beautiful country with great economic opportunity,
both at sea and on land. Our newly adopted foreign
policy has investment at its heart, and in the past few
years our Government has been working to create an
environment conducive to investment in all our key
priority sectors.

Of course, systems are not the only thing that
Somalia needs. I draw the Council’s attention to the
urgent need to develop key economic sectors that will
provide all Somalis with greater opportunities for
sustainable livelihoods. I welcome the international
community’s efforts to expand support for high priority
economic sectors and youth employment, including
through vocational training and skills development.

Tackling terrorism, rebuilding an inclusive State
and playing a meaningful role in our region and the
wider world requires sustainable development, which I
am certain we can nurture and sustain with the wealth
of our nation. While we are grateful for the aid that our
partners have provided, and continue to provide, to us,
we strongly encourage them and their entrepreneurs to
invest in Somalia for the social and economic benefit

10/28

16-10933

19/04/2016

The situation in Somalia

of both themselves and the Somali people. Indeed, with
the wealth of our resources, Somalia is truly a place
where investment will most certainly meet with great
profitable opportunities.
In conclusion, let me once again thank the Council
for its unwavering support for Somalia. The strength of
the Council members’ commitment, combined with our
people and the Government’s support and partnership
on the ground, has today brought forward a Somalia at
one, a Somalia at peace with itself and focused on the
collective achievement of national stability, progress
and prosperity. Somalia has turned the corner, and
there is absolutely no turning back to the dark past. It
is my most earnest desire that what is discussed here
and the decisions taken will be in the best interests of a
united Somalia, once again one Somalia — a sovereign,
secure, democratic and Federal Somalia at peace with
itself and the world, for the benefit of its people.
I would like to conclude by reiterating my gratitude
and that of the Somali people for the engagement of our
international partners, including the AMISOM troops
on the ground, with the support provided to them by
partners. Today, Somalia is holding elections after 47
years. The last election that took place in Somalia was
in 1969. The people who participated in that election
are today retired, at best. A new nation is experiencing
a new, good beginning.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
members of the Security Council.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank all our briefers this morning. Let me take
this chance to commend President Mohamud for his
leadership. Under his guidance, we have witnessed
progress in Somalia that was once thought impossible.
He has spearheaded Somalia’s return to the international
community. As he just stated, Somalia has turned the
corner and there is no turning back. I join others in
welcoming him to the Security Council. I also warmly
welcome Special Representative Keating on his first
address in the Chamber in his new role.
Tomorrow will mark the first anniversary of
the Al-Shabaab attack against the United Nations
compound in Puntland. Six people were killed that
day; four were UNICEF staff. Their lives were cruelly
cut short because they dared to help to build a better
Somalia, one of peace, one free from polio, one where
all children could receive an education. As we mourn
and remember our colleagues and all the victims of

S/PV.7674

terrorism in Somalia, let us reaffirm our commitment
today to the future that they dared to build.
Since Prime Minister Cameron hosted the London
Conference on Somalia in 2012, the British commitment
has involved the reopening of our Embassy, an
increase in our development assistance and now the
deployment of personnel to the United Nations. That
commitment will only be strengthen in the years ahead.
Such commitments have never been more vital. This
is a crucial year for Somalia’s future prosperity and
stability. For me, it comes down to three things, namely,
elections, security and partnership.
First, the election process in August will be a
landmark moment in Somalia’s political development.
The electoral process needs to be transparent, to deliver
on time and to be inclusive. Such an electoral process
will cement Somalia’s positive trajectory to democracy.
There can be no place at the table for any group or
individual who seeks to deliberately undermine the
process. I welcome the decision on an electoral process
and the recent agreement on an implementation plan
by the National Leaders Forum. It is important now to
translate that into action. The United Nations and the
international community stand ready to support the
process, and in doing so we commit to help Somalia
to reach that most vital of goals, that is, one-person/
one-vote elections in 2020.
But no country can develop successfully if it leaves
half its population behind, and we therefore welcome
the commitment to reserve 30 per cent of the seats in
both Houses for women. That is not a women’s issue;
it is a peace issue. Engaging women at all levels of
decision-making is absolutely crucial to development
and stability.
The second top issue is security. One of the most
sacred responsibilities of any State is to protect its
citizens. We have seen the Federal Government in
Somalia take welcome steps towards that goal in its
high-level partnership commitments on security sector
reform and the agreement to a national security policy
with the interim regional administrations. I urge the
Government to continue those efforts. For them to
succeed, security sector reform and the development
of the Somali National Army and police force need to
be fully coordinated with donors. They also need to be
accountable and transparent.
In the meantime, the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) of course remains a critical enabler

16-1093311/28

S/PV.7674

The situation in Somalia

to progress. I would like to commend the bravery of the
AMISOM men and women and to offer my condolences
for the losses suffered by troop-contributing countries.
History will show the immense contribution made by
AMISOM to peace in Somalia. The commitments at
the recent summit in Djibouti to an early resumption
of offensive operations against Al-Shabaab is very
welcome. Better coordination and command and control
will be essential to success. The United Kingdom
stands ready to assist where we can, and that is why we
are deploying British military personnel to the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia, some of whom have
just arrived in Somalia.
My final point concerns partnership. The year
2016 is the final one for the current Somali Compact.
The Compact has provided a crucial framework for
partnership between the international community and
Somalia. We now need to build on that and to agree
on a compact type of agreement for 2017 and beyond,
which should strengthen the links between Somalia’s
political, security and development tracks and reaffirm
the principles and shared values that bind us together.
A central element of the agreement will be the Somalia
national development plan, and we welcome the
progress made in developing it.
As Somalia works towards these three
priorities — elections, security, partnership — the
commitments of the international community, including
the Security Council, remain essential. But as my
Deputy saw first-hand when he visited Mogadishu last
week, it is clear that any international commitment
will be met with equal if not more dedication by the
people living and working in Somalia. Whether they
are representatives of the Federal Government, civil
society or AMISOM, they all continue to serve bravely
with an undiminished commitment to a stable, secure
and prosperous Somalia.
When the history books are written, let them say
that 2016 was a truly decisive year, a year when Somali’s
fragile gains were consolidated and strengthened by the
most representative and democratic electoral process
in a generation. In achieving that goal, President
Mohamud, you will have the resolute support of the
Security Council.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s important meeting. I would like to
welcome Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, President of
12/28

19/04/2016

the Federal Republic of Somalia; Mr. Téte António,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the
United Nations; and Mr. Michael Keating, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia.
This year is of utmost importance for Somalia, as
we expect elections to be held at the end of August,
leading, for only the second time in 27 years, to
a peaceful transition of power in that brotherly
country. In this regard, my delegation commends the
efforts made by President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud
and his Government to overcome all obstacles and
continuously work to reach out to all Somalis. This
has led to a comprehensive, integrated Somali-owned
political process that is supported by all international
and regional Powers.
We welcome the efforts made by all Somalis,
particularly the leaders of the various federal regions
through the Somali Leaders Forum held at the
beginning of this month, and the agreement reached on
all items related to the electoral process. My delegation
stresses its support for Somali national efforts in this
regard. We emphasize that the electoral process must
be completed within the set time frame and involve
the largest possible number of Somalis, including
women and young people. We call on the international
community to ensure that the funding necessary for the
electoral process and its security is in place.
Progress made on the political front would not have
been possible without progress on the security front.
This is allowed political leaders to work in freedom
as the strength of the terrorist group Al-Shabaab has
declined. Thanks to the successful security operations
led by both African Union Mission to Somalia
(AMISOM) and the Somali National Army, members
of Al-Shabaab have been expelled from more than 90
Somali cities. Their military capabilities have been
degraded to the lowest level in years. We commend
AMISOM and the Somali National Army for the
sacrifices they have made in recent times.
My delegation stresses the need for the international
community to ensure that predictable and secure
material support is provided to AMISOM forces. This
support is needed; the international community must
not abandon its commitment to the Mission. We call
on Member States to support the Somali Government’s
efforts to retrain and rehabilitate its army and redraft
16-10933

19/04/2016

The situation in Somalia

the national security strategy. Somali forces must be
appropriately armed in order to prosecute the necessary
military operations against Al-Shabaab. That would
ensure durable peace and security and allow for the
withdrawal of AMISOM at the appropriate time.
These achievements must be protected by taking
practical steps to ensure peace and security for the
Somali people. We must work to coordinate international
efforts in support of the Somali Government and the
federal regions and provide essential services to areas
liberated from Al-Shabaab. This would be the best proof
of the international community’s support for economic
revitalization in Somalia. We must also coordinate
humanitarian efforts, particularly in the health sector,
especially when it comes to maternal and child health.
Further, support for the rule of law must be provided in
those regions.
Accordingly, my delegation renews its call for
support for the friendly Somali people, which was
stressed during the visit to Somalia earlier this month
by the Egyptian Minister for Foreign Affairs, in which
he underscored the need to support the health and
education sectors, training of Somali medical cadres,
the rebuilding of the Somali military hospital, the return
of the Egyptian educational mission to Mogadishu
to set up two schools there, the training of cadres in
the field of agriculture, and reviewing the possibility
of setting up tripartite cooperation to train military
cadres, including the Coast Guard, in Somalia.
In Egypt, a study has been undertaken to provide
technical help to the Somali Parliament. Training is
being considered for the fields of investment, contract
drafting and natural-resource protection. We shall act
to coordinate Arab humanitarian and medical efforts in
order to meet the needs of the country. We also welcome
the Secretary-General’s efforts in cooperation with the
Bretton Woods institutions in support of economic
growth in Somalia and the reduction of poverty.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the need to
coordinate international efforts in support of Somalia
in order to derive the greatest possible value from such
efforts. We stress our commitment to providing support
to the Somali people and Government in deed, and not
just in word, and to coordinating all efforts — bilateral,
regional and international — in this regard.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I
welcome President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud to New
York and thank him for being here. We appreciate

S/PV.7674

the important work he is doing, his optimism about
Somalia’s future and the clear portrait he has painted of
the opportunities and the challenges his nation faces at
this pivotal moment. I would also like to thank Special
Representative Keating for his briefing and for his
efforts to galvanize and ensure the coherence of the
international effort in Somalia.
I also thank Ambassador António for his briefing;
certainly the strong partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations has been one of the keys
to the successes we have achieved to date, and this
partnership will be critical as we move forward. To
this end, at our next discussion on Somalia, we would
welcome the chance to hear from Special Representative
Madeira, whose insights into the situation in Somalia
could be useful for us to consider as we approach the
mandate renewal for the African Union Mission to
Somalia (AMISOM) next month.
One thing is certain — the Somali people are
fighting for the future of their country. The Al-Shabaab
campaign of terrorism, which has cost the lives of so
many people, must only strengthen our determination
to make progress in securing a peaceful and prosperous
future for the Somali people. To achieve success, we
need to act purposefully, quickly and collectively in
order to help the Somali people build strong institutions
of democratic governance and rule of law, to continue
taking the fight to Al-Shabaab and to help the nearly
5 million Somalis who cannot meet their basic daily
needs without assistance.
It is an election year in Somalia, as the President
has stated and as we all know, and the Government’s
tenacious work to reach an agreement on an electoral
model was an important step forward. Our hope is that
the Somali Parliament can finalize the implementation
plan quickly and that the next steps can proceed swiftly
in the spring and summer — steps such as launching
voter-education programmes, vetting candidates,
finalizing financing and security modalities and other
efforts to help put voting structures in place. This
year’s vote is essential, not just in itself but because it
is a critical step towards universal elections in 2020,
based on one person/one vote.
Against that backdrop, the United States welcomes
the progress that the Somali Government has made with
the state-formation process over the past three years.
For the first time in decades, the map of Somalia’s
Federal states is nearly complete. We encourage the

16-1093313/28

S/PV.7674

The situation in Somalia

19/04/2016

Government to continue those efforts and to finalize
the formation of the Hiiraan and Middle Shabelle
regions. As the election season approaches, time is
of the essence, if Somalia is to ensure that those two
regions can also take part in the electoral process later
this year. Their transition to Federal state status is part
of that.

connection with how we, Somalia and the international
community, can combat terrorism. We agree on the
imperative of creating space for inclusive politics,
pursuing economic recovery, reducing unemployment
among young people, enhancing education and
encouraging further defections from Al-Shabaab by
providing a future for disengaged combatants.

Creating an atmosphere where inclusive politics
can thrive requires security, and there major challenges
persist. There is no question that, thanks principally to
the efforts of the African Union and the countries of the
region, acting through the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and with the support of the United
Nations, security in Somalia has improved considerably.
We commend the bravery of the AMISOM troops
and the Somali soldiers and pay particular tribute to
the willingness of Ethiopia and Kenya to continue to
lead the fight against terrorism in the Horn of Africa.
For its part, the United States will continue to use the
tools at its disposal, financial, diplomatic, intelligence
and military, to help dismantle Al-Shabaab and other
terrorist groups.

Those are very difficult steps, to be sure, but
they can be helped by promulgating a coordinated
and comprehensive national security policy that
includes the establishment of clear police, justice
and corrections models for Somalia in the context of
federalism. Security advances will not be sustainable
and cannot take root unless respect for human rights
and international humanitarian law is central and
safeguarded. In connection with that, we encourage
the Federal Government of Somalia to set up a human
rights commission to ensure respect for the freedom of
expression, make additional progress on ending the use
of child soldiers and hold security forces accountable
for violations, including those related to sexual
exploitation and abuse. All security forces in Somalia,
including the Somali National Army and AMISOM,
must respect human rights.

Both AMISOM and the Somali National Army must
press the offensive against Al-Shabaab. In particular,
we urge them to initiate coordinated planning aimed at
recapturing the Juba River Valley. Their success will
create much-needed space for political and economic
development throughout the country. As part of that
effort, we echo the call of President Mohamud and
Mr. Francisco Madeira, Special Representative of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia, for enhanced international support for
the creation of a capable, professional and inclusive
Somali National Army that respects international
humanitarian law.
In order to achieve that ambitious goal, the unique
partnership among AMISOM, the Somali National
Army, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia and the United Nations Support Office in
Somalia requires close cooperation and coordination.
That includes a number of steps, including making sure
that AMISOM has the right equipment and that it is
operationally sound, including through the provision of
critical enablers to the Mission. That support is vital to
ensuring that both AMISOM and the Somali National
Army can bring further military pressure to bear on
Al-Shabaab and avoid costly losses such as the harrowing
ones they have suffered in recent months. What comes
after an area is liberated from Al-Shabaab has a direct
14/28

In the face of the challenges we are confronting,
the international community must do its part to
support Somalia’s progress by engaging in actions that
empower rather than exploit the nation’s economy. With
that in mind, we emphasize that illegal, unreported
and unregulated fishing in Somalia’s waters has the
potential to stoke instability in an already fragile nation.
Lastly, the chronic humanitarian crisis in Somalia
demands our attention. Too many people, some 40 per
cent of the population, are in need of humanitarian
assistance; too many, more than 1.1 million, are
suffering from displacement; and too many children are
malnourished. Those challenges have been exacerbated
by the effects of the El Niño weather phenomenon.
The United States has been at the forefront of raising
international awareness about El Niño’s impact
in Africa, while partnering with governmental
and non-governmental aid operations to prevent,
mitigate and respond to emergency needs related to
food, water and health. In addition to strengthening
financial institutions in Somalia, the United States
Government has provided more than $240 million
in humanitarian aid since October 2014, supporting
emergency food assistance, nutrition interventions
and health-care programmes, among other forms of
16-10933

19/04/2016

The situation in Somalia

lifesaving assistance, and has invested in resilience
programming to help bolster the ability of households
and communities to weather such shocks. Together, we
must do more. We urge the international community to
support the humanitarian response plan for 2016.
In conclusion, while we have made truly important
gains, we have a long way to go. We must maintain
a sharp focus, steady coordination and a steadfast
commitment to ensuring that stability takes root
and that ultimately peace prevails once and for all in
Somalia, for all Somalis.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation): We welcome
the participation in today’s meeting of the President of
Somalia, His Excellency Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud,
and in general we share the views that he has expressed.
We would like to thank Mr. Michael Keating, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
for his comprehensive briefing on the work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia. We are grateful
to the Permanent Observer of the African Union to the
United Nations, Mr. Téte António, for his explanation
of that pan-African organization’s approaches to the
settlement in Somalia.
We were pleased to see that the Somali National
Forum held on 12 April confirmed the planned
parameters for the general elections scheduled for
August and September and the unacceptability of
failing to keep to the established timetable.
The security situation, however, continues to be
worrisome. We are seeing an increase in the activity of
the Al-Shabaab terrorist group and trends that suggest
changes in its tactics. According to international
experts, the extremists have become more mobile and
are focusing on carrying out their terrorist attacks
where they can have the greatest international impact,
coordinating their activities with various international
accomplices. We have been obliged to recognize the
fact that Al-Shabaab members have recently been
attacking military bases as well as the so-called soft
civilian targets.
In that regard, we believe that it is essential to
maintain military pressure on Somali extremists, and
we urge the international community to continue its
efforts to increase the capacity of the Somali army and
the African Union Mission in Somalia. The militarypolitical situation in the country demands that the
African Union peacekeepers and Somali security
forces step up their combat efforts against Al-Shabaab

S/PV.7674

and that the United Nations expand its logistical and
technical support in accordance with resolution 2245
(2015), which extended the mandate of the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia.
In our view, one of the Somali authorities’ priorities
at this stage is the process of building the State and
federalization, and completing the formation of the
Federal states is particularly high on that agenda. We
cannot allow the remaining disagreements to have a
negative impact on the country’s electoral process.
On the social and humanitarian front, the
continuing drought in Puntland and Somaliland, which
has brought hundreds of thousands to the verge of
starvation, is very worrying. We urge the international
community to provide humanitarian assistance to the
affected regions in order to supply the population with
drinking water, food and medicines. Russia has been
regularly providing humanitarian assistance to the
Federal Government of Somalia and Somali refugees in
neighbouring countries through targeted contributions
to the appropriate United Nations funds, with our total
assistance exceeding $15 million for the period from
2011 to 2015. We share the belief that currently there
is a need to not only step up international donations
to resolve specific economic and social issues, but
also to ensure comprehensive support to the Federal
Government to provide financial and humanitarian
assistance to people.
At the same time, we call for the strict implementation
of the provisions of resolution 2275 (2016) on the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, including, inter
alia, the necessary holding this year of parliamentary
elections on the basis of the agreed electoral model and
the Government’s implementation of the road map for
2020, as well as accelerating work on the drafting of a
new Constitution for the country. The most important
tasks for the Government now are to strengthen the
security sector, bolster the foundations of federalism
and advance sustainable national and inter-ethnic
reconciliation in Somalia.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to commend you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s informative meeting. I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Somalia, Mr. Michael Keating, and the Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
Ambassador Téte António, for their briefings. I also

16-1093315/28

S/PV.7674

The situation in Somalia

welcome His Excellency President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud, who is honouring us with his presence.
I would like to underscore the agreement reached
between the Federal Government of Somalia and
Puntland, which paves the way for the electoral process
of 2016 and for the preparation of the universal elections
of 2020, which will take place in the framework of one
person, one vote. The agreement represents a positive
outcome of the National Leaders Forum, which was
held in Mogadishu between 9 and 12 April.
I believe it is important to emphasize the renewed
pledge by the Federal Government of Somalia that there
will be no extension of the limits of the established
constitutional mandate for the legislative and executive
branches and that elections for those branches will be
held in August 2016; that the constitutional reform will
be finalized; and that the Government will determine
the number and location of the federal states of Somalia
in 2016 in order to fulfil the goals of the federal
project. We also welcome the upcoming holding of the
National Leaders Forum, which will be followed by a
constitutional conference in Garowe in May. A peaceful
and transparent electoral process in 2016 will mark
a milestone for all Somalis and will be critical to the
continued progress of the country towards democracy
and stability.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
and the international community must work in an
increasingly close and coordinated manner with the
regional administrations and the federal Government
to prioritize capacity-building and the strengthening
of institutions at the regional level to help regional
administrations consolidate their authority and be
able to establish step by step the basic conditions for
governance, security and the provision of basic services
for local populations. My delegation is pleased that the
new legislative framework provides that 30 per cent of
the parliamentary seats are to be reserved for women
in each state member of the federation, and with the
emphasis on the importance of increasing participation
by women and young people in the political processes.
I cannot fail to mention Uruguay’s concern about
the continuing threat posed by the terrorist group
Al-Shabaab, which continues to lurk in the shadows,
despite the progress made in fighting the extremists
and the alleged or theoretical loss of their firepower.
The fight against Al-Shabaab requires an integrated
and comprehensive approach. There must be continued
16/28

19/04/2016

improvement of the interaction with all of civil society
in Somalia — including women, young people,
businesses and religious leaders — so as to ensure
that they form an integral part of the various political
processes under way. We underscore the peace and
reconciliation agreement that was reached at the end
of March among the leaders and representatives of
Jubaland and Marehan, which will strengthen the unity
in the fight against the extremists.
Security sector reform is vital, in particular the
rapid and effective development of the Somali National
Army, including a planned and coordinated integration
of current regional forces to help facilitate the more
effective participation of the Somali National Army
in joint operations with the African Union Mission
in Somalia so that the security forces of the Federal
Government of Somalia, including the police, can
assume a greater role in maintaining peace and security
and in protecting Somali citizens. In that regard, we
welcome the results of the consultative conference on
police reform in Somalia, which took place in Nairobi
from 21 to 24 March. Many of the outcomes of that
conference will be incorporated into a new 2017-2025
Heegan plan.
My delegation places particular emphasis on the
need to protect civilians, especially the most vulnerable
groups, namely, children, young people, women and
the elderly, and we call upon the Federal Government
of Somalia to choose the path of mediation and seek
out stability, especially in areas where access to
humanitarian assistance and supplies is crucial. At
the same time, we deplore the fact that foreign and
national forces operating in Somalia continue to carry
out abuses, attack civilians and violate international
humanitarian law.
Finally, I wish to express Uruguay’s support for
the process that the Federal Government of Somalia is
carrying out, which is recognized as the most inclusive
process in recent years.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this important briefing on the situation
in Somalia. I want to welcome President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud and commend him for his leadership. I also
want to welcome the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Michael Keating,
and the Permanent Observer of the African Union to
the United Nations, Ambassador Téte António.
16-10933

19/04/2016

The situation in Somalia

One of the key priorities for Spain in the Security
Council is to make headway in efforts to restore peace
and stability in Somalia in the wake of so many years of
senseless violence and conflict. There still a long road
ahead, but considering the extraordinary difficulties
that the Somali people and its leaders have managed
to overcome in recent years, we have no doubt that
success is within grasp. It is now the responsibility of
everybody to not let such success slip from our fingers.
The year 2016 is crucial for various reasons. First, in
the political sphere, the Somali leadership just approved
the electoral process for 2016, after innumerable efforts
and an encouraging agreement between the Federal
Government of Somalia and Puntland. We welcome that
agreement and trust that the Federal Parliament will
soon ratify it and that its provisions will be enacted.
The adopted format seems to be the most feasible at
present and strikes a key balance between two essential
elements in the politics of Somali society: the regions,
on the one hand, and the clans, on the other. Spain
would like to congratulate the Government of Somalia
on its decision to set aside 30 per cent of parliamentary
seats for women, who must continue to play a key role
in the Somali political process, as indeed should civil
society as a whole.
The successful conclusion of the electoral process
in August 2016, as provided for in the Constitution,
is a key step towards making further progress in the
establishment of peace in and the stabilization of
Somalia so that universal elections can be held in 2020
under the formula of one person, one vote.
We urge the Somali leadership to stick to the path
of dialogue and agreement, and to avoid relapsing back
into the divisions that derailed the political process in
the past. As I said earlier, success is within grasp, but
it is incredibly fragile. Let us not forget that a political
crisis is capable of destroying in just a matter of days the
costly progress that took years to achieve. We therefore
now have a historic responsibility. In that regard, we
must not lose sight of the importance of making progress
in the constitutional review process. In addition, with
respect to federal State-building, Spain, which has
always recognized the territorial integrity of Somalia,
hopes that significant progress will soon be made in
Hiran and Middle Shabelle in order to establish a new
interim administration, and we trust that reconciliation
efforts between clans will be stepped up.

S/PV.7674

Secondly, turning to the security sector, we robustly
condemn the terrorist attacks carried out by Al-Shabaab
against the Somali people, their representatives,
officials and institutions. We also condemn the attacks
carried out against the contingents of the countries of the
African Union Military Observer Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), who are fighting shoulder to shoulder with
Somali forces in order to restore stability and peace in
Somalia. We wish to express our full solidarity with the
people and Government of Somalia, AMISOM and the
Somali security forces.
Somalians should have no doubt on two issues.
First, Al-Shabaab can be destroyed and the future
Somalia will be defined not by terrorists but by the
people of Somalia. Secondly, AMISOM and the Somali
National Army will always be on their side. Al-Shabaab
represents the greatest threat to the security and
stability of Somalia and to the entire Horn of Africa
region. Its terrorist activities over the past year show
that the group continues to be active, that it has great
operational capacity, and that it intends to wreak the
greatest possible havoc. Given that challenge, we
cannot let down our guard.
After several challenging months, AMISOM and
the Somali forces have taken the initiative, although
it remains essential that they work in a coordinated
fashion to defeat Al-Shabaab. We do not doubt that
this is possible, although we continue to insist that
AMISOM must develop a more unified and effective
command-and-control structure, in line with the
recommendations of the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union. To that end, it will be necessary
to build on the key understanding established at the
recent summit of the Heads of State and Government
of the Troop- and Police-Contributing Countries of
AMISOM, held in Djibouti, which was an important
step forward in the right direction.
It is urgent that AMISOM have strengthened and
centralized intelligence capacity in place, and we hope
that the already committed enabling elements that the
Mission needs will be made available as soon as possible.
All of that is crucial in order to respond to the asymmetric
war tactics employed by Al-Shabaab. The role of the
Somali National Army and police is, of course, vital
to the achievement of that goal. Both institutions must
gradually assume greater responsibility, commensurate
with the security demanded by the Somali people, with
a view to developing an exit strategy for AMISOM. To
that end, we must redouble our efforts to achieve rapid

16-1093317/28

S/PV.7674

The situation in Somalia

and substantive progress in the area of security sector
reform. We urge the Somali authorities to effectively
implement the relevant plans.
The Somali army and police should increase their
role and effectiveness so as to guarantee security in
the areas freed from Al-Shabaab, and also to secure
the main supply routes. We wish to stress that the
fight against Al-Shabaab is more than a military
operation. It should be rooted in a firm strategy that
prevents radicalization and recruitment from various
sectors of the Somali population, in particular youth.
Young people must believe that Somali institutions
and the international community are on their side. The
fight against Al-Shabaab must take place within the
framework of respect for the political leadership and
human rights, and go hand in hand with genuine and
systematic efforts to ensure security, the provision of
basic services and opportunities for the populations in
recovered areas.
For my third point, which is no less important, I
wish to speak about the grave humanitarian situation.
Some 4.9 million Somalis are in need of humanitarian
aid. The drought that is racking the north of the country,
in particular Somaliland and Puntland, as a result of
the weather phenomenon known as El Niño has left
some 900,000 individuals facing severe malnutrition.
That tragic situation, exacerbated by desertification,
is unacceptable and unsustainable. Alleviating the
humanitarian emergency faced by Somalia is essential
in building on the efforts made in the area of politics
and security, given that all of those dimensions
are interrelated.
Rebuilding Somalia will require the rebuilding of
Somalians’ trust in their institutions. It is therefore
necessary that members of civil society perceive a
tangible improvement in their quality of life — in their
access not only to water and food, but also to education
and employment. All of that will ultimately determine
the success of the Somali process and the ultimate
defeat of Al-Shabaab.
Our leaders are preparing to sign the Paris
Agreement on climate change next Friday in these very
Headquarters. We must now be more aware than ever
that climate change is neither an abstract issue nor
a problem for the future. It is a threat that is already
shaping the life expectancy of millions of people around
the world, thrusting specific populations and countries,
such as Somalia, into a situation of environmental,
18/28

19/04/2016

economic and social stress, with direct repercussions
for international peace and security. This is a horizontal
and structural challenge that we must rise to meet with
all resources as soon as we have them.
In conclusion, I wish to underscore that Spain is
convinced that the establishment of peace and stability
in and the development of Somalia will not be possible
without the reconstruction of the Somali State and
civil society. We can achieve those goals only if we
have a unified and committed leadership that acts in
the interests of all Somalians. The United Nations,
regional organizations and countries that have friendly
relations with Somalia will continue to support the
country on that path. With every passing month, we are
increasingly convinced that we are drawing closer to a
time in which Somalians can take full responsibility of
their own future.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking you, Sir, for convening this timely meeting
in the presence of the President of the Federal Republic
of Somalia. I would like to express my appreciation to
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud for joining us today
in the Security Council, and commend his leadership.
I also thank him for his very forceful presentation.
Let me also join others in thanking Mr. Michael
Keating and Ambassador Téte António for their
informative briefings.
After a long endeavours, Somalia is at last moving
towards State-building. This year is especially crucial
for the political transition process in Somalia. Successful
implementation of the electoral process is a test case.
Japan welcomes the decision by the federal Government
of Somalia on an electoral model for 2016 based on
inclusive, Somali-led discussions. We are also delighted
at the very encouraging news on the National Leaders
Forum on 12 April, where the detailed structures and
modalities of the electoral process were agreed among
the Somali leaders. It is now important to deliver on the
electoral process in August, as expected. We call upon
all parties of Somali to engage constructively towards
that end. There is an urgent need to make progress on
the completion of the State formation and constitutional
review processes and on the political road map in order
to realize a one person/one vote election by 2020.
We look forward to the constitutional conference
producing a positive outcome in May. The Security
Council should continue to do all that it can, and Japan
fully supported the adoption of resolution 2275 (2016),
16-10933

19/04/2016

The situation in Somalia

which extended the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) until the end
of March of next year.
Turning to the security aspect, Al-Shabaab still
remains a major threat. Japan strongly condemns all
territorial attacks and pays tribute to the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali National
Army for their work under the harsh conditions on the
ground. In order to prevent Al-Shabaab from making
further gains, we believe that it is crucial that offensive
operations against it be carried out in an even more
closely coordinated manner. We welcome the holding of
the recent summit of the troop- and police-contributing
countries to AMISOM, as well as the commitment to
improving coordination within AMISOM as a step in
that direction.
Security sector reform is also important. The
coordinated integration of regional forces in the
Somali National Army will make joint operations with
AMISOM more effective. Extending basic policing
services throughout the country, including within the
liberated areas, is equally important, as is capacitybuilding for the maritime police force. We welcome
President Mohamud’s commitments to push forward
those reforms.
Somalia’s State-building efforts must be Somaliled, but at the same time be supported by the
international community. For its part, Japan recently
provided additional assistance in the amount of
$38.5 million, which will be implemented by various
United Nations agencies. That assistance will be used
for State-building in Somalia, enhancing basic social
services, strengthening the capacity of the security
sector and revitalizing the economy. Assistance for
tackling the challenges that I have mentioned today is
included, such as support for the establishment of the
national electoral commission and strengthening the
police force. They will be implemented by ANSOM and
the United Nations Development Programme.
Let me conclude by reaffirming Japan’s strong
commitment to assisting Somalia at this crucial juncture.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Venezuela) (spoke in
Spanish): We wish to welcome the presence and
the statement of His Excellency Mr. Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud, President of the Federal Republic of
Somalia. I also thank Mr. Michael Keating, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
and Ambassador Téte António, Permanent Observer

S/PV.7674

of the African Union to the United Nations, for
their briefings.
The security situation in Somalia, as well as in all of
the Horn of Africa, is fragile as a result of the actions of
the terrorist group Al-Shabaab, the presence of armed
groups and criminal organizations and the increase
in the trafficking in small arms and light weapons
throughout the entire region. The peacebuilding
process in Somalia is taking place in a context in which
the progress made has not been without difficulties. A
year ago, we welcomed the achievements of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in the fight
against Al-Shabaab. Today, we note with concern the
re-emergence of Al-Shabaab, marked by asymmetric
bloody attacks carried out against civilians, AMISOM
and Somalia’s own armed forces. We see how a more
assertive Al-Shabaab, with hundreds of combatants, is
launching attacks against military targets. We note with
concern how AMISOM contingents are barricading
themselves in and limiting their security patrols to
those of defensive perimeters. We recall with dismay
the victims of brutal attacks by Al-Shabaab against
civilians, AMISOM and the Somalia’s armed forces
that resulted in hundreds of deaths over the past six
months.
Despite those threats and difficulties, Somalia is
making progress in the arduous process of establishing
legitimate institutions throughout the country, laying
the foundations so that, once peace is achieved,
there will be no relapse into conflict. The process is
painstaking and challenging. The Somali State is
still fighting to establish its presence and authority
throughout its entire national territory. Occasionally,
the Somali armed forces and local authorities are
unable to hold or maintain territory that they have
wrested from Al-Shabaab. In that vein, international
support to the Somali security sector is essential and
must be maintained with increasing transparency,
within the framework of the development plans of the
Federal Government. It is also vital to support efforts
aimed at extending State authority to very corner of the
country so that local administrations can provide basic
services to their populations. It is essential to shore up
the institutional capacity of the country. Only in that
way, can it meet the hard challenges that it faces.
In that regard, we also acknowledge the need to
address violent extremism in Somalia holistically,
going beyond a strictly military approach and
rolling out strategies that address the root causes of

16-1093319/28

S/PV.7674

The situation in Somalia

radicalization. Given those circumstances, the support
of the international community and the commitment of
the United Nations need to be more present than ever.
Our country is therefore of the opinion that the Security
Council must consider supporting the appeal for a
lifting of the sanctions, in particular the arms embargo,
thereby contributing to strengthening the State and
Somalia’s armed forces in its fight against Al-Shabaab
and other scourges that threaten the well-being and
stability of the country.
The United Nations must be more effective in
the way it works to cut off sources of funding for
Al-Shabaab, while respecting the sovereign right of
Somalia to develop its natural resources and ensure
subsistence for those communities whose livelihoods
depend upon the extraction trade and artisanal trade.
Even as the embargo on charcoal has been tightened,
Al-Shabaab has merely developed new funding sources
of funding, including, among others, racketeering,
extorting money from private businesses, blackmailing,
holding members of the local population for ransom,
extorting fees on transportation and trading illegally in
natural resources, as well as donations from the Somali
diaspora.
That stands in stark contrast with the revenue
challenges facing the Federal Government of Somalia
and of the question of how to sustain itself fiscally. One
of the primary sources of income is the collection of
taxes. However, international corporations in Somalia
provide very little revenue to the country. In the specific
case of the oil industry, we see how it is seeking to
divide the country by taking advantage of the concept of
federalism to exploit the State’s institutional weakness
and secure lucrative contracts that are of little benefit
to the sustainable development of the Somali people.
In order to address the challenges facing the country,
there is a need to strengthen State institutions and
bolster capacities for exercising full sovereign control
over its natural resources. For instance, illegal fishing
in Somalia’s exclusive economic zone jeopardizes the
survival of thousands of small-scale fishers who, given
their economic conditions, are apt to turn to criminal or
destabilizing activities.
On another front, I would like to mention the
humanitarian situation, which continues to be very
complex, with more than 4 million people still
requiring humanitarian aid, over 1 million facing food
insecurity and over 300,000 children suffering from
acute malnutrition, of whom 58,000 are suffering
20/28

19/04/2016

from severe malnutrition. The needs of the more than
1.1 million displaced persons is urgent, and the recent
drought has only made things worse. We call on the
international community unconditionally to provide the
necessary financial resources to alleviate the pressing
humanitarian needs of the Somali population, who
have been affected by recurring conflict and economic,
social and environmental hardships. Unfortunately,
reports speak of difficulties in gaining access to the
areas most in need, and the endless negotiations and
payment of fees in many part of the country seem to
be the norm for humanitarian convoys, particularly in
areas where Al-Shabaab is present.
From a political perspective, we welcome the
mediation efforts of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and the African Union that led to the
recent decision of the President of Puntland, Abdiweli
Mohamed Ali Gaas, to accept the electoral formula for
the 2016 elections. We also stress the vital role played by
women in economic, political and social life in Somalia.
We therefore commend the Federal Government in
Somalia’s decision to reserve 30 per cent of available
seats for women in the 2016 parliamentary elections.
In that regard, it is important that all political
sectors in Somalia understand that it is only in political
unity that can they effectively address the phenomenon
of terrorism, defeat Al-Shabaab and strengthen their
State institutions in order to ensure that Somalia can
meet the major challenges that still lie before it. We
wish the electoral process every success and call for the
deployment of an important security presence to ensure
the peaceful holding of elections throughout Somalia.
We underscire the role that the Federal Constitution
of Somalia must play as the bedrock of stability and the
peaceful development of politics in the country. It will
provide the legal framework that will shape the destiny
of the people. We call for the review process of the key
chapters of the provisional constitution to be completed
swiftly. By the same token, we encourage the Federal
Government to engage the emerging federal states and
their people in the review process and consultations
on the development of this Magna Carta for Somalia
through a widespread civic education campaign that
will achieve a broad and lasting social consensus based
on the inclusion of all sectors of society.
Finally, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
reiterates its commitment to the peace, security and
16-10933

19/04/2016

The situation in Somalia

development of Somalia and the entire region of the
Horn of Africa.
Mr. Taula (New Zealand): We welcome His
Excellency President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud and
greatly value the opportunity for the Council to hear
directly his perspectives on the situation in Somalia.
We also thank Mr. Keating and Ambassador Téte
António for their updates.
Somalia was one of the defining issues when New
Zealand last served on the Security Council. Two
decades later, Somalia is in a much better position, but
it remains an important item on our agenda, with farreaching implications for regional peace and security
and the fight against terrorism.
We welcome the progress achieved through
the bravery and commitment of soldiers and other
personnel from the African Union (AU), neighbouring
countries, international partners and Somalia itself.
As a result, Al-Shabaab has been weakened. There
were no successful instances of piracy in the past year.
Most importantly, progress has been made towards a
functioning Federal Government, with the prospect of
a democratic transition this year. This has come at a
truly awful cost to Somalia, its neighbours and the AU,
and significant challenges lie ahead. Sustained political
attention will be required to deal with each of those
challenges, and the Council must maintain its focus
on Somalia.
We support the analysis presented by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Michael
Keating and wish to highlight five points.
First, we agree that this year’s elections are critical.
They need to be Somali-led and ensure that the Somali
people are fully involved and feel ownership of the
political process. We welcome the agreement reached
at last week’s Somali Leaders Forum in Mogadishu on
the details of the electoral model. We also take note of
President Mohamud’s reminder that these elections will
be the first in 47 years. That is a truly remarkable event
and one that we all applaud.
Secondly, other political priorities require attention.
Dialogue between the Federal Government of Somalia
and regional administrations has been positive but needs
to go further. Key issues still need to be addressed,
including setting regional boundaries, completing the
constitutional review and determining the governance
of natural resources. The federal project relies on

S/PV.7674

strengthening institutions in the regions. Federal and
regional authorities need to make progress here to
avoid jeopardizing the political transition. Somali civil
society needs to have a bigger role. Furthermore, if
peace is to be sustainable, stabilization will be critical
in terms of effective service delivery for people in areas
under Somali Government control. There is still a long
way to go in these areas.
Thirdly, a well-functioning security sector is
fundamental to long-term stability in Somali. The
Federal Government needs to be supported to have
the sufficient capacity to both prevent a resurgence
of Al-Shabaab and other vectors of terrorism and to
provide checks on regional and clan-based conflict.
We welcome the efforts of international partners to
strengthen the Somali National Army and the police
force. However, there is an urgent need for closer
coordination. The efforts will be successful only if
partners programmes are made more coherent and
if the silos are broken down. Building a strong and
coherent army and police force will be essential to the
implementation of a successful exit strategy for the
international community.
Fourthly, 2016 will be a particularly important year
for the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
The Al-Shabaab threat continues to be very real and
AMISOM’s role remains critical. The implementation
of the commitments made by AMISOM’s contributors
at the Djibouti summit will be of fundamental
importance, particularly with regard to commitments
concerning command and control.
Lastly, I note that New Zealand is deeply concerned
about the financing challenges facing AMISOM.
Continued international support for the Mission will be
essential if it is to fulfil its mandate. We acknowledge
the important funding that the European Union
continues to provide. With the reallocation of some
of that funding, it will be important to work with
partners in the region and further afield to ensure that
AMISOM’s current funding challenges are addressed
in a manner that does not undermine its operations at
this critical juncture.
This situation also underlines the need to move
beyond our reliance on ad hoc financing for regionally
led peace operations in Africa. New Zealand is a strong
supporter of finding innovative solutions that can
provide more predictable funding for such missions.
That is something which we need to collectively

16-1093321/28

S/PV.7674

The situation in Somalia

explore. We welcome efforts to mobilize funding
from within Africa and hope that the international
community, including the United Nations, can be
strategic and creative in working out how to properly
support the robust missions that the African Union is
prepared to lead.
In conclusion, we know that achieving what we
have outlined today will be difficult. We also know that,
while the Federal Government has a central role to play,
it cannot do this alone. The Council, the United Nations
system, the African Union and other partners need to
work closely with the Somali authorities in meeting
these challenges. But we also remember today the great
distance that Somalia has already travelled. We must
all continue to support the Somali Government and
people in their efforts to come together.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I join colleagues around
the table in expressing my appreciation to the Chinese
presidency for convening this timely and important
meeting. I also thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Keating and Ambassador Téte
António for their insightful briefings on the latest
developments in Somalia.
My delegation acknowledges and welcomes
the presence of His Excellency Mr. Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud, President of Somalia, in the Chamber
this morning. President Mohamud’s presence today
is a testament of his deep and abiding commitment
to returning Somalia to normalcy and restoring hope
for a better future for Somalia’s people, who have
suffered far too long from conflict and deprivation. We
commend the steadily improving situation in Somalia
since 2012 under President Mohamud’s leadership. Let
us hope that the Federal Government and the Federal
State Governments in Somalia will stay the course for
more significant progress on the political, social and
economic fronts, particularly in the crucial weeks and
months ahead.
The year 2016 is of particular significance for
Somalia. After more than two decades of brutal
conflict and the prolonged erosion of fundamental
democratic norms and practices, the country will
undertake a major and crucial step later this year in
making greater progress towards re-establishing itself
as a functioning State. To create the right enablers to
drive that transformation, the Security Council and
the international community must continue to remain
actively engaged in Somalia, particularly in supporting
22/28

19/04/2016

the Federal and regional authorities in their efforts to
restore peace and security, as well as in bringing muchneeded socioeconomic development and progress to
the people.
On the political front, Malaysia welcomes
the strong regional support and engagement with
Somalia, particularly by the African Union (AU) and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD). We commend ongoing efforts by the Federal
Government of Somalia and the regional states in
seeking consensus on the electoral model. The IGAD
facilitation has led to recent announcement, on 3 April,
by Puntland authorities to assent to the 4.5 model for
the 2016 transition process. The successful outcome
and conclusions, earlier this month, at the third National
Leaders Forum, and the positive momentum created
should be seized by stakeholders in the Hiraan and
Middle Shabelle regions to put aside their differences
and work constructively with the Federal Government
in order to establish a sustainable regional authority
ahead of the scheduled electoral process.
Although elections based on one-person/one-vote
will not be possible this year, the inclusive process
leading to agreement on key principles of the electoral
process should pave the way for more representative
elections in 2020. In the same vein, the Federal
Government and the regional authorities should be
encouraged to expedite work in constituting the upper
House of the legislature and to ensure that women’s
voices are adequately represented, particularly of the
inclusionist candidates for the upcoming elections.
On the development front, Malaysia welcomes and
supports the outcomes of the High-level Political Forum
on Sustainable Development for Somalia, held in Istanbul
in February, and commends the commitment of Federal
Government to implement the outcomes. In addition,
the recently concluded thirteenth Extraordinary
Summit of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC), held in Istanbul last week, also welcomed the
transformation of the OIC Humanitarian Coordination
Office in Somalia into a development office, reflecting
the positive developments on the ground since 2011,
when the OIC Office was first established.
While noting the significant progress Somalia
has made in pursuing its development goals, the
humanitarian situation in the country continues to
be of concern. That includes chronic food insecurity,
malnutrition, poor access to water, sanitation and
16-10933

19/04/2016

The situation in Somalia

hygiene, displacement, as well as the cyclical violence
attributed chiefly to armed violence, including by
terrorist groups and through clan-based conflicts.
Compounding that is the ongoing El Niño phenomenon.
All those elements threaten to exacerbate the already
precarious situation. All regional and international
actors and donors should step in to provide assistance
to the 5 million Somalis in dire need, which include
approximately 300,000 children. Unimpeded access
to humanitarian assistance must be secured from all
stakeholders in the country.
On the security front, Malaysia joins other Council
members in welcoming the ongoing efforts aimed at
strengthening Somalia’s security sector and institutions,
including the recently held African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) troop- and police-contributing
country summit held in Djibouti and the African
Union-United Nations Joint Task Force consultative
meetings held in late February and late March,
respectively. Malaysia fully supports the early roll-out
and implementation of stabilizing efforts in areas newly
liberated from Al-Shabaab, including through quickimpact projects. Such initiatives will help to promote
local economies and form an important component of
the overall efforts of the Federal Government to win
the hearts and minds of local communities. In line with
the commitments made at the AMISOM troop- and
police-contributors summit, all the parties concerned
should strengthen command and control for better
coordination, particularly with a view to degrade and
eradicate the threat posed by Al-Shabaab.
At a time when political tensions appear to be
increasing, and against the backdrop of increasing
intensity and frequency of complex attacks and
operations by Al-Sabaab, particularly against civilians
and civilian targets, the 20 per cent reduction of
AMISOM troop allowances raises concerns. In that
regard, we welcome the AU-United Nations Joint Task
Force agreement to address the funding issue.
In conclusion, I take this opportunity to pay tribute
to the tireless dedication and sacrifices made by all
security sector actors in Somalia, particularly the brave
men and women of the Somalia national security forces,
AMISOM, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia (UNSOM) and the United Nations Support
Office in Somalia (UNSOS). In that regard, Malaysia
affirms its support for AMISOM, UNSOM, UNSOS and
the Federal Government’s collective efforts to pave the
way for Somalia to secure its place in the community of

S/PV.7674

nations — a Somalia that is secure, stable and engaged
in pursuit of national development for a better future.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I, too, would
like to begin by thanking the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Michael Keating,
and the Permanent Observer of the African Union,
His Excellency Ambassador Téte António. I would
particularly like to thank the President of the Federal
Republic of Somalia, His Excellency Mr. Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud, who has honoured us with his presence
today. I also thank him for the encouraging news that
he shared with us.
The information provided by the President is
important given the worrying news from Somalia over
the past month. Al-Shabaab has been degraded, which
is good, but the terrorist organization remains active.
Combating Al-Shabaab is a fight against one of the
many manifestations of terrorism, and everyone knows
that fight is very close to our hearts in France. The
fight against Al-Shabaab is a collective one. I would
like to commend the courage and commitment of the
personnel of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) in combating that criminal organization.
I would particularly like to pay tribute to the soldiers
who lost their lives in the latest attacks. France, through
the United Nations and the European Union, remains
fully committed alongside the troop-contributing
countries in those efforts. With a view to continuing
to consolidate the progress made over recent years, we
must do more in four areas.
First, AMISOM, which is in the front line of the
fight against Al-Shabaab, in accordance with its
mandate, must conduct offensive operations in the
fight against that terrorist organizationThe situation
on the gournd is complex and the enemy adapts its
strategies as circumstances evolve. In that context, in
order to mount an offensive, AMISOM must continue
to improve its effectiveness and functioning, thereby
bringing the maximum pressure to bear on the terrorist
organization that is Al-Shabaab.
AMISOM contingents must act in a cohesive
manner and with a single, clear chain of command,
including shared planning and execution and with better
information-sharing among the various contingents,
which has not always been the case. Resolution
2124 (2013) already called for such qualitative
improvements — an appeal reiterated in resolution
2234 (2015). The declaration by the troop-contributing

16-1093323/28

S/PV.7674

The situation in Somalia

countries adopted at the Djibouti summit on 28 February
takes up those varous points. AMISOM would greatly
benefit from their swift implementation, beginning
with the appointment of a Force Commander, while the
United Nations should once again review the modalities
for logistical support in order to provide better-adapted
and more effective assistance. We therefore call on the
African Union and the troop-contributing countries to
work together to improve the work of the Mission, in
line with its mandate.
I would add that an effective military fight against
Al-Shabaab also requires exemplary conduct on
the part of AMISOM troops in terms of respect for
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
A military intervention can be successful only if it is
supported by the Somali people. The setting up of the
Civilian Casualty Tracking, Analysis and Response
Cell should improve efforts in that connection, while
also advancing the credibility and effectiveness of
AMISOM. Similarly, the matter of impunity for some
contingents is also problematic, as it undermines the
reputation of the Mission and makes people on the
ground less likely to embrace it.
But everyone knows that AMISOM all by itself is
not a sustainable solution and that it is not intended to
stay in Somalia forever. The development of a Somali
security solution will allow us to consider, at the
appropriate time, the drawdown of the Mission and an
exit strategy for the force. That will require the gradual
re-establishment of the authority of the Somali State
over its territory by developing its capacity to ensure
its own security, including that of its security forces.
The role of the Somali security forces is particularly
necessary to support the efforts of AMISOM. It is also
necessary to retain the areas liberated by AMISOM so
that the African Union forces can focus on offensive
actions. The Somali authorities must continually
demonstrate their commitment to this undertaking,
starting by paying their security forces. A number of
bilateral and multilateral international partners are
already active in this area, but their actions should
undoubtedly be better coordinated. The United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia, which has a key
mandate in the coordination of international aid, must
play this role better.
To conclude, I would say that only political action
will permanently free the country from the crisis
in which it has been entangled for for 25 years. This
24/28

19/04/2016

year is crucial as the election deadlines draw near. We
are encouraged by the progress that has been made
in framework of the National Consultative Forum
and the choice of electoral modalities. Alongside
the preparation of elections, in accordance with the
deadlines, Somali political actors need to demonstrate
their responsibility by completing the federalization of
the country. The development of the Somali security
solution that I mentioned earlier will depend largely on
that eventuality, and it is our shared priority. We count
on all Somali actors to rapidly finalize this project.
France understands the magnitude of the challenges
Somalia is facing, as the level of our collective
commitment demonstrates. Political mobilization must
forthwith consolidate the military gains made in recent
years. We hope that 2016 will be decisive in that respect.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Mr. President,
I would like to thank you for organizing today’s
meeting on Somalia. I wish to welcome the President of
Somalia, Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, and thank him
for honoring us with his presence and sharing his views
on the situation in Somalia and his hope for the future
of his country. I would also like to thank Mr. Michael
Keating for his briefing and Ambassador Téte António,
Permanent Observer of the African Union, for his
briefing on behalf of the High Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union.
The briefings provided enabled members of the
Security Council to better understand the progress and
challenges faced by the people and the Government
of Somalia, the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), the United Nations and other international
partners of Somalia, which have joined forces to build a
peaceful, stable and prosperous Somalia. The progress
we are all witnessing is a reward for the investment we
are all making towards peace in a country that has long
faced a very brutal war.
I take this opportunity to praise the Somalis for
reaching agreement on the electoral process. The 4.5
formula as the electoral model will allow for the holding
of elections in Somalia while taking into account the
various sensibilities and influential role of the elders
and traditional and religious leaders. We commend the
national consultative process regarding the electoral
process, which took into account the different points
of view expressed by the various communities that
compose the Somali ethnic mosaic. We also take note
16-10933

19/04/2016

The situation in Somalia

of the commitment of the Somali stakeholders to the
universal ballot in the elections to take place in 2020.
Significant progress has also been made in the
constitutional review process and in the development
of the federal system, while relevant legislation
has recently been passed by Parliament regarding
money-laundering, counter-terrorism financing and
the protection and promotion of the most vulnerable
groups, such as women and children. The national
gender policy, the national youth policy and the national
development plan for 2017-2019 were important
legislative milestones. We praise the Somali legislative
body for these important achievements.
While we take note of the continuous progress in
Somalia, the country still faces considerable challenges,
especially regarding the humanitarian situation, which
needs to be urgently addressed. Also, the fight against
and defeat of Al-Shabaab aew imperative if the country
is to make progress towards peace and stability. In this
regard, predictable funding is an absolute necessity that
we have to take into account for AMISOM.
We welcome the progress achieved in capacitybuilding for the Somali National Army and the
Somali police force, and the financial commitment of
international partners to developing programmes and
projects for upgrading the Army and the police. This
is also another important requirement, as the country
needs to be organized to guarantee its own defence
as peace continues to be built. It is important that
the federal and regional authorities ensure the strict
compliance of security operations with international
standards regarding human rights and respect for the
rule of law. The Federal Government of Somalia and the
interim regional administrations need to create a secure
environment for the civilian population, bridging any
existing gaps and addressing intercommunal conflicts.
In conclusion, I wish to convey to the President
of Somalia Angola’s full support. We know that it is
important that the country be reborn. The rebirth of
the country needs to be an absolute objective that can
be achieved. From the discussion this morning, the
Security Council is again reassured of that. We therefore
look forward to seeing a brighter future with peace,
prosperity and sustainable development in the country.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would first of all
like to warmly welcome the president of Somalia his
Excellency Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud. We also
extend our appreciation to both briefers.

S/PV.7674

My delegation commends the work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), the
United Nations Support Office for the African Union
Mission in Somalia and other parties involved in close
cooperation with the Federal Government of Somalia.
We welcome the progress achieved in the areas of
State-building, good governance and restoring peace
security and economic growth, which are crucially
important in the light of upcoming parliamentary
elections. We especially praise the efforts of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia in ensuring
security in the country and their significance for the
further establishment of peace and reconciliation. The
recent extension of the Mission’s mandate underscored
the importance of UNSOM activities in support of the
work of the Federal Government of Somalia.
Ukraine strongly condemns the recent suicide
bombings in the city of Gaalkacyo and the suicide
car bombing at the Banadir regional administration
headquarters in Mogadishu, which took the lives
of 14 people, including two children. Recalling the
Al-Shabaab attack in March on the coastal village
of Garad, on the shores of Puntland, which included
large numbers of children among the Al-Shabaab
militants, we want to express our deep concern about
the recruitment of children and their use in armed
conflicts, along with other violations of international
humanitarian law perpetrated against children in
conflict situations.
It is very troubling that the recruitment of children
and young people into Al-Shabaab is happening in
mosques and schools. We believe firmly that every
effort must be made to ensure that schools meet their
goal of being educational facilities first and foremost,
offering students a path to a better and more peaceful
future. The sanctity of places of religious worship
must also be respected, and they should not be used as
poaching grounds for finding foot soldiers to fill in the
ranks of terrorist groups. In our view, it is extremely
important to improve the provisions for child protection
in the mandates of the African Union Mission in
Somalia and the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia in order to strengthen the Missions’ abilities to
effectively recognize, report and respond to violations
and abuses committed against children, including their
abduction by armed groups.
Ukraine acknowledges the positive impact of
the collective steps taken by the United Nations
and the Puntland authorities to make the necessary

16-1093325/28

S/PV.7674

The situation in Somalia

arrangements for ensuring the proper treatment of
former child soldiers recruited by terrorists, in order
to rehabilitate and eventually reunite them with their
families. Such children and young people should have
an opportunity to complete their education and learn a
trade so as to be able to make a living and contribute to
their communities.
We commend the Federal Government of Somalia’s
drafting of a national security policy and plans for a
consultative meeting in the regions aimed at advancing
its implementation. The deliberations on a new policing
model and updated Heegan plan for developing the
Somalia police at the Federal, regional and state levels
deserve special mention, as an essential element in the
provision of improved safety and security to the local
populations in every region in Somalia.
We also welcome the announcement, on 25 March, of
a comprehensive agreement on peace and reconciliation
among the peoples of Jubaland. We call on the Federal
Government of Somalia to continue to cooperate with
all the relevant stakeholders in order to resolve the
longstanding disputes between various communities
and administrations in the rest of Somalia. The
agreement reached between the Federal Government
and the Puntland Government with a letter agreeing
to Puntland’s full participation in the electoral process
with the goal of forming a new Federal Parliament later
this year represents another positive step on the way to
achieving administrative unity in the country.
Considering that progress, the Security Council
should stay focused on maintaining the current positive
trends and securing the implementation of all of the
Federal Government’s initiatives aimed at establishing
sustainable peace and completing the reconciliation
process. The President of Somalia can rely on our
continued support.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal would like to thank the Chinese
presidency for organizing today’s briefing and to
welcome the presence in the Chamber of Mr. Hassan
Sheikh Mohamud, President of the Federal Republic of
Somalia. I would also like to thank our briefers this
morning, Mr. Michael Keating, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia, and Ambassador
Téte António, Permanent Observer of the African
Union, for their clear presentations, which have given
us a better understanding of the political, security
and humanitarian situation in Somalia, as well as the
26/28

19/04/2016

challenges it is dealing with, particularly in the current
pre-election period.
In that regard, I would also like to welcome the
agreement concluded by Somali leaders, including
President Mohamud, and the Presidents of the regional
states of Puntland, Southwest, Galmudug and Jubaland,
on the modalities for implementing the 2016 electoral
process, at the Somali Leaders Forum held from 9 to
12 April. The communiqué announcing the agreement
is a clear expression of the growing consensus among
Somalia’s leadership on the country’s governance. The
Forum also enabled them to arrive at agreement on the
2016 electoral process at the Federal and state levels
regarding the parliamentary elections. In that regard,
we offer them our encouragement and support for the
success of the process, which should help to normalize
the situation in Somalia.
However, in order to achieve that, Somalia and the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) will
need the support of their international partners more
than ever. We therefore encourage the African Union
Mission in Somalia to maintain its strong support to the
country. However, we urge greater vigilance in ensuring
that the violence around the election mentioned by the
Somalia-Eritrea Monitoring Group in its most recent
report (see S/2015/801) does not spread to the rest of
the country.
On the security front, we remain concerned about
the persistent threat posed by Al-Shabaab to the liberated
territories, which are also areas of intercommunal
tension, as well as by the growing presence of the
Islamic State in the region. Despite those continuing
threats, Senegal welcomed the liberation of the town
of Adan Yabaal, in Middle Shabelle region, after a
major offensive against Al-Shabaab led by AMISOM
and the Somali National Army. We encourage such
joint operations, which will unquestionably enable
people displaced by collateral damage — lack of water
and electricity, vandalized equipment, burned food
stocks, explosive devices planted by Al-Shabaab and
so forth — to return home. The rapid provision of
financing and technical support for the security sector
by the international community will undoubtedly help
to improve strategies for combating armed groups,
including Al-Shabaab.
We firmly condemn all attacks on humanitarian
personnel, the expropriation of aid and the creation
of obstacles to its transportation, regardless of the
16-10933

19/04/2016

The situation in Somalia

perpetrators. In that regard, Senegal would like to
pay tribute to the staff of AMISOM, some of whom
have made the ultimate sacrifice in the fight against
Al-Shabaab. We would also like to salute the Somali
national defence forces for their sacrifices, commitment
and determination to defeat Al-Shabaab and achieve
lasting peace in Somalia.
Somalia’s mining resources continue to be the object
of growing interest from international corporations, and
that too has the potential to be a threat to the country’s
peace, security and stability. In that regard, we condemn
the continuing violations of the ban on exports of
charcoal from Somalia despite a slight improvement in
the situation in the wake of Al-Shabaab’s withdrawal
from the production sites. We reiterate our call for a
coordinated effort among the Federal Government, the
Federal states and the international organizations and
military forces on the ground to establish a thorough
and effective mechanism for combating the illegal trade
in Somali charcoal. In that context, we commend the
efforts of maritime forces to fight illicit trafficking in
natural resources.
I would like to conclude by reiterating Senegal’s
support and encouragement to the people and the
Government of Somalia as they look forward to the
elections scheduled for this year.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
I welcome the President of Somalia, His Excellency
Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, to this meeting and
thank him for his statement. I also thank Mr. Keating,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Somalia, and Ambassador António, the Permanent
Observer of the African to the United Nations, for their
briefings.
With elections scheduled for later this year,
Somalia’s peace process is entering a crucial period.
Recently, the Federal Government of Somalia has made
active efforts to promote social reconciliation, combat
terrorism, advance federal institution-building and
comprehensively implement Vision 2016. China highly
appreciates the able leadership of President Mohamud
and is confident that, under his leadership, the Somali
people will continue to achieve new progress on
national reconciliation. At the same time, the security
and humanitarian situation in the country remains
fragile and the attainment of peace and development

S/PV.7674

is still an arduous task. In that connection, I wish to
emphasize the following four points.
First, all parties should continue to push forward
the peace process in Somalia. China welcomes the fact
that President Mohamud and the leaders of all parties
in Somalia held a National Leaders Forum recently
and reached a consensus on the electoral process for
the 2016 elections. We hope that all the parties will
put the long-term interests of their nation and their
people above all else, strengthen dialogue, settle their
differences and work together for peace, stability
and development in their country. The international
community should adhere to the principle of Somali
ownership and Somali leadership, effectively help
the Federal Government advance the peace process,
reinforce
federation-building,
comprehensively
improve its administrative capacity, expedite local
institution-building, promote social reconciliation
and bring about lasting peace and the sustainable
development of Somalia.
Secondly, emphasis should be placed on
consolidating the security environment in Somalia.
The terrorist group Al-Shabaab still poses a grave
threat to security in the country. Recently, the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali
National Army have worked together to enhance
counter-terrorism cooperation and have achieved
remarkable results. China strongly condemns the
terrorist attacks against AMISOM and appreciates the
important contributions made by the African Union and
countries in the region to the maintenance of security
and stability in Somalia. We welcome the summit of
the AMISOM troop- and police-contributing countries
in February, and expect the United Nations Support
Office in Somalia and other parties concerned to work
together and continue to provide sustained and stable
logistical support to AMISOM and the Somali National
Army, thereby creating external conditions favourable
to the advancement of the Somali political process.
Thirdly, efforts are needed to comprehensively
promote the development of the Somali economy.
Development is the only way to eliminate the root causes
of conflicts and achieve lasting stability in Somalia.
Somalia is endowed with rich natural resources and has
enormous potential for development. The international
community should increase its assistance to Somalia
aimed at building infrastructure and developing its
agriculture, boosting job creation and improving
development so that the Somali people can enjoy the

16-1093327/28

S/PV.7674

The situation in Somalia

dividends of peace at an early date. China expects
the World Bank and other international financial
institutions and development agencies to honour their
commitments of assistance as soon as possible and
to provide effective support for Somalia’s economic
development and the improvement of its people’s lives
by focusing on strengthening the country’s ability to
sustain itself, based on its development needs, in order
to lay a solid foundation for its future development.
Fourthly, the international community should
further improve its coordination with regard to the
Somali question and create synergy. China supports
a leading role played by the United Nations in
coordinating the international efforts aimed at assisting
Somalia. We also support the constructive help
provided by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia in promoting the political process and starting
national reconstruction in Somalia. China welcomes the
meeting held in February by the High-Level Partnership
Forum on Somalia, which further consolidated the
consensus of the international community for Somalia’s
development. It is hoped that, in providing assistance
to Somalia, the international community will continue
to increase its consultation and cooperation with the
Federal Government of Somalia, fully respect its views
and focus on the priority areas and overall direction
of the country’s development with a view to forging
synergy among assistance efforts.
China and Africa form a community of shared
destiny and interests. At the Johannesburg Summit

28/28

19/04/2016

of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation last
December, China’s President Xi Jinping proposed 10
areas in which China wants to engage in pragmatic
cooperation with Africa: industrialization, agricultural
modernization, infrastructure, financial resources,
green development, trade and investment facilitation,
poverty reduction and public welfare, public health,
people-to-people exchanges, and peace and security.
China is ready to join hands with African countries,
including Somalia, in a concerted and active effort to
follow up on the Summit’s outcomes and, in the light
of Africa’s actual needs, help the continent to improve
people’s livelihoods and enhance African countries’
own development capacities.
For many years, China has firmly supported
the Somali peace process and provided Somalia and
AMISOM with assistance to the best of its ability. China
has also trained a large number of talented people for
the country’s reconstruction under the framework of the
Forum on China-Africa Cooperation. We are ready to
work with the international community in our ongoing
and unremitting efforts for peace, stability, prosperity
and development in Somalia and the Horn of Africa.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

16-10933
