A/RES/S-32/1

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
7 June 2021

Thirty-second special session
Agenda item 8
Adoption of the political declaration

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 2 June 2021
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/S-32/L.1)]

S-32/1.

Our common commitment to effectively addressing challenges and
implementing measures to prevent and combat corruption and
strengthen international cooperation
The General Assembly
Adopts the political declaration entitled “Our common commitment to
effectively addressing challenges and implementing measures to prevent and combat
corruption and strengthen international cooperation” annexed to the present
resolution.
1st plenary meeting
2 June 2021

21-07229 (E)

100621

*2107229*

Our common commitment to effectively addressing challenges and
implementing measures to prevent and combat corruption and
strengthen international cooperation

A/RES/S-32/1

Annex
Our common commitment to effectively addressing challenges and
implementing measures to prevent and combat corruption and
strengthen international cooperation
We, Heads of State and Government, ministers and representatives of Member
States and parties to the United Nations Convention against Corruption, 1 are
assembled at United Nations Headquarters from 2 to 4 June 2021 for the special
session of the General Assembly on challenges and measures to prevent and combat
corruption and strengthen international cooperation, convened in accordance with
Assembly resolution 73/191 of 17 December 2018.
We are concerned about the seriousness of the problems and threats posed by
corruption to the stability and security of societies, undermining the institutions and
values of democracy, our ethical values and justice and jeopardizing sustainable
development and the rule of law.
We highlight the 15 years of implementation of the Convention, and we
recognize that corruption is a local and a transnational phenomenon that affects all
societies and undermines economies, making international cooperation to prevent and
combat it essential. We pledge to pursue a multilateral approach in preventing and
combating corruption, and reaffirm our strong commitment to the Convention as the
most comprehensive legally binding universal instrument on corruption, and to
integrating it into our domestic legal systems, as necessary.
We welcome the fact that 187 parties have ratified or acceded to the Convention,
thus making it an instrument enjoying a status very close to universal adherence, and
in this regard we urge all States and competent regional economic integration
organizations, within the limits of their competence, that have not yet done so to
consider ratifying or acceding to the Convention as a matter of priority.
We reaffirm our support for the bodies created under the Convention, most
notably the Conference of the States Parties to the United Nations Convention against
Corruption and the Mechanism for the Review of Implementati on of the Convention,
which are leading to important improvements and progress in the implementation of
anti-corruption measures in many States parties.
We reaffirm our commitment to the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, 2 our joint plan of action for people, planet and prosperity.
We recognize that achieving the 2030 Agenda is an enabling factor for States to
effectively prevent and combat corruption, while, at the same time, our efforts against
corruption contribute to achieving the 2030 Agenda. We take note of the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development, 3
which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda, supports and complements it, helps to
contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete policies and actions,
and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing,
including financing for development, and creating an enabling environment at all
levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity.
We pledge to prevent and combat corruption and strengthen international
cooperation in a manner consistent with our obligations with regard to and respect for
all human rights, justice, democracy and the rule of law at all levels, and we will
__________________

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2349, No. 42146.
General Assembly resolution 70/1.
3
General Assembly resolution 69/313, annex.
1
2

2/18

21-07229

Our common commitment to effectively addressing challenges and
implementing measures to prevent and combat corruption and
strengthen international cooperation

A/RES/S-32/1

uphold the purposes and principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations, the
fundamental principles of international law, as well as the United Nations Convention
against Corruption and the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, 4 including, inter alia, respect for the principles of sovereign
equality and the territorial integrity of States and of non -intervention in the domestic
affairs of other States, in our fight against corruption.
We recognize the injustice and other negative consequences caused by
corruption, and reaffirm our common commitment to ending impunity for corruption
offences.
We are concerned about the negative impact that all forms of corruption,
including the solicitation of undue advantages, can have on access to basic services
and the enjoyment of all human rights, and recognize that it can exacerbate poverty
and inequality and may disproportionately affect the most disadvantaged individuals
in society. We also recognize that the loss of resources caused by corruption at all
levels and in all its forms, including when it involves vast quantities of assets, may
constitute a substantial proportion of the resources of States, with a particularly
negative impact on developing countries. This can undermine citizens’ trust, have a
negative impact on governance and the enjoyment of all human rights by all persons
affected by corruption, including the victims of corruption, and facilitate various
forms of crime.
We acknowledge that these challenges have been exacerbated by the ongoing
effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
We recognize that preventing and countering corruption and illicit financial
flows and recovering and returning confiscated assets, in acco rdance with the
Convention against Corruption, can contribute to effective resource mobilization,
poverty eradication, sustainable development and the enjoyment of all human rights,
and we will step up our efforts in this regard. We recognize that corrupti on is often
transnational in nature, and reiterate the need for strong international cooperation and
assistance in the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of corruption
offences, as well as in the recovery and return of confiscated assets in accordance
with the Convention.
We stand united against corruption and acknowledge that the prevention and
fight against all forms of corruption is the responsibility of all States and thus requires
strong political will, the participation of society, strong, fair, effective, impartial,
accountable and transparent institutions, comprehensive and balanced anti-corruption
frameworks and approaches at all levels and committed enforcement by all
jurisdictions in accordance with national legislative systems, as well as prevention,
anti-corruption education, training, effective international cooperation and asset
recovery, and we recognize the strategic importance of promoting holistic and
multidisciplinary approaches to countering it in line with the purposes and principles
of the Convention.
We will step up our efforts to promote and effectively implement our anti corruption obligations and robust commitments under the international anti corruption architecture, which we as a community have created together, and will
further work towards finding synergies and common solutions. We take note of the
efforts of international and regional organizations and forums in preventing and
combating corruption and of the important tools to effectively prevent and counter
corruption contained in the Convention against Corruption and in the Organized

__________________
4

21-07229

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
3/18

Our common commitment to effectively addressing challenges and
implementing measures to prevent and combat corruption and
strengthen international cooperation

A/RES/S-32/1

Crime Convention, and in other international and regional instruments, including
those recalled in the preamble of the Convention against Corruption.
We note that no country is free of corruption and that, overall, while progress in
preventing and combating corruption has been made, those efforts are not enough,
and we commit to doing more to address remaining gaps and existing and emerging
challenges and difficulties, in particular in the implementation of the Convention.
Therefore, we recognize the need for our intensified efforts, sustained political
commitment and decisive action, at all levels, against corruption.
Preventive measures
1.
We recognize the need and reaffirm our responsibility to take urgent action to
prevent corruption from occurring by putting in place preventive measures, policies
and practices as outlined in chapter II of the United Nations Convention against
Corruption and by strengthening practical tools, continuing to gather and share good
practices and enhancing efforts and resources for education and training in the public
and private sectors, while acknowledging the role of all individuals and groups
outside the public sector engaged in prevention as one of the main pillars in the fight
against corruption. We will promote transparency, accountability, integrity and a
culture of rejection of corruption at all levels of society as a basis for preventing
corruption and ending impunity.
2.
We welcome the efforts of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to
promote the implementation by States parties of chapter II of the Convention, on
preventive measures, and invite the Office to reinforce its global outreach and
information exchange in order to increase public awareness of and knowledge on
preventing and combating corruption, including through public global corruption
prevention campaigns, subject to the availability of extrabudgetary resources to that
end. These efforts should bring together other relevant international and regional
organizations with a mandate to fight corruption and should include an educational
and research component and a component specifically addressing young people.
3.
We will continue to implement and, where appropriate, strengthen strategies,
plans, policies and practices relating to prevention to ensure that they are
evidence-based and focused on addressing root causes, vulnerabilities and risk factors
at all levels of society, that they are responsive to the characteristics a nd risks of
different economic sectors, that they are inclusive and interdisciplinary, deriving from
a participatory process that involves all relevant stakeholders, including, where
appropriate, the private sector, and that they have a measurable direct i mpact on
individuals, organizations and institutions and undergo regular review, and we will
do so in accordance with the fundamental principles of domestic law.
4.
We recognize the role of anti-corruption bodies and specialized authorities in
implementing and monitoring these policies and practices, and we will grant them the
necessary independence, in accordance with the fundamental principles of domestic
law, to enable them to carry out their functions effectively and free from any undue
influence and with integrity and accountability. We pledge to strengthen their capacity
and provide them with the necessary resources to carry out their oversight functions
and to facilitate strong cooperation among them at all levels.
5.
We stress the role played by the supreme audit institutions and other oversight
bodies in preventing and combating corruption, in particular with regard to promoting
integrity, accountability, transparency and the proper management of public affairs
and public property, as well as the efficient use of public resources. We will preserve,
in accordance with the fundamental principles of domestic law, the independence of
supreme audit institutions and other oversight bodies in order to enable them to carry
out their functions effectively and free from any undue influence, and we will
4/18

21-07229

Our common commitment to effectively addressing challenges and
implementing measures to prevent and combat corruption and
strengthen international cooperation

A/RES/S-32/1

implement policies for the effective operation of those institutions, considering the
relevant provisions of the principles and standards formulated by the International
Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions, as appropriate, in particular with regard
to ensuring the proper management of public finances and public property and in areas
such as public procurement. We will ensure that the findings and recommendations
contained in the reports of those institutions and bodies are adequately addressed,
including through corrective action where feasible and in accordance with domestic
law, to enhance the fight against corruption for the benefit of society.
6.
We commit to fostering a culture of accountability, transparency, le gality,
integrity and fairness in the public sector, including by applying anti -corruption
obligations and measures, codes of conduct and other ethical standards for all public
officials, including executives and law enforcement officers, as well as prosec utors
and members of parliaments and judicial bodies, bearing in mind their independence,
and those subject or exposed to high corruption risks. We will promote the
development of public ethics and integrity and other related programmes for public
bodies, taking into consideration their institutional characteristics and domestic legal
frameworks, and provide training to public officials, ensuring that, where appropriate,
public bodies have the mandate and capacity to monitor the results of such
programmes.
7.
We will strengthen our efforts to prevent, identify and manage conflicts of
interest, including by assessing and mitigating corruption risks and through effective
and transparent financial disclosure systems, with information disclosed by
appropriate public officials made available as widely as possible, and we will use
innovative and digital technology in this field, with due regard for data protection and
privacy rights.
8.
We recognize that an independent and transparent judicial system that is in line
with the principles of judicial ethics, including integrity, plays a crucial role in
preventing and combating corruption.
9.
We will promote the role of parliaments and other legislative bodies in the
management of public finances and will ensure their capacity t o exercise effective
budget oversight, thus ensuring their role in preventing and combating corruption,
including in areas where they have a mandate for review or oversight and in
accordance with the fundamental principles of our legal systems. We will bui ld and
strengthen relations between national legislatures and supreme audit institutions and
other oversight bodies and encourage national legislatures to be aware of the findings
of such institutions and bodies.
10. We commit to increasing transparency and accountability in the management of
public finances and in government procurement, funding and contracting services to
ensure transparency in government actions in the use of public funds and during the
whole public procurement cycle. We commit to strengthening data-collection systems
and open databases that are accessible and user-friendly, in accordance with domestic
laws, and to better understanding and better enabling oversight and accountability,
including by supreme audit institutions and oversight bodi es.
11. We recognize that public procurement is at serious risk of corruption, including
in relation to our efforts to respond to and recover from the COVID -19 pandemic, and
deserves focused and tailored measures for its whole cycle. We encourage, where
appropriate, the inclusion of anti-corruption provisions in contracts and, when
awarding public procurement contracts, will take into account whether natural or legal
persons have been determined to have committed acts of corruption and any
mitigating factors, as appropriate, and will consider establishing appropriate
registries, in accordance with domestic law, while respecting the protection of
personal data and privacy rights.
21-07229

5/18

A/RES/S-32/1

Our common commitment to effectively addressing challenges and
implementing measures to prevent and combat corruption and
strengthen international cooperation

12. We recognize that Member States are responsible for ensuring transparent, free
and fair elections, in accordance with domestic law and our ambition to ensure
responsive, inclusive, participatory and representative decision -making at the
national level. We will maintain, strengthen, develop and implement measures that
protect the integrity of the electoral process and promote its accountability to voters,
transparency and impartiality in domestic electoral institutions and oversight
mechanisms, and transparency in the funding of candidatures for elected public office,
political parties and electoral campaigns, where applicable, with a view to preventing
corruption, ensuring accountability, promoting good governance and reinforcing trust
in public institutions.
13. We will take measures to prevent corruption involving the private sector and set
and communicate high standards regarding anti-corruption policies. We will
encourage ethical behaviour, anti-corruption and anti-bribery compliance efforts,
integrity, accountability and transparency measures in all enterprises. We will support
and promote initiatives to ensure that private sector entities are well equipped to
conduct business with integrity and transparency, particularly in their relations with
the public sector, and in fair competition, and will encourage the private sector to take
collective action in this regard, including through the establishment of public -private
partnerships in the prevention of and fight against corruption. We commit to enforcing
proportionate and dissuasive civil, administrative or criminal penalties for failure to
comply with such measures, as appropriate.
14. We note the positive role of international investments and the importance of
minimizing opportunities for all acts of corruption.
15. We will prevent the misuse of procedures regulating private entities and mitigate
corruption risks when granting subsidies, contracts and licences and when engaging
in privatization and public-private partnerships.
16. We commit to making efforts in international cooperation and taking appropriate
measures to enhance beneficial ownership transparency by ensuring that adequate,
accurate, reliable and timely beneficial ownership information is available and
accessible to competent authorities and by promoting beneficial ownership
disclosures and transparency, such as through appropriate registries, where consistent
with the fundamental principles of domestic legal systems and using as a guideline
the relevant initiatives of regional, interregional and multilateral organizations
against money-laundering. To this end, we will develop and implement the measures
necessary to collect and share such information on the beneficial ownership of
companies, legal structures and other complex legal mechanisms, and we will
enhance the ability of competent authorities in this regard.
17. We will take measures to prevent the financial system from being abused to
hide, move and launder assets stemming from corruption, including when vast
quantities of assets are involved. Those crimes undermine the integrity of the financial
system, and we commit to promoting the implementation of the Convention and our
respective applicable international obligations.
18. We will reinforce and enhance inter-agency cooperation at all levels to prevent
individuals and companies, other legal entities, and systems used to transfer money,
as well as non-regulated or unregistered financial or commercial or non-commercial
entities at serious risk of being abused for corruption and money -laundering, from
committing or being used to facilitate acts of corruption, and will encourage and
support companies and financial institutions in this regard, including to make better
use of resources already expended. We will, in accordance with the fundamental
principles of domestic law, take measures to prevent corruption involving the private
sector, including by promoting the development of standards and procedures designed
to safeguard business integrity and promote transparency and the use of good
6/18

21-07229

Our common commitment to effectively addressing challenges and
implementing measures to prevent and combat corruption and
strengthen international cooperation

A/RES/S-32/1

commercial practices among businesses and in the contractual relations of businesses
with States, and in accordance with domestic laws and regulations, where required,
including through measures regarding the maintenance of books and records,
financial statement disclosures and accounting and auditing standards.
19. We will institute comprehensive domestic regulatory and supervisory regimes
for banks and non-bank financial institutions, including natural or legal persons that
provide formal or informal services for the transmission of money or value, or other
bodies particularly susceptible to money-laundering, in order to deter and detect all
forms of money-laundering in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Convention, including when it concerns illicit financial flows. We will strengthen the
capacity of financial intelligence units to receive, analyse and disseminate to the
competent authorities reports of suspicious financial transactions, and we will
encourage cooperation among these units at the international level for the purpose of
preventing and combating the transfer of proceeds of crime.
20. We acknowledge the importance of raising public awareness regarding the
existence, causes, gravity and negative consequences of corruption, and the
appropriate tools available to prevent and combat it, including undertaking public
information activities that contribute to non-tolerance of corruption and through
education and training programmes. We commit to developing integrated, balanced
and comprehensive approaches to promoting the rule of law at all levels, including
through the full and effective use of the Convention.
21. We note with appreciation the important role of civil society, academia, the
private sector and the media in identifying, detecting and reporting on cases of
corruption, and we will take appropriate measures, within our means and in
accordance with the fundamental principles of domestic law, to promote the active
participation of individuals and groups outside the public sector, such as civil society,
non-governmental organizations, community-based organizations and the private
sector, in the prevention of and the fight against corruption and to raise public
awareness regarding the existence, causes and gravity of and the threat posed by
corruption. We will respect, promote and protect the freedom to seek, receive, publish
and disseminate information concerning corruption. That freedom may be subject to
certain restrictions, but these shall only be such as are provided for by law and are
necessary for respect of the rights or reputations of others and for the protection of
national security, public order or public health or morals. We will consider inviting
those individuals and groups to contribute to the development and implementation of
our technical assistance programmes, at our request, and based on the needs identified
for the implementation of the provisions of the Convention. To promote such
participation, we will also make efforts so that the conditions are present for their
effective contribution to achieving the objectives of the Convention, including the
ability to operate independently and without fear of reprisal because of their efforts
in that regard, in accordance with domestic law and our respective applicable
international obligations.
22. We will respect, promote and protect the freedom to seek, receive, disseminate
and publish information concerning corruption, and ensure that the public has
effective access to information, in accordance with the domestic laws of States. We
commit to increasing the transparency of decision-making processes, in accordance
with the fundamental principles of domestic law, as a means to prevent and combat
corruption and facilitate efficient processes, including by adopting appropriate and
necessary procedures or regulations and designating and enhancing bodies
responsible for facilitating access to information, as well as through the use of digital
tools, open data and Internet-based portals to help make information more accessible,
with due regard for data protection and privacy rights.

21-07229

7/18

Our common commitment to effectively addressing challenges and
implementing measures to prevent and combat corruption and
strengthen international cooperation

A/RES/S-32/1

Criminalization and law enforcement
23. We reject corruption and will implement measures to better detect it with a view
to ending impunity. We commit to criminalizing, investigating, prosecuting and
adjudicating acts of corruption and related offences in the public and private sectors.
We commit to having in place and enforcing effective, proportionate, dissuasive and
non-discriminatory criminal or non-criminal sanctions against natural and legal
persons for corruption and related offences, in accordance with domestic law and the
Convention.
24. We urge States parties to adapt their legislation and regulations, pursuant to
article 65 of the Convention, to comply with the relevant obligations to establish as
criminal offences the bribery of national public officials, the active bribery of foreign
public officials and officials of public international organizations, embezzlement,
money-laundering and obstruction of justice as covered in articles 15, 16 (paragraph 1),
17, 23, 25 and 27 (paragraph 1) of the Convention and, to the degree possible, to go
beyond the minimum and adopt additional measures for preventing and combating
corruption. We invite States to also consider adopting measures, subject to their
constitutions and the fundamental principles of their legal systems and as may be
necessary, to criminalize trading in influence, the abuse of functions and illicit
enrichment, that is, a significant increase in the assets of a public official that he or
she cannot reasonably explain in relation to his or her lawful income, bribery and
embezzlement in the private sector and concealment. We invite States to draw on the
observations and best practices emanating from the Mechanism for the Review of
Implementation of the Convention to guide these efforts.
25. We reaffirm our commitment to actively preventing and combating bribery and
bribe-taking in all its forms, in accordance with the Convention and the provisions
thereof, including by criminalizing the solicitation and acceptance of bribes and the
bribery of foreign public officials and officials of public international organizations.
We will implement measures as may be necessary to establish liability for legal
persons as required by the Convention, also with a view to enhancing the use of good
commercial practices among businesses and in contractual relations between
businesses and States.
26. We will take effective measures at the domestic level to prevent, investigate and
prosecute acts of corruption and related offences involving members of national
parliaments at all levels in accordance with the Convention, while taking into account
questions of privileges and immunities, as well as of jurisdiction, as appropriate, with
a view to promoting the highest ethical standards as an essential element for
maintaining public trust. We will strengthen interparliamen tary dialogue and
cooperation, including in coordination with the Inter-Parliamentary Union and similar
organizations, as appropriate, to promote the exchange of good practices relating to
legislation, review and oversight controls in the fight against cor ruption, and we will
consider implementing those good practices in domestic law.
27. We acknowledge that one of the most effective ways to prevent and combat
corruption is to uphold the independence of the judiciary and ensure effective
oversight, investigatory, prosecutorial and judicial institutions that enjoy protection
from undue influence and have access to all relevant information. We will ensure
equal access to justice for all and maintain and, when necessary, strengthen integrity,
impartiality, inclusivity, due process, fair trial rights, transparency and equality before
the law in our national criminal justice systems. We recognize the contribution that

8/18

21-07229

Our common commitment to effectively addressing challenges and
implementing measures to prevent and combat corruption and
strengthen international cooperation

A/RES/S-32/1

multilateral commitments make to this end, as well as other documents 5 noted in
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.
28. We commit to strengthening efforts to build the capacity of law enforcement
and judicial authorities for the successful investigation, prosecution and adjudication
of corruption and corruption-related offences, including through training, and to
allocating sufficient resources for specialized anti-corruption authorities and criminal
justice institutions to more effectively investigate and prosecute these crimes.
29. We will enable effective cooperation at the domestic level, including through
promoting collaboration, joint activities and information exchange among, as
appropriate, anti-corruption authorities, police, investigative, prosecutorial and
judicial authorities, financial intelligence units and administrative and oversight
bodies, in particular supreme audit institutions, in corruption investigations and
proceedings at the national and international levels, in accordance with domestic law.
30. We will provide a safe and enabling environment to tho se who expose, report
and fight corruption and, as appropriate, for their relatives and other persons close to
them, and will support and protect against any unjustified treatment any person who
identifies, detects or reports, in good faith and on reasonab le grounds, corruption and
related offences. To this end, we will, inter alia, enable confidential complaint
systems, protected reporting systems and programmes for the protection of reporting
persons, and increase awareness of such measures, in accordance with domestic legal
systems and within our means. We also reiterate our obligation to criminalize
obstruction of justice and to effectively protect victims, witnesses and justice and law
enforcement officials from potential retaliation or intimidation, us e of physical force
or threats.
31. We will strive to provide a safe and adequate environment to journalists, and we
will investigate, prosecute and punish threats and acts of violence, falling within our
jurisdiction, committed against them.
International cooperation
32. We bear in mind that no country can effectively combat corruption alone, that
preventing and combating corruption, including complex cases such as those
involving multiple national jurisdictions and vast quantities of assets, is a
responsibility of all States and that promoting, facilitating and supporting
international cooperation and technical assistance in the prevention of and fight
against corruption, including in asset recovery, constitutes one of the main purposes
of the Convention. We reaffirm the importance of international and multilateral
cooperation and will afford one another the widest measure of mutual legal assistance
in investigations, prosecutions and judicial proceedings in relation to the offences
covered by the Convention and consistent with its provisions and other applicable
international obligations. We note barriers and international challenges that are
encountered by States parties and have a negative impact on international cooperation
in preventing and combating corruption more efficiently and effectively while
safeguarding due process. We further commit to strengthening political will and to
enhancing our common endeavours to make full use of the Convention and other legal
instruments to advance international cooperation in preventing and combating
__________________
5

21-07229

These documents include the Universal Charter of the Judge, the Bangalore Principles of Judicial
Conduct, the Commentary on the Bangalore Principles of Judicial Conduct, the Istanbul
Declaration on Transparency in the Judicial Process and the measures for the effective
implementation of the Istanbul Declaration, the Basic Principles on the Independence of the
Judiciary and the Guidelines on the Role of Prosecutors. Making reference to these documents in a
footnote shall not constitute a precedent for future negotiations.

9/18

A/RES/S-32/1

Our common commitment to effectively addressing challenges and
implementing measures to prevent and combat corruption and
strengthen international cooperation

corruption at all levels and to afford one another relevant technical assistance in this
regard, as needed.
33. We acknowledge that effective and timely communication and cooperation
between competent authorities can be an important factor in curbing the cross-border
movement of persons involved in the commission of corruption offences and property,
which includes funds, derived from the commission of corruption offences, and can
also contribute to our efforts to prevent and counter illicit financial flows derived
from corruption. We will strive to eliminate the exploitation of deficiencies in our
regulatory regimes and channels that may serve as incentives for the cross -border
movement of these persons and such property, as well a s investigate and prosecute
corruption offences, when possible and consistent with domestic law. We endeavour
to deny these persons and their family members, who knowingly benefit from such
property, safe havens and visas, where appropriate and in accordan ce with domestic
legal frameworks and international obligations, also with a view to strengthening
international cooperation to facilitate the return of persons sought for corruption
offences. To this end, we are encouraged to use and strengthen appropriat e focal
points to facilitate information exchange between each other, noting existing
agreements, formal international forums or networks for this purpose, including the
International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL)/Stolen Asset Recovery
(StAR) Initiative Global Focal Point Network on Asset Recovery or the new Global
Operational Network of Anti-Corruption Law Enforcement Authorities.
34. We commit to adopting measures at the national level, in accordance with
domestic legal frameworks and consistent with international obligations, to, where
appropriate, put safeguards in place to prevent immigration and refugee protection
programmes, as well as business, investment and immigration policies, from being
abused by such offenders, while respecting the sovereignty of States.
35. We recognize the fundamental role of effective international cooperation in
preventing and combating corruption, and to this end underline the importance of
addressing, tackling and effectively responding to international challenges and
barriers, in particular measures, that hinder such cooperation, and which are not
consistent with the Charter of the United Nations and obligations under international
law, and in this regard urge States, consistent with their international obligations, to
refrain from applying such measures.
36. We will strengthen our efforts to implement, and reach the full potential of, the
provisions on international cooperation in the Convention, including by urging all
States to consider concluding and effectively implementing bilateral and multilateral
agreements or arrangements, including on extradition, mutual legal assistance and the
return and final disposal of confiscated proceeds of offences established in
accordance with the Convention, in accordance with domestic legal systems. We will
afford one another the widest measure of mutual legal assistance in investigations,
prosecutions and judicial proceedings, including in recovering and returning proceeds
of crime, in relation to the offences covered by the Convention.
37. We recognize the significance of international cooperation and call for
strengthened collaboration at the national, regional and international levels using an
inter-agency approach among law enforcement, prosecutorial and judicial auth orities,
financial intelligence units and other competent authorities, as appropriate. To this
end, we will enable effective collaboration in corruption investigations and
proceedings at the national, regional and international levels, in accordance with
domestic law, including through information exchange among, as appropriate,
anti-corruption, police, investigative, prosecutorial and judicial authorities, financial
intelligence units, central authorities responsible for mutual legal assistance, and
administrative and oversight bodies, in particular supreme audit institutions.
10/18

21-07229

Our common commitment to effectively addressing challenges and
implementing measures to prevent and combat corruption and
strengthen international cooperation

A/RES/S-32/1

38. We emphasize the need for reliable, high-quality, timely and effective
communication and procedures, including to reduce the time required for sending
requests through official channels in preparation for or during mutual legal assistance
requests in criminal cases, including through secure electronic communication
channels, and call upon INTERPOL and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime to continue working in close cooperation and in complementarity in this regard.
We endeavour to establish contact and communication between competent authorities
by utilizing appropriate channels to foster cross-border cooperation in the collection
and sharing of evidence and the enforcement of judicial orders, in accordance with
domestic law and international obligations. We will establish and strengthen the
capacity of central authorities and other competent authorities, including through
sharing good practices and specialized knowledge.
39. We acknowledge the critical importance of developing and maintaining
international networks of law enforcement officials to advance international
cooperation for the success of corruption cases, and we note with appreciation the
positive contributions made by existing multilateral institutions and mechanisms. We
commit to better utilizing and strengthening international, regional and cross -regional
law enforcement and, as appropriate, judicial cooperation networks as platforms
among competent authorities for information-sharing and mutual legal assistance and
the development and dissemination of specialized knowledge.
40. We will adequately address requests based on non-criminal proceedings,
including civil, administrative non-conviction-based proceedings, as well as those
related to information concerning unexplained assets held by public officials, where
appropriate and consistent with domestic legal systems and applicable international
obligations, with a view to, inter alia, strengthening global efforts to prevent
corruption, sanctioning acts of corruption and corruption-related offences and
recovering and returning proceeds of these offences in accordance with the
Convention.
Asset recovery
41. We emphasize that asset recovery is one of the main purposes of the Con vention
and that the return of assets pursuant to chapter V thereof is a fundamental principle
of the Convention and that States parties shall afford one another the widest measure
of cooperation and assistance in this regard.
42. We recognize the importance of asset recovery and return in the fight against
corruption and that it, inter alia, contributes to fostering sustainable development and
promoting justice and the rule of law at all levels and in all States. We acknowledge
the progress made thus far but are conscious that we must further improve the
implementation of the measures available under the Convention for asset recovery
and return, and we will redouble our joint efforts. We encourage States parties to
remove barriers to applying measures for the recovery of assets, in particular by
simplifying their legal procedures, where appropriate and in accordance with their
domestic law, and by preventing the abuse of such procedures while safeguarding due
process. We further recognize the need for effective, efficient and responsive
international cooperation in asset recovery and return and mutual legal assistance
without undue delay, and we will continue to address challenges in our fight against
corruption, including gaps in the implementation of the Conven tion.
43. We will strive to end impunity for corruption and ensure that crime does not pay
by preventing, detecting and deterring in a more effective manner the transfer,
conversion and concealment of property derived from the commission of corruption
offences, by strengthening domestic efforts to adequately criminalize corruption
offences and prosecuting those engaged in corruption and money -laundering, by
21-07229

11/18

A/RES/S-32/1

Our common commitment to effectively addressing challenges and
implementing measures to prevent and combat corruption and
strengthen international cooperation

taking domestic measures to investigate, trace, freeze, seize, confiscate and return
such property as defined in the Convention, and by strengthening international
cooperation in asset recovery. We recognize that a strong and trusting partnership
between requesting and requested States, with proactive measures taken by both, is
key to successful asset recovery and return.
44. We commit to strengthening reliable and timely information exchange and
engaging in proactive and responsive information-sharing, in accordance with
domestic legal systems, by making better use of all available instruments, as
appropriate and in accordance with the Convention and domestic law, to request and
provide international cooperation for the purposes of enhancing the identification,
tracing, freezing, seizure, confiscation and return of the proceeds of offences
established in accordance with the Convention.
45. We will strengthen the capacities of central and other competent authorities
responsible for international cooperation and asset recovery, as necessary, and draw
upon and improve the relevant skills of experts on an ongoing basis to enhance the
identification, tracing, freezing, seizure, confiscation and return of the confiscated
proceeds of crime with a view to giving effect to requests for asset recovery. We will
also take such measures as may be necessary to permit competent author ities to give
effect to an order of seizure and confiscation issued by a court or other competent
judicial authority of another State, in accordance with the Convention as well as
domestic law and regulations. We recognize the importance of confidentiality,
consistent with domestic law, in conducting international cooperation regarding the
identification, tracing, freezing, seizure and confiscation of the proceeds of crime.
46. We recognize the importance of measures for the direct recovery of property
without prejudice to international cooperation. In this regard, we will ensure that
domestic legal frameworks allow States parties to initiate legal proceedings in our
courts to claim title to or ownership of property acquired through the commission of
an offence established by the Convention, we will allow the recognition of other
States parties harmed by an offence through judicial orders for compensation or
damages, and we will take measures to enable our courts, in confiscation proceedings,
to recognize the claim of another State party as a legitimate owner. We will work
collectively to share information and good practices and develop further guidance in
that regard, to facilitate litigation of such cases in foreign courts.
47. We commit to using the available tools for asset recovery and asset return, in
accordance with domestic law, such as conviction-based and non-conviction-based
confiscation, as well as direct recovery mechanisms as outlined in chapter V of the
Convention, and to sharing knowledge on and continuing to discuss and develop
innovative modalities to clarify and improve mutual legal assistance processes in
order to more efficiently advance asset recovery proceedings and render them more
successful. We recognize that the best and most adequate use of e ach legal remedy
must be determined by the competent authorities on a case-by-case basis and is
dependent on domestic law requirements.
48. We recognize that the return and disposal of confiscated property is based on
cooperation between requesting and requested States, and we strive to ensure that it
is done in a transparent and accountable manner by making use of the options set out
in the Convention, including giving special consideration to the possibility of
concluding agreements or mutually acceptable arrangements, on a case-by-case basis,
for the final disposal of confiscated property, while fully respecting the principles of
sovereign equality and the territorial integrity of States and of non -intervention in the
domestic affairs of other States, in line with article 4 of the Convention, and to
consider the Sustainable Development Goals in the use of returned assets. In this
regard, we will continue to clarify or simplify legal procedures, where appropriate
12/18

21-07229

Our common commitment to effectively addressing challenges and
implementing measures to prevent and combat corruption and
strengthen international cooperation

A/RES/S-32/1

and in accordance with domestic law, and will explore the scope for new approaches
to asset recovery, return and disposal in conformity with the Convention.
49. We recognize the importance of ensuring the effective administration and
disposal of confiscated assets and, to this end, with due regard for artic le 4 of the
Convention, within domestic legal frameworks or administrative arrangements, we
will consider the various possible models of disposal and administration of
confiscated proceeds of offences established in accordance with the Convention,
including, where feasible, allocating such proceeds to the national revenue fund or
the State treasury, reinvesting funds for special purposes and compensating victims
of the crime, including through the social reuse of assets for the benefit of
communities. We stress the need to preserve the value and condition of proceeds of
crime pending the conclusion of confiscation proceedings, including with a view to
returning these assets in the future in accordance with chapter V of the Convention.
50. When employing alternative legal mechanisms and non-trial resolutions,
including settlements, in corruption proceedings that have proceeds of crime for
confiscation and return, we will strengthen our efforts to confiscate and return such
assets in accordance with the Convention.
51. We note that, where appropriate and unless States decide otherwise, requested
States may deduct reasonable expenses incurred in investigations, prosecutions or
judicial proceedings leading to the return or disposal of confiscated property, but we
encourage requested States to consider waiving or reducing such expenses to the
barest minimum, particularly when the requesting State is a developing country.
52. We will consolidate and expand the global knowledge and data collection on
asset recovery and return through gathering and sharing information on challenges
and good practices, as well as on volumes of assets frozen, seized, confiscated and
returned in relation to corruption offences, and the number and types of cases, as
appropriate, while ensuring the protection of personal data and privacy rights,
drawing upon existing efforts, including those already under way through existing
projects by the Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative, and, inter alia, those foreseen by the
Global Operational Network of Anti-Corruption Law Enforcement Authorities. We
recognize that access to such global knowledge and data positively contributes to the
quality and efficiency of the recovery and return of proceeds of crime and supports
evidence-based policymaking.
Technical assistance and information exchange
53. We acknowledge the importance of promoting, facilitating and supporting
timely, sustainable, adequate and effective technical assistance for strengthening
national capacities to prevent and fight corruption, and call for accelerated action at
all levels and by all technical assistance providers in addressing such needs, upon
request, including those identified through the Implementation Review Mechanism,
by mobilizing sufficient financial assistance, technical support and other resources.
54. We recognize that multilateral and bilateral technical assistance is more
effective when aligned with national anti-corruption strategies and action plans and
built on their respective strengths, and therefore note the importance of c oordination
at the country level among donors, technical assistance providers and recipient
countries. We pledge to enhance cooperation and coordination in this regard, in order
to make full use of the available means of support.
55. We pledge to strengthen country-led and country-based, integrated and
coordinated technical assistance, upon request, including through and in cooperation
with the United Nations, especially the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,

21-07229

13/18

Our common commitment to effectively addressing challenges and
implementing measures to prevent and combat corruption and
strengthen international cooperation

A/RES/S-32/1

and other relevant international, regional and national organizations or entities, within
their mandates.
56. We will continue to afford one another, according to our capacity, the widest
measure of technical assistance, especially for the benefit of developing countries,
including in the form of material support, capacity-building and training, upon
request, consistent with chapter VI of the Convention, and through bilateral and
multilateral cooperation.
57. We will develop and improve specific tailor-made, accessible and effective
technical assistance and training programmes, which take into account the specific
needs of the beneficiaries, for personnel and other professionals responsible for
preventing and combating corruption, and we will promote the exchange of
experiences and lessons learned, including, where appropriate and compatible with
domestic law, by introducing personnel exchange programmes and joint training
initiatives and by participating in specialized networks, including to enhance
prevention, prosecution and international cooperation in asset recovery efforts.
58. We pledge to continue sharing information on the provision of technical
assistance and needs for such assistance, including those needs identified through the
Implementation Review Mechanism, and to this end will consider publishing on a
voluntary basis the results in the country reports. We will continue developing and
sharing with each other, directly and through relevant international and regional
organizations, statistics and analytical expertise concerning corruption and
information on best practices to prevent and combat corruption, as appropriate.
59. We request the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, within its mandate
and existing resources, to continue to assist and support Member States, upon request,
in their efforts aimed at advancing the implementation of the Convention and
strengthening their capacities and institutions to that effect.
Anti-corruption as an enabler for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
60. We will strengthen our fight against corruption in all it s forms and at all levels
and stress that corruption is an impediment to the achievement of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and an obstacle to the efficient mobilization of resources
and means for sustainable development. We recognize the impor tance of
mainstreaming transparency and anti-corruption as a cross-cutting enabler for the
broader development agenda and the need to incorporate anti-corruption measures in
the implementation of the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework.
61. We reaffirm our commitment to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda,
including Sustainable Development Goal 16, to promote peaceful and inclusive
societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build
effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels, and its targets, and will
redouble our efforts to strengthen the recovery and return of stolen assets and
significantly reduce illicit financial flows by 2030.
62. We take note of the report of the High-level Panel on International Financial
Accountability, Transparency and Integrity for Achieving the 2030 Agenda. 6
63. We underscore that the anti-corruption work of the United Nations should be
strongly linked to and coordinated with measures and programmes contributing to
strengthening the rule of law at the national and international levels. We invite the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue coordination and cooperation
__________________
6

14/18

A/75/810, annex.
21-07229

Our common commitment to effectively addressing challenges and
implementing measures to prevent and combat corruption and
strengthen international cooperation

A/RES/S-32/1

with the United Nations Development Programme to foster anti-corruption measures
that enable the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
64. We underscore the particular responsibility of the United Nations system to
serve as a role model in the fight against corruption by enforcing the highest standards
of transparency and integrity to prevent all forms of corruption in its activities, to
impose a system-wide zero-tolerance policy against corrupt practices and to ensure
full and transparent investigations where instances arise and, in this regard, we invite
the members of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination
to review the implementation of the recommendations of the Inst itutional Integrity
Initiative in order to ensure that their rules and regulations are fully aligned with the
principles of the Convention.
65. We invite the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, as the lead entity in
the United Nations system on countering corruption, to increase coordination and
cooperation with the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the
Department of Peace Operations of the Secretariat with a view to strengthening the
rule of law and anti-corruption measures in United Nations peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts.
66. We will strengthen our efforts to enhance the effectiveness of anti-corruption
education and facilitate anti-corruption research and implement teaching and learning
programmes with elements of integrity at all levels of education, in accordance with
domestic education systems, with a view to strengthening ethical behaviour, including
through the adoption of values, principles and actions that make it possible to build a
fair and corruption-free society and to foster a culture that promotes respect for the
rule of law and integrity. We will raise public awareness regarding the existence,
causes, gravity, risks and effects of corruption through outreach programmes and in
other appropriate ways and deliver training for practitioners, in accordance with the
fundamental principles of domestic law, with a view to promoting the active
participation of individuals and groups outside the public sector, such as civil society,
non-governmental organizations, community-based organizations and the media, in
the prevention of corruption. In this context, we call upon all international and
regional organizations concerned, such as the International Anti-Corruption
Academy, to strengthen their cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, with full respect for its mandate, and other relevant United Nations
entities.
67. We will continue the professional development of public officials to meet the
requirements for the correct, honourable and proper performance of publ ic functions
with a view to promoting integrity, accountability and the proper management of
public affairs and public property.
68. We recognize the role that technologies can play in support of anti -corruption
measures, including in public procurement and with regard to asset and conflict of
interest declarations by public officials to appropriate authorities, in accordance with
the fundamental principles of domestic law, to promote transparency, interaction with
citizens and accountability, and the importance of strengthening cooperation and the
exchange of best practices on the development and application of such technologies.
We will promote, while safeguarding personal data protection and privacy rights, the
use of technological innovations to prevent, detect and combat corruption and
facilitate digital government in this regard by leveraging technological advancements,
including systems and programmes that improve the ability of the competent
authorities to conduct financial analysis, such as the United Na tions Office on Drugs
and Crime software goAML.
69. We will improve our understanding of the linkages between gender and
corruption, including the ways in which corruption can affect women and men
21-07229

15/18

A/RES/S-32/1

Our common commitment to effectively addressing challenges and
implementing measures to prevent and combat corruption and
strengthen international cooperation

differently, and we will continue to promote gender equality and the empowerment of
women, including by mainstreaming it in relevant legislation, policy development,
research, projects and programmes, as appropriate and in accordance with the
fundamental principles of domestic law.
70. We express our concern about the links between corruption and other forms of
crime, in particular organized crime and economic crime, including money laundering, and will continue to enhance our understanding and strengthen our
responses to any existing, growing and potential links, and disr upt them, recognizing
that corruption can often be an enabler of other transnational crimes and illicit
financial flows.
71. We will safeguard sport from corruption by strengthening and further
coordinating our efforts in an inclusive and impartial manner, inc luding in the
framework of the United Nations, and by enhancing cooperation between all relevant
stakeholders, including sports organizations at all levels, relevant international and
regional organizations and relevant domestic authorities, including law enforcement
authorities, as appropriate. To that end, we will raise awareness within sports
organizations and the broader sports community of the value of fairness and the
gravity of corruption, promote accountability and good governance within sports
organizations and facilitate the exchange of expertise, the timely dissemination of
information and the sharing of good practices. We will address risks to groups in
vulnerable conditions, in particular children and young athletes, posed by corruption
in sport, with a view to promoting fair competition, healthy lives and principles of
integrity and to creating an atmosphere of intolerance towards corruption in junior
and youth sport, in accordance with domestic legal systems.
Advancing a forward-looking anti-corruption agenda and framework
72. We commit to redoubling our efforts to prevent and combat corruption and to
ensuring that corruption safeguards and responses are integral elements of our
recovery efforts as we respond to the COVID-19 pandemic.
73. We will ensure that appropriate measures are in place to prevent and combat
corruption when responding to or recovering from national crises and emergencies,
while striving not to negatively impact the speed and quality of responses in such
situations. In this regard, we recognize the role of supreme audit institutions and other
oversight bodies and their functions in upholding policies and procedures for the
management of public finances and public procurement, and the importance of
partnerships between the public and private sectors and other relevant stakeholders,
in accordance with domestic law.
74. We will, in order to substantially reduce corruption and bribery in all their forms
by 2030, adopt, as soon as possible, to support the achievement of this target,
legislative and other measures to establish as criminal offences the acts required by
the Convention, including by criminalizing solicitation and the acceptance of bribes
and the bribery of national public officials and foreign public officials, and to act ively
enforce these measures.
75. We reiterate the central and main role of the Convention and the Conference of
the States Parties to the Convention in global efforts to improve the capacity of and
cooperation among States parties to effectively and comprehen sively prevent and
combat corruption. We therefore urge all States parties, United Nations entities,
non-governmental organizations, the private sector and the general public, as
appropriate, to strengthen their support for the Convention and the Conferenc e, and
for the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. We endeavour to provide the
Office with adequate and regular voluntary contributions to support the
Implementation Review Mechanism, research and analysis, normative work and
16/18

21-07229

Our common commitment to effectively addressing challenges and
implementing measures to prevent and combat corruption and
strengthen international cooperation

A/RES/S-32/1

technical assistance, as well as other relevant programmes related to the prevention
and combating of corruption, including relevant United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime global programmes and other related activities.
76. We reaffirm the importance of the Implementation Review Me chanism as an
intergovernmental, transparent, efficient, non-intrusive, inclusive, impartial,
non-adversarial, non-punitive, ongoing and gradual process for accelerating progress
in the implementation of the Convention by States parties. We commit to furth er
harnessing its potential in identifying the good practices and challenges that we
encounter in the implementation of the Convention, disseminating good practices and
making efforts to address the gaps in implementation and challenges and deepen
mutual understanding and trust between States parties, while also building on
identified challenges in this regard.
77. We welcome the achievements of the Implementation Review Mechanism in
furthering parties’ efforts to fully implement their obligations under the Con vention,
and we urge parties to the Convention to complete their reviews under the Mechanism
in a timely manner so as to conclude the first and second review cycles within their
agreed period of performance. We will give due consideration to the voluntary
provisions set out in the terms of reference of the Mechanism. We further commit to
fully and effectively following up on the conclusions and observations from the
review process, and we welcome the efforts by the Conference of the States Parties
to the Convention to assess the performance of the Mechanism and adapt, where
appropriate, procedures and requirements for the follow -up.
78. We welcome the creation of the Global Operational Network of Anti-Corruption
Law Enforcement Authorities under the auspices of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the aim of which is to develop a quick, agile and efficient tool for
combating cross-border corruption offences, to strengthen communication exchange
and peer learning between anti-corruption law enforcement authorities and to
complement and coordinate with existing and efficient platforms for international
cooperation, such as the INTERPOL/StAR Global Focal Point Network on Asset
Recovery. We encourage States to participate in and make best use of this network,
as appropriate.
79. We encourage the Conference of the States Parties to the Convention to continue
exploring activities, procedures and methods of work aimed at improving cooperation
with relevant international and regional organizations and mechanisms and
non-governmental organizations in line with the Convention and to continue making
appropriate use of relevant information produced by other international and regional
mechanisms for preventing and combating corruption in order to avoid unnecessary
duplication of work and to facilitate and promote effective cooperation and
implementation of the Convention. In this regard, we invite the secretariat of the
Conference to continue ensuring the necessary coordination with the relevant
international and regional organizations in the field of anti-corruption with a view to
further facilitating and enhancing synergies.
80. We encourage the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in coordination
with the Statistical Commission and in broad cooperation across the United N ations
system, to develop and share a comprehensive, scientifically sound and objective
statistical framework, grounded in methodological work and reliable data sources, to
support States in their efforts to measure corruption, its impact and all relevant aspects
of preventing and combating it, in order to inform and strengthen evidence -based
anti-corruption policies and strategies, consistent with the Convention.
81. We will continue to consider ways in which we can improve our joint capacities
to contribute to more effective and practical implementation of the Convention. We
recognize the need to strengthen measures and develop new approaches to assist
21-07229

17/18

A/RES/S-32/1

Our common commitment to effectively addressing challenges and
implementing measures to prevent and combat corruption and
strengthen international cooperation

States, at their request, in identifying and addressing challenges and gaps and
overcoming obstacles in the implementation of the Convention.
82. We also invite the Conference of the States Parties to the Convention to identify
gaps and challenges in the implementation of the Convention by taking into account
the results of the Implementation Review Mechanism, as wel l as any gaps and
corruption challenges within the international anti-corruption framework, and to
consider any recommendations by States parties to address the gaps and challenges
identified in such a way as to improve the Convention and the implementatio n thereof
as may be necessary. In this regard, and as a first step, we further invite the
Conference, in the future, after the conclusion of and evaluation of the findings from
the second review cycle, to organize a special session of the Conference on all aspects
of the asset recovery and return process, with a view to considering all options
available under the Convention, including exploring possible areas for improvement
to our international asset recovery framework.
83. We invite the Conference of the States Parties to the Convention to request the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to prepare a comprehensive report for the
Conference on the state of implementation of the Convention after the completion of
the current review phase, taking into account information on gaps, challenges, lessons
learned and best practices in preventing and combating corruption, in international
cooperation and in asset recovery since the Convention entered into force.
84. We encourage the Conference to conduct the necessary surveys on particular
gaps, challenges, lessons learned and best practices in prevention, criminalization,
law enforcement, international cooperation and asset recovery and return, to be
undertaken by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
85. We commit to implementing the present political declaration and invite the
Conference of the States Parties to the Convention, as the treaty body with prime
responsibility for promoting and reviewing the implementation of the Convention, to
follow up and build on the declaration. We commit to taking stock of the
implementation of the declaration and will consider holding a follow -up special
session of the General Assembly on corruption, as necessary, taking into account the
outcome of the follow-up by the Conference.
86. We invite Member States and other donors to provide extrabudgetary resources
for these purposes in accordance with the rules and procedures of the United Nations.

18/18

21-07229
