S/PV.7251

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7251st meeting

Wednesday, 27 August 2014, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Sir Mark Lyall Grant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Lamek
Ms. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Maes
Mr. Laro
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Dunn

Agenda
The situation in Libya

14-51870 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1451870*

S/PV.7251

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Germany, Italy and Libya to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Tarek Mitri,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2014/629, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Australia, France, Germany, Italy, Jordan,
Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea, Rwanda and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Chad, Chile, China, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, Republic
of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and United States of America
The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2174 (2014).
I now give the floor to Mr. Mitri.
Mr. Mitri: In recent days, armed confrontations,
which are both the cause and the result of the deep
divisions among Libyan political factions, have been
unprecedented in their gravity and, to be sure, very
alarming. The houe of representatives has resolved that
groups fighting under the name of Fajr Libya — Libya’s
Dawn — and Ansar Al-Sharia are terrorists and
outlaws. The Fajr Libya coalition charged that the
transitional Government and the newly elected house of

2/6

27/08/2014

representatives violated the constitutional declaration
and lost legitimacy, considering their call for foreign
intervention an act of treason. They asked the former
General National Congress to convene. The General
National Congress, the tenure of which expired at the
election of the new house of representatives, designated
Omar Al-Hasi as Prime Minister and asked him to form
a “national salvation” Government.
Since my last briefing to the Council, on 17 July,
(see S/PV.7218) armed battles, inflamed by air strikes,
continued almost uninterrupted in Tripoli, Benghazi
and other parts of the country. In Tripoli, we have
seen an unprecedented movement of population in an
attempt to escape the fighting. Conservative figures
of those displaced are estimated at over 100,000, with
at least another 150,000, including many migrant
workers, having fled the country to seek refuge abroad.
There is a general deterioration in living conditions.
Food, fuel, water and electricity are in short supply.
The departure of foreign medical staff and shortages in
medical supplies have rendered the plight of civilians
more critical. A rise in criminality has contributed to
a further worsening of the situation. It is also likely
that the fighting will result in the disperal of explosive
remnants of war and unexploded ordnance, posing a
further threat to civilians.
The use by all sides of heavy weapons in densely
populated areas has spread terror and contributed to
a growing number of innocent lives lost, including
those of children. In addition, there have been many
cases of kidnapping, the burning of houses, looting
and other acts of revenge. The damage inflicted on
public infrastructure in Tripoli’s southern and western
sections — including the airport, the main oil depot and
roads and bridges — is nothing less than tragic.
In the east, fighting continues between two
coalitions of forces comprised of Libya Shield units,
armed brigades and the Ansar Al-Sharia extremist
group, on the one hand, and forces allied to general
Khalifa Haftar and the Army Special Forces, on the
other. The violence has resulted in a significant number
of civilian casualties.
When I last briefed the Council, I reported on the
evacuation of international staff members of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) as a result
of the escalating conflict and the fighting in and around
the Janzour area, where our premises are located. We
continue to stress that this is a temporary measure and

14-51870

27/08/2014

The situation in Libya

that staff will be redeployed once security conditions
permit.
Notwithstanding that measure, the Mission has
remained closely engaged with developments in Libya.
On 7 August, a small team led by my deputy travelled
to Tripoli to explore options for an unconditional
ceasefire. The visit to Libya was facilitated by the
Italian Embassy, and I would like to thank Italy for its
generosity. During 12 days, the delegation met with a
wide range of political and military actors. While all
engaged constructively with regard to our proposals, it
is very clear that much more work is needed to overcome
mistrust among the parties to the conflict.
While the Mission intends to build on those talks,
we believe that a clear message needs to be sent to the
warring parties to remind them of their obligations under
international humanitarian law. I believe resolution
2174 (2014) has just done that, while also underlining
the need for constructive engagement on their part with
a United Nations-facilitated political dialogue.
On 4 August, we attended the inaugural session of
the newly elected house of representatives in Tobruk.
Regrettably, many efforts, including ours, to arrive
at an agreement over procedural and related issues
failed to ensure the full participation of all elected
members. A number of representatives decided to
boycott the sessions. While underlining the importance
of safeguarding Libya’s fragile transition, with the
house of representatives as the only legitimately elected
legislature, we also affirmed that every effort must be
exerted to enable parliamentarians who are boycotting
the house of representatives to join their colleagues.
Developments on the battlefield in Libya over
the past few weeks are a source of grave concern. In
particular, we strongly condemn the indiscriminate
shelling. Those responsible for the loss of civilian
lives and for the destruction of private property and
public infrastructure, as well as those responsible for
any ill-treatment and torture of prisoners, must be held
accountable. Of particular concern are reports from
Derna that an extremist group has conducted summary
trials and executions outside the judicial system.
In that regard, I welcome the declaration, on
17 August, by the Libyan General Prosecutor of his
intention to investigate crimes committed during the
recent fighting in Tripoli. I urge his office to initiate
impartial investigations, even in the absence of formal
complaints. I welcome also the recent statements by the

S/PV.7251

Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court and by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights reminding all parties to the conflict
that perpetrators of crimes against civilians, as well
as those who order or fail to stop them, are liable for
prosecution, as are those who incite violence.
The threat from the spread of terrorist groups has
become real. Their presence and activities in a number
of Libyan cities are known to all. At present, the chaotic
security situation and the very limited capacity of
the Government to counter that threat may well have
created fertile ground for mounting danger in Libya
and beyond.
In my previous briefing I qualified the aborted
18 and 19 June political dialogue meeting, which I had
intended to convene, as a missed opportunity. Every
unsuccessful dialogue initiative is a lost opportunity in
Libya. We need to remind Libyan political leaders and
brigade commanders that dialogue remains the only
alternative to a protracted armed confrontation. No
military solution is possible, and the present impasse
will be deepened further by the use of force. Although
the horizon for a political agreement seems distant,
the United Nations needs to spare no effort to bring
various actors to the dialogue table. Intimidation and
defamation should not distract us from the obligation of
being an impartial mediator.
With the exception of a minority suspicious of, or
hostile to, the role of the United Nations in Libya, there
is broad-based acceptance of UNSMIL’s presence,
as well as high expectations. The main and recurrent
demand is to see the United Nations contribute more
effectively to the protection of the civilian population.
There may be broad support in Libya for an enhanced
United Nations presence, but clarity on the modalities
and type of support that is to be realistically expected
is still lacking. Moreover, there is a great need to
seriously address Libyan misperceptions as a condition
for greater United Nations engagement in Libya.
Once again, we have been asked to play a greater
role in institution-building. An adequate response
would necessitate further developing UNSMIL’s
capacities. But that is not in itself a guarantee of the
achievement desired. Previous experience tells us that,
without collective Libyan political will and clearly
defined national priorities, UNSMIL is likely to face
difficulties in implementation. National ownership is
not only about ensuring that United Nations actions
accord with Libyan strategies; it also requires Libya’s

14-518703/6

S/PV.7251

The situation in Libya

continued and lasting receptivity to subsequent advice
and technical assistance. In addition, Libyan national
ownership involves making a consistent effort to ensure
the effective coordination of international support. In
its mandate for UNSMIL the Council asks the Mission
to play a leading role in that regard, but its success has
been limited. It is important that we see Libya playing
a coherent role in enabling concerted efforts. No less
important is the willingness of all friends of Libya to
allow their activities to be better coordinated.
As elsewhere in the region, radical transformations
have opened up new opportunities and raised hopes.
The Libyan experience illustrates the fact that transition
is fraught with great risks, some of which are owed to
perceived conflicting interests and mutual fears — the
legacy of more than four decades of despotic rule — as
well as to reactivated enmities and reinvented hatreds
in the struggle for power. Those risks also include
the possibility of Libya’s future being affected by
regional polarization and proxy rivalries. The threat
of the changes that the revolution initiated being
derailed is most likely growing. The descent into more
instability and greater uncertainty cannot be reversed
unless various actors in Libya’s public life commit,
in words and deeds, to a democratic political process.
That process cannot be reduced to the ballot box and
the emergence of numerical majorities and minorities.
Its progress is conditional on the upholding of the
principles of pluralism, inclusivity, the separation of
powers and adherence to agreed democratic values and
norms.
Many Libyans continue to be sceptical about the
political process in their country, and frustrated with
their political elites. Low participation in the two most
recent elections is an indication of the erosion of such
credibility. Disappointment, aggravated by the suffering
and fear provoked by armed confrontations, increases
the risk of a major setback for Libya. A large number of
Libyans, distressed or disillusioned, are contacting and
writing to us. But many others refuse to be discouraged.
We cannot shy away from supporting all of them — both
the disappointed and the determined — in this difficult
period of their country’s history.
Finally, I would like to thank the Council for its
support during the two years of my tenure, which
will end very soon. I would also like to express warm
words of appreciation to all the UNSMIL and United
Nations staff in Libya, national and international, for
the indefatigable spirit they have shown in spite of the

4/6

27/08/2014

enormous problems they have encountered and the
risks to their personal safety and security in carrying
out their work.
The President: I thank Mr. Mitri for his briefing.
On behalf of my colleagues on the Security Council, I
would like to express our appreciation for his efforts
over the past two years on the Libya dossier.
I now give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity
to address the Security Council at today’s meeting.
I would also like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
presidency of the Council this month, and to thank you
and the delegation of the United Kingdom for drafting
today’s resolution on Libya (resolution 2174 (2014)). I
am also grateful for all the consultations you held on
the resolution.
I would like to say, however, that I do not know why
the Libyan delegation was not invited to participate in
the entire meeting and was not seated in the Chamber
while the resolution was being adopted. Is this a new
practice in the Council, unanimously agreed on by its
members, or was it a decision by the President or by the
Secretariat? The fact is, I do not know why it was done.
Is there a particular message that the President or the
Council wishes to send the Libyan delegation?
I would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Tarek Mitri, for his briefing.
Since Mr. Mitri is preparing to leave us, I would like to
commend his savoir-faire, his abilities, his dedication,
his patience and all his efforts to help Libya emerge
from its current difficult situation. I would also like
to emphasize that during his two years as Head of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) he
has forged friendly relationships and earned the respect
of all who are familiar with UNSMIL’s mandate and the
difficult political and security situation in Libya. I am
firmly convinced that the majority of the Libyan people
respect and feel grateful to Mr. Mitri. There can be no
question that all who have met Mr. Mitri consider him
to be a brother and a friend. Since he has decided to
relinquish his job, we can only wish him every success
in his future career. We await his memoirs.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
welcome the appointment of Mr. Bernardino León to
replace Mr. Mitri. As the European Union’s Special
Representative for Libya, he is well acquainted with
the situation and the Mission in Libya. I would like to
14-51870

27/08/2014

The situation in Libya

congratulate him on the trust the Secretary-General
has placed in him and to reaffirm that the Libyan
Government will make every effort to help him carry
out his tasks.
The Council is of course aware that the situation
in Libya is complicated. However, since 13 July that
situation has become even more complicated and
threatens to turn into a large-scale civil war if it
is not dealt with carefully and, above all, by every
party involved. I have always personally ruled out the
possibility that a civil war might break out, but the
situation has changed. In the past, security incidents were
limited, isolated and rare, but the new confrontations
in Tripoli and its environs have taken place between
two armed groups using heavy weapons. Each of the
them has allies in all the other regions of the country.
Unfortunately, those two armed groups were the first
players to take part in the 17 February revolution. They
fought side by side against the dictatorship and tyranny.
They were also the two most heavily armed groups in
the period following the revolution.
Many believe that the power-sharing arrangement
between the two groups and the oversight of Tripoli
and the terrorist acts perpetrated by them against the
country’s authorities and their interference in the work
of the National Transitional Council are the main causes
of the present chaos. But it must also be recognized that
one of the two groups currently supports the house of
representatives and the Government, while the other
group is opposed to the house of representatives and
the Government and is calling into question their
legitimacy.
It is not a question of deciding who is right and who
is wrong in the context of the latest confrontations, since
all armed groups in Libya, including army units, are
acting for the most part outside the bounds of the law.
Those groups do not report to the Ministry of Defence
or the Government. But I would just like to say that
the destruction inflicted on State institutions and the
targeting of the Tripoli airport and aircraft, Government
headquarters, ministry headquarters and institutions of
State are all acts that could be considered serious crimes
for which their authors and instigators are responsible.
Similarly, those actors have to assume responsibility
for the death of innocent civilians, including young
people who were pushed into harm’s way in the war,
and for the displacement of people, the ransacking of
homes, the pillaging of public libraries — all of which
are serious crimes falling under the jurisdiction of the

S/PV.7251

International Criminal Court. Indeed, the Court has
commenced inquiries into those crimes.
All armed confrontations, regardless of their
location, create new animosities and new grounds for
reprisal, bringing about a new atmosphere that leaves
no room for patience and tolerance. Unfortunately,
in Libya, most political and religious leaders and the
media are inciting combat and disregard for the law
and for the State institutions. None of them today are
calling for tolerance, love or brotherhood, for refraining
from violence or allowing the principles of justice and
equality to prevail. Unfortunately, the principles and
precepts of Islam have not taken hold in the hearts of
the fighters.
There are many strong voices in the media that only
spread rumours, incite violence and misrepresent the
facts. Many of those voices belong to people with two
nationalities, who live outside of the country with their
families, who do not care about those who have died or
about the destruction, who are acting only with their
own personal interests in mind.
There is a crying need to help the Libyan people
disarm the armed groups, especially those possessing
heavy weapons. That is the only way to guarantee that
the carnage will stop and that the lives of young people
being used by the politicians will be spared. Those
who are clinging to power are using young people to
fuel a dirty war that violates all religious and moral
principles. Such principles are the sole guarantee for
keeping the war from being waged in the cities and for
not causing the displacement of populations, which we
have seen in recent weeks.
I believe the only choice the armed groups have,
if they want to lead a normal life and have any kind
of future, is to respect the decision of the house of
representatives to dissolve the armed groups and have
them lay down their arms. In that regard, two things
must happen. First, the groups must begin to understand
the importance of reforming the army. Secondly, the
armed groups must accept the presence of an Arab and
Muslim force, restricted in size, to help them lay down
and destroy their weapons. I believe that when the
house of representatives will have appointed a general
chief of staff from the ranks of the revolutionaries, a
new ethos within the army will be born. I hope that all
the armed groups will work with the new general chief
of staff once the armed groups have been disbanded.

14-518705/6

S/PV.7251

The situation in Libya

The situation in Tripoli and Benghazi has forced
the house of representatives to hold meetings in places
other than those two cities, which is not contrary to
the Constitutional Declaration, which provides that
the seat of the house of representatives is in the city
of Benghazi but that the Council can meet in other
cities. The international community must help the
Libyan house of representatives and the Government to
maintain control of the State and the entire territory of
the country, through the fight against terrorism and the
disarmament of armed groups.
We welcome the role played by the countries of the
region in helping the Libyan authorities restore peace
and stability. We welcome the outcome of the Foreign
Ministers meeting held in Cairo on 25 August. The final
communiqué of that meeting sets out several points,
including, first of all, halting all armed confrontation
in order to facilitate the political process and holding a
dialogue with all political parties that have renounced
violence in order to achieve reconciliation and
draft a new national constitution. The communiqué
emphasizes the important role of the countries of the
region, including in terms of following the situation
in Libya as it develops and the importance of Libya
participating in all regional and international initiatives
aimed at finding a solution to the crisis.
Second, it calls for all the militias and armed agents
to lay down their weapons through an incremental
approach. The groups must also renounce the military
option in the context of a consensus among all political
parties to set aside violence through a mechanism
supported by countries of the region.
Third, it underscores that foreign parties must
refrain from exporting weapons to illegal groups in
Libya and it stresses the importance of promoting
oversight of airports and other ports of entry into
Libya. Moreover, the Libyan State is the only party that
can request that weapons be imported, and only after
the approval of the Sanctions Committee.
Fourth, it stresses the importance of fighting
terrorism in all its forms, drying up its sources and
combating transnational organized crime and all illegal
activities.

6/6

27/08/2014

Fifth, it states the need to promote the role of
legitimate State institutions, including the council of
representatives, establish State institutions, including
the police and the army, and rehabilitate them through
specific programmes aimed at restoring peace. The
objective in that respect is to lay the foundation for
stability and peace and to promote development.
Sixth, it states that support must be provided to the
Libyan Government in order for it to exercise control
over its borders with neighbouring countries through a
comprehensive programme and to in order to put an end
to all illegal export activities.
Seven, it highlights that a mechanism should be
established for taking action when there is a failure to
comply with sanctions, including the sanctions targeted
against individuals and entities who undermine stability
and the political situation.
The resolution just adopted by the Security Council
is a positive milestone that sends a very clear message to
the parties to the conflict. However, the Libyan people
still await active efforts by the international community
in accordance with the plan adopted by the council of
representatives and the Government. That plan, which
I transmitted to the Council yesterday and which I
asked be circulated as an official document, is aimed at
restoring security and stability, dispelling the spectre
of fear and terrorism and enabling people to express
their legitimate views freely without being accused of
taking sides or being threatened with being killed or
kidnapped. Those are practices perpetrated by armed
groups against political figures, human rights workers
and all those who have fled the country because of such
threats. Many have also been killed.
Lastly, I would like to say that the freedom of
expression in Libya has been constrained by the actions
of armed groups and the absence of the rule of law. Our
hope is that all the parties will put the public interest
above their own personal interests.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion of
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

14-51870
