192

General Assembly-Forty-first Session

practice of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment,
Welcoming the decision of the Commission on Human
Rights, in its resolution 1986/50 of 13 March 1986, to extend for one year the mandate of the Special Rapporteur
to examine questions relevant to torture, 31
t. Takes note with appreciation ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General on the status of the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment; 120
2. Expresses its satisfaction at the number of States that
have signed or ratified the Convention since it was opened
for signature, ratification and accession on 4 February
1985;
3. Requests ali States that have not yet done so to
become parties to the Convention as a matter of priority;
4. Invites ali States, u pon ratification of or accession to
the Convention, to consider the possibility of making the
declarations provided for in articles 21 and 22 of the Convention;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Commission on Human Rights at its forty-third session
and to the General Assembly at its forty-second session a
report on the status ofthe Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
6. Decides to consider the report of the SecretaryGeneral at its forty-second session under the item entitled
"Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment".
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/135.

United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of
Torture

The General Assembly,
Recalling article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which states that no one shall be subjected to
torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment, 2
Again recalling the Declaration on the Protection of All
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,12 1
Recalling also its resolution 39/46 of to December 1984,
by which it adopted and opened for signature, ratification
and accession the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
Recalling further its resolution 36/ 151 of 16 December
1981, in which it noted with deep concern that acts oftorture took place in various countries, recognized the need
to provide assistance to the victims of torture in a purely
humanitarian spirit and established the United Nations
Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture,
Convinced that the struggle to eliminate torture includes
the provision of assistance in a humanitarian spirit to the
victims and members of their families,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 122
1. Expresses its gratitude and appreciation to those
Governments, organizations and individuals that have al-

120A/41/511.
121 Resolution 3452 (XXX), annex.
122 A/41/706.

ready contributed to the United Nations Voluntary Fund
for Victims of Torture;
2. Calls upon ali Governments, organizations and individuals in a position to do so to respond favourably to requests for initial as well as further contributions to the
Fund;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Board ofTrustees of
the Fund for the work it has carried out;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the support given to the Board ofTrustees ofthe Fund;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to make use of ali
existing possibilities, including the preparation, production and dissemination of information materials, to assist
the Board ofTrustees ofthe Fund in its efforts to make the
Fund and its humanitarian work better known and in its
appeal for contributions.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/136.

Assistance to student refugees in southern
Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 40/138 of 13 December 1985, in
which it, inter a/ia, requested the Secretary-General, in
co-operation with the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, to continue to organize and implementan effective programme of educational and other appropriate
assistance for student refugees from Namibia and South
Africa who have been granted asylum in Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia,
Having considered the report of the High Commissioner
on the assistance programme to student refugees from
South Africa and Namibia,123
Noting with appreciation that sorne of the projects
recommended in the report on assistance to student refugees in southern Africa have been successfully completed,
Noting with concern that the discriminatory and repressive policies which continue to be applied in South Africa
and Namibia cause a continued and increasing influx of
student refugees into Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and
Zambia,
Conscious of the burden placed on the limited financia!,
material and administrative resources of the host countries by the increasing number of student refugees,
Appreciating the efforts of the host countries to deal with
their student refugee populations, with the assistance of
the international community,
t. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;
2. Expresses its appreciatio'n to the Governments of
Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia for granting
asylum and making educational and other facilities available to the student refugees, in spite of the pressure which
the continuing influx of those refugees exerts on facilities
in their countries;
3. Also expresses its appreciation to the Governments
of Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia for the cooperation which they have extended to the High Commissioner on matters concerning the welfare of these refugees;
4. Notes with appreciation the financial and material
support provided for the student refugees by Member
121 A/41/55.1

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

States, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, other bodies of the United Nations
system and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations;
5. Requests the High Commissioner, in co-operation
with the Secretary-General, to continue to organize and
implement an effective programme of educational and
other appropriate assistance for student refugees from Namibia and South Africa who have been granted asylum in
Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia;
6. Urges ali Member States and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to continue contributing
generously to the assistance programme for student refugees, through financia! support of the regular programmes
of the High Commissioner and of the projects and programmes, including unfunded projects, which were submitted to the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa, 124 held at Geneva from 9 to
11 July 1984;
7. A/so urges ali Member States and ali intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to assist the
countries of asylum materially and otherwise to enable
them to continue to discharge their humanitarian obligations towards refugees;
8. Appeals to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Development Programme and ali other competent United Nations
bodies, as well as other international and nongovernmental organizations, to continue providing
humanitarian and development assistance so as to facilitate and expedite the settlement of student refugees from
South Africa and Namibia who have been granted asylum
in Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia;
9. Calls upan agencies and programmes of the United
Nations system to continue co-operating with the Secretary-General and the High Commissioner in the implementation of humanitarian programmes of assistance
for the student refugees in southern Africa;
10. Requests the High Commissioner, in co-operation
with the Secretary-General, to continue to keep the matter
under review, to apprise the Economic and Social Council,
at its second regular session of 1987, of the current status
ofthe programmes and to report to the General Assembly
at its forty-second session on the implementation of the
present resolution.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986
41/137.

Humanitarian
Djibouti

assistance

to

refugees

12 4 See A/CONF.125/1, para.
125 A/41/515.

Aware of the heavy economic and social burden placed
on the Government and people of Djibouti as a result of
the presence of refugees and of the consequent impact on
the development and infrastructure of the country,
Appreciating the determined and sustained etforts made
by the Government of Djibouti, despite its modest economic resources and limited means, to cope with the
growing needs of the refugees,
Noting with appreciation the steps taken by the Government of Djibouti, in close co-operation with the High
Commissioner, to implement appropriate and lasting solutions in respect of the refugees in Djibouti,
Appreciating the assistance provided by Member States,
the specialized agencies, intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations and voluntary agencies to the
relief and rehabilitation programmes for the refugees and
displaced persons in Djibouti,
1. Takes note of the report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on humanitarian assistance to
refugees in Djibouti and appreciates his etforts to keep
their situation under constant review;
2. Welcomes the steps taken by the Government of
Djibouti, in close co-operation with the High Commissioner, to implement adequate and lasting solutions in respect of the refugees in Djibouti;
3. Expresses its appreciation to Member States, the specialized
agencies,
intergovernmental
and
nongovernmental organizations and voluntary agencies for
their assistance to the relief and rehabilitation programmes for the refugees and displaced persons in
Djibouti;
4. Urges the High Commissioner to intensify his etforts
to mobilize, on an emergency basis, the necessary resources to implement lasting solutions in respect ofthe refugees in Djibouti;
5. Calls upan ali Member States, the organizations of
the United Nations system, the specialized agencies and
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
to continue to support the determined and constant etforts
made by the Government of Djibouti to cope with the urgen! needs of the refugees and to implement lasting solutions in respect of their situation;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-second session, through the
Economic and Social Council, on the implementation of
the present resolution.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

in

The General Assembly,
Recallingits resolution 40/134 of 13 December 1985 on
humanitarian assistance to refugees in Djibouti, as well as
ali its previous resolutions on this question,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees on humanitarian assistance to refugees in Djibouti,125
Deeply concerned about the plight of the refugees and
displaced persons in the country, which has been aggravated by the devastating etfects of the prolonged
drought,

193

41/138.

Assistance to refugees in Somalia

The General Assemb/y,
Recalling its resolutions 35/180 of 15 December 1980,
36/153 of 16 December 1981, 37/174 of 17 December
1982, 38/88 of 16 December 1983, 39/104 of 14 November 1984 and 40/132 of 13 December 1985 on thequestion
of assistance to refugees in Somalía,
Taking note of the report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on assistance to refugees in
Somalía, 126 in particular section IV of that report,
A/so taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
on assistance to refugees in Africa, 84

3l
lch A/41/514
