THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

2444”

MEETING:

NEW

26 MAY

1983

YORK.

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2444)
of the agenda

The situation

....................................

...............................................

1
1

in Namibia:

Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritius to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (!V15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15761) . . . . . . .

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Of$cial Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively.to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965,. became fully operative on that date.

2444th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,
President: Mr. M. KAMANDA

wa KAMANDA

26 May 1983, at 10.30 a.m.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lusaka (President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia) and the other’
members of the delegation took places at the Council table.

(Zaire).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2439th meeting, I invite Mr. Nujoma, President of the South West
Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), to take a place
at the Council table.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2444)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nujoma took a
piace at the Council table.

2. The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Mauritius to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15761)

4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with decisions taken at previous meetings on
this item [2439th to 2443rd meetings], I invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Australia,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic Yemen, Egypt,
Ethiopia, Gabon, the Gambia, the Federal Republic of
Germany, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Jamaica, Japan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Liberia, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mali, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, the
Niger, Nigeria, Panama, Qatar, Romania, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, the
United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia and Zambia to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

The meeting was called to order at II.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Tbe situation fn Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Mauritius to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zarif(Afghanistun). Mr. Hadj Azzout (Algeria), Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola), Mr. 3oseph (Australia), Mr. Hashim (Bangladesh), Mr. MoseIey (Barbados), Mr. Adjbade (Benin), Mr.
Legwaila (Botswana), Mr. Tsvetkov (Bulgaria), Mr. Pelletier (Canada), Mr. Trucco (Chile), Mr. Malmierca (Cuba),
Mr. Moushoutas (Cyprus), Mr. AI-Ashtal (Democratic
Yemen), Mr. KhaIil (Egypt), Mr. Ibrahim (Ethiopia), Mr.
Davin (Gabon), Mr. Blain (Gambia), Mr. van Well (Federal Republic of Germany), Mr. Kaba (Guinea), Mr. Rao
(India), Mr. Kusumaatmadja
(Indonesia), Mr. Shearer
(Jamaica), Mr. Kuroda (Japan), Mr. Wabuge (Kenya), Mr.
Abulhassan (Kuwait), Mrs. Jones (Liberia), Mr. Burwin
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Traore (Mali), Mr. Marin
Bosch (Mexico), Mr. Erdenechuluun (Mongolia). Mr. Mrani
Zentar (Morocco), Mr. Chissano (Mozambique), Mr. Oumarou (Niger), Mr. Fafowora (Nigeria), Mr. Cabrera (Panama).
Mr. Jamal (Qatar), Mr. Marinescu (Romania), Mr. Niasse
(Senegal). Ms. Gonthier (Seychelles), Mr. Stevens (Sierra
Leone), Mr. Adan (Somalia), Mr. von Schirnding (South

(S/lmiO);

Letter dated 13 May 1983 from tbe Permanent Representative of India to the United Nations addressed to
tbe President of the Security Council (S/15761)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2439th meeting, 1. invite the representative of Mauritius to take a
place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Maudave (Mauritius) took a place at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2439th meeting,
I invite the President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia and the other members of the delegation to take
places at the Security Council table.
1

Africa), Mr. Fonseka (Sri Lanka), Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian
Arab Republic), Mr. Slim (Tunisia), Mr. Kirca (Turkey),
Mr. Owiny (Uganda), Mr. Rupia (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Bassole (Upper Volta), Mr. Martini Urdaneta
(Venezuela), Mr. L.e Kim Chung (Viet Nam), Mr. Mojsov
(Yugoslavia) and Mr. Goma (Zambia) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the CounciI chamber.

11. We offer a snecial tribute to the suffer-inn neonle of
Namibia and reiierate unreservedly our solidarity.with
SWAPO.
12. As a prelude to my delegation’s contribution to yet
another Council debate on the protracted issue of Namibia, we offer the following remarks made here on 23
May by the representative of the United Kingdom:

5. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have received letters from the representatives of Argentina, the German Democratic Republic and Hungary in
which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on’ the Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent
of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule
37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

“At the time of independence, Namibia will face a
difficult economic transition. . . . We have long experience and useful technical skills, developed through
economic co-operation with many other countries,
which, we believe, could help.to promote Namibia’s
longer-term
economic and social development.*’
[2439th meeting, para 61.1
13. When these remarks were made I suspect that they
were first greeted with retorts to the effect that independence should be granted first and the question of economic and social development would follow.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Muiiiz (Argentina),
Mr. Ott (German Democratic Republic) and Mr. Rdcz
(Hungary) took places at the side of the Council chamber.

14. My Government, while cognisant of the primacy of
independence for Namibia in these debates, wishes to
take as a point of departure the issue of economic and
social development, if only to provide another perspective and a pointer to the graveness of the question before
us.

6. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
Members of the Council have before them document
S/15791, containing a note by the President of the Security Council, dated 25 May 1983, and the text of a statement by the representative of Seychelles.

15. “South West Africa’*, as it was called in 1945 and
before, when the issue was first touched on by the United
Nations, is a problem which is as old as the United
Nations itself. The generation of South West Africans
born in 1945, who reached 21 years of age in 1966, had
hopes, I want to believe, in 1966, more than ever before,
that their life-chances would take a dramatic turn for the
better with the adoption of General Assembly resolution
2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966. As we all know only too
well, resolution 2145 (XXI) terminated South Africa’s
Mandate to administer the Territory of. South West
Africa.
‘_

7. The first speaker is Mr. Augustine Stevens, Minister
of State for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Sierra
Leone, whom I welcome. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
8. Mr. STEVENS (Sierra Leone): On behalf of the
Government of the Republic of Sierra Leone, and on my
own behalf, Sir, I wish to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of May and to thank the Council, through you, for
acceding to our request and granting us the opportunity
to participate in this important debate on Namibia. Our
thanks are also due to the Secretary-General for his very
concise and objective report on this item [S/15776$

16. What happened to the hopes of the 1945 generation
of Namibians? What is the life-chance or the quality of
life, the economic and social situation, of that generation
compared-if
comparison can be made-with their peers
in sister African countries that attained independence in
1966?

9. To you, Mr. President, I must say that my delegation
has been highly impressed by the manner in which you
have conducted these Council meetings. It is indeed a
happy and gratifying coincidence that a distinguished son
of Africa, in the person of yourself, should be presiding
over this debate on Namibia, a problem which our two
sister countries view with great concern.

17. We need not guess, nor search for, answers to these
questions; scars on the faces of untold numbers of Namibians at home, and abroad as refugees, who have survived and continue to be the target of South Africa’s
race-motivated repressive actions, South Africa’s actions
in contravention of internationally accepted conventions
on human rights and its policy and practice of apartheid
are vivid expressions of the objective reality facing the
1945 generation of Namibians.

10. Our congratulations are also due to those delegations that have addressed the Council before me for their
constructive contributions to the debate. We have in mind
here, among others, Mr. Lusaka, President of the United
Nations Council for Namibia, Mr. Rao of India, speaking
on behalf of the Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement, and Mr. Maudave in his capacity as Chairman of
the Group of African States.

18. And what do we offer as potentials and guarantees
for the economic and social development of the generation of Namibians born in 1966, at the time when the
2

General Assembly terminated South Africa’s Mandate?
At the prime age of 17-1966 to 1983-thii generation at
home and abroad sits listening to and awaiting the outcome of these debates. What chances are there that this
solemn session of the Council will provide anything other
than what this generation might call “the usual”?

relations with South Africa, in spite of various Assembly
resolutions which culminated in the call for Member
States to refrain from diplomatic, consular and other contacts with South Africa.
24. The report of the International Conference in Sup
port of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence, which was convened in Paris from 25 to 29 April
1983: provides a startling account of how entrenched in
their support of South Africa some Member States are.
The areas of co-operation between South Africa and these
Member States include technical and material resources
supply for the development and acquisition of nuclear
capability by South Africa; military security and defence
pacts in breach of the arms embargo imposed by the
Council; economic and trade agreements which not only
have an economic destabilization effect on Namibia, but
also rob it of its natural resources, particularly the country’s uranium supply and marine life.

19. It is, indeed, a telling comment on this our United
Nations-and,
yea, on the Council-that
any segment of
the world, any nationality and any age group should find
reason for despair and be led to conclude that, collectively, we cannot be a source of hope and strength and
stand resolutely in support of the quest for justice, freedom and equality.
20. At 38 years of age or older, at 17 or younger, Namibians deserve now, more than ever, the fullest assurances that we in the United Nations will live up to the
terms of our solemn obligation under Article I, paragraph
1, of the Charter of the United Nations:

25. With such a range of support coming from quarters
that are sympathetic to the cause of Namibia, it should
be no wonder then that South Africa has remained
intransigent. Herein lies the challenge to this body.

“To maintain international peace and security, and to
that end: to take effective collective measures for the
prevention and removai of threats to the peace, and for
the suppression of acts ‘of aggression or other breaches
of the peace, and to bring about by peaceful means,and in conformity with the principles of justice and
international law, adjustment or settlement of intemational disputes or situations which might lead to a
breach of the peace.”

26. In all of these developments, however, we are
impressed with the moral commitment of a host of our
numbers to seeing Namibia assume its rightful place in
our world as an independent State, and exercise its inalienable rights which are part and parcel of this status.
. ..
27. In this regard, my delegation takes note of, and
remains impressed with, the untiring efforts of the five’
Western members of the Council, the front-line States
and Nigeria, which have narrowed the scope of the issue,
leaving us with the task of defining the constitutional
framework to serve as guide for an independent Namibia
and, indeed, the electoral process that would bring about
the country’s independence peacefully.

21. With regard to Namibia, living up to the terms of
our obligations under the Charter requires that we keep in
focus the intransigence of the racist r&ime of South
Africa and its avowed commitment to holding the rest of
us to ransom. Records of the Organization are replete
with examples of South Africa’s prevarication and contempt for all that the United Nations and, indeed, the
Council have attempted in the quest to put an end to
South Africa’s acts of aggression against the defenceless
people of Namibia and neighbouring African States, particularly the front-line States, to maintain peace in that
region.

28. The efforts of the United Nations Council for Namibia, and especially its President, and those of the
Secretary-General in touring and consulting with leaders
in the region of southern Africa, as well as his unequivocal stand and the challenge he has lodged on the doorstep
of the Council, are worthy of our commendation.

22. But even as we focus on the racist regime of South
Africa, its allies, some of whom are on record as having
the best intentions for Namibia, should not escape our
attention, as they give us reason to suspect that they, too,
could be partners in crime against humanity and particularly the long-persecuted and oppressed people of Namibia.

29. We have come close to a solution if indeed we agree
that what remains is a definition of a constitutional
framework and an electoral process. We can ill afford
any attempts to steer us away from this course.
30. My delegation wishes at this point to reiterate that
it stands firm behind Council resolution 435 (1978), as
the only legitimate basis for negotiating Namibia’s independence. In this regard, we avail ourselves of this opportunity to reaffirm our conviction that the people of
Namibia are entitled to the exercise of their inalienable
right to independence and self-determination in a united
Namibia, including Walvis Bay, Penguin Island and
other islands within its territorial boundaries; that the
United Nations has direct responsibility, through the
United Nations Council for Namibia, for the administra-

23. This admonition is offered against the background
information contained in the recently distributed report
of the United Nations Council for Namibia’ with particular reference to part five, paragraphs 971 to 1153, concerning contacts between Member States and South Africa
since the adoption of General Assembly resolutions ES8/2 and 36/121 B of 14 September and 10 December
1981. Paragraphs 48 to 112 of the report contain indications of the extent to which some Member States have
been engaged in direct or indirect economic and trade
3
--_._-__. .__

tion of Namibia until such time as the country attains
independence; and that we regard SWAP0 as the sole
and authentic representative of the people of Namibia.

38. The PRESIDENT
(interpretatimfiom
RemhI: The
next speaker is Mr. Albert0 P&ho Owiny, the Minister of
State for Foreign Affairs of Uganda. I welcome him and
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

31. Extraneous issues now advocated in some quarters
as pre-conditions for Namibia’s independence, such as
the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola, casting
Namibia’s
independence in cold-war terms, do not
impress my delegation in the least to warrant a change in
our position. We believe that independence for Namibia
should continue to be viewed primarily as a decolonization issue and thus should be debated strictly in this
context.

39. Mr. OWINY (Uganda): Mr. President, I express my
gratitude to you and the members of the Council for giving me an opportunity to participate in this debate.
40. It is a pleasure for my delegation to see you, Sir, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zaire, a neighbouring
country with which Uganda enjoys warm relations, presiding over the Council’s work. We are confident that,
given your wide experience in international affairs, you
will guide the work of the Council with great success.

32. Angola is a sovereign State. The Council has not
found its bilateral relations with Cuba a threat to international peace and security, which would make its relations
with Cuba a violation of the Charter of the United
Nations. It is thus not within our jurisdiction, we believe,
to question or take issue with Angola’s relations with
Cuba, which would be tantamount to questioning the
sovereignty of Angola and interfering in its internal
affairs.

41. I address the Council as the representative of one of
the countries that was mandated by the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, meeting at New Delhi from 7 to 12 March
1983, to participate in the present deliberations of the
Council on the question of Namibia. In calling for this
meeting, and mandating 31 Ministers for Foreign Affairs
to participate in and follow closely the, Council deliberations, the Non-Aligned Movement has once again underscored the importance it attaches to the decolonization
question of Namibia, This demonstrates its commitment
to the struggle of the Namibian people and confidence in
the ability of the Organization to design effective means
for the implementation
of the United Nations plan
endorsed in Council resolution 435 (1978).

33. The glaring fact is that the conditionality of withdrawing Cuban troops from Angola is a pretext behind
which the racist and oppressive regime of Pretoria wishes
to conceal its illegal occupation of Namibia, using that
country as a military base for the acts of aggression it has
continued to wage on the front-line States.
34. The events in southern Africa which took place on
the eve of the commencement of these debates are another
manifestation of the graveness of the policy and practice
of apartheid. It is regrettable that lives and property continue to be lost and endangered with the persistence of
this problem.

42. About tive years ago, the hopes of the international
community were raised when, on the initiative of the five
Western countries with close political, economic and rnil:
itary relations with South Africa, the Council adopted
resolution 435 (1978) as a basis for Namibia’s independence. We were promised then that Namibia would
achieve freedom within a year. Members of the Western
contact group of five undertook to ensure South Africa’s
compliance with resolution 435 (1978) and the United
Nations plan.

35. In conclusion, we urge that a call be made for the
immediate
implementation
of resolution 435 (1978)
which, in essence, has brought us to now resolving the
issue of the constitutional framework and electoral process in Namibia. It is equally important that concern be
given to creating an atmosphere in Namibia that would
facilitate free and fair elections.

43. The last live years have been a frustrating experience
for all who desire to see Namibia independent. Expectations have been raised only to be replaced by despair.
Rather than seeing progress towards the goal of independence, we have been witnessing South Africa’s use of one
pretext after another to derail the United Nations plan.

36. To this end, we must ensure an effective voter education and registration programme; .free assembly that
would permit SWAP0 and any other political parties to
participate in an electoral process without intimidation or
threat to their lives and property; the de-SouthAfricanization of Namibia, that is, the removal of all
apartheid tendencies in that Territory; and increased
responsibilities for the United Nations Council for Namibia in the electoral process.

44. Despite South Africa’s prevarications Africa did
not lose patience; it continued, through the front-line
States and Nigeria, to negotiate with the contact group in
good faith. The front-line States and Nigeria conducted
intensive consultations with the contact group to remove
all obstacles hampering the implementation
of resolution
435 (1978). As the latest report of the Secretary-General
[S/157763 indicates, progress was made towards solving
the new issues which South Africa had raised. Agreement
was reached on principles concerning the Constituent
Assembly and the Constitution of an independent Na-

37. We further appeal to the international community
and particularly to the allies of South Africa, through
your good offices, Mr. President, and those of the
Secretary-General, for support of the type that would
ensure an atmosphere conducive to free and fair elections
in Namibia.
.4

mibia. Substantial progress was made on other outstanding matters, including the composition and deployment
of the United Nations Transition Assistance Group
(UNTAG). Indeed, so high were the hopes of implementing the United Nations plan that arrangements were set
in motion to recruit staff for UNTAG. The only outstanding issue which remained was the electoral system.
The international community thus eagerly expected the
Council to meet and adopt the enabling resolution.

49. As I stated earlier, it is about five years since the
adoption of resolution 435 (1978), which we were assured
would be implemented within one year. Yet to this day
South Africa continues. to defy the Council. The time has
now come for the Council to shoulder the responsibilities
assigned to it by the Charter and implement its own decisions on this matter. Failure to act will only undermine
the authority and confidence reposed in the Council.
50. the situation in Namibia and southern Africa arising
from the illegal occupation of the Territory is grave. At
the 2439th meeting, the President of SWAPO, Mr. Sam
Nujoma, gave us a vivid account of the untold suffering
that Namibians, both within and outside the Territory,
continue to endure at the hands of South Africa. Apart
from being denied the fundamental
right to selfdetermination, the people of Namibia are prevented from
enjoying all elementary human rights, forced to join the
South West African Force, tortured and maimed. The
economic resources of the country are being plundered,
contrary to Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the Natural
Resources of Namibia.s South Africa utilizes Namibia as
a base for committing acts of aggression and destabilization against-the front-line States. To this day, South Aft-i- .
can troops continue to occupy the southern part of .
Angola.

45. It is well known that the only matter which is holding up Namibia’s independence is the injection into the
negotiations of the so-called linkage between the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola and Namibia’s
independence by a member of the contact group, namely,
the United States.
46. As I stated during the thirty-seventh session of the
General Assembly,3 Uganda sees no justification for any
linkage between Namibian independence and the presence of Cuban military personnel in Angola. The former
is a clear-cut colonial issue, and has been treated as such
by the United Nations and by the entire. international
community. The latter, on the other hand, is a bilateral
arrangement, which is by no means unique, between two
independent, sovereign States. It is an historical fact that
the presence of Cuban military personnel in Angola was
occasioned in the first place by South African aggression
against Angola, which continues to this day in the southern region of Angola.

51. Only last Monday, Pretoria mounted an air raid
against Mozambique, at the very time when the Council
was commencing consideration of the Namibian problem.
That is the latest in a series of raids and subversive activities which South Africa has carried out against Angola,
Botswana, Seychelles, Mozambique, Lesotho, Zimbabwe,
Zambia and other African States.

47. We note with satisfaction, however, that a member
of the Western contact group, namely, France, has publicly dissociated itself from the linkage. We call upon the
others to follow that example.

52. Uganda condemns in the strongest terms those
aggressive acts. In this regard, the President of the Republic of Uganda, Mr. A. Milton Obote, made a statement
yesterday on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU), in which he
declared, inter alia:

48. As a result of the linkage and the attendant intransigence of South Africa, the process of negotiation on independence has been paralysed. The international community has felt indignant and has expressed its concern
at the lack of progress. The Conference of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, and the International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the
Namibian People for Independence underscored the fact
that Namibia remains the responsibility of the United
Nations alone. The Secretary-General,
in his lucid
report, has stated that he regards the problem of Namibia as his special responsibility in view of the unique
relationship between the United Nations and the people
of Namibia. He has also expressed his concern at the
delay in implementing the Council resolution. The international community thus considers it appropriate that
the Council should once again examine the problem.
Both the declaration issued at New Delhi by the Seventh
Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries [S/l5675 and Corr. 1 and 2, annex,
sect. I, para. 491 and the Paris Declaration on Namibia”
issued by the International Conference in Support of the
Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence, call
for a meeting of the Council so that it can reassert itself
and shoulder its responsibilities concerning the implementation of resolution 435 (1978).

“While we celebrate this historic day, we are at the
same time reminded of the fact that the racist, criminal
South African apartheid regime continues to occupy
the territory of an OAU member State, namely, the
People’s Republic of Angola, and to carry out acts of
subversion and aggression against the African frontline States. We condemn unreservedly and in the
strongest terms the South African apartheid regime’s
violation of the sovereignty of the People’s Republic of
Mozambique. We also demand that the South African
regime immediately remove its forces from Angolan soil.
The cowardly raid carried out by the heinous South
African regime in Maputo only serves to strengthen
our determination to eradicate the evil and inhuman
system of apartheid from our continent.”
53. As I had occasion to warn the Council in April 1981
[2276th meeting], the illegal occupation of Namibia is not
a case of an ordinary illegality. It constitutes a breach of
the peace, has given rise to continuous aggression and
5

clearly constitutes a danger to international peace and
security. It falls squarely within the purview of Article 39
of the Charter of the United Nations.

and authentic representative, a liberation
means, including armed struggle.

struggle by all

59. I wish to express our appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative, Mr. Ahtisaari, for
their efforts in trying to achieve independence for Namibia and to defuse the explosive situation which the illegal occupation gives rise to. We agree with the views he
expressed in his. report where he stated:

54. The Council has a solemn responsibility towards
the people of Namibia. It is therefore incumbent on it to
bring a rapid end to this illegality. The purpose of this
series of meetings is to examine ways and means of implementing resolution 435 (1978). My delegation believes
that, in order to expedite this process, it would be useful
for the Council to stipulate a definite time-frame for the
implementation
of resolution 435 (1978). The hand of the
Secretary-General should be strengthened and the central role of the United Nations in bringing about the
independence of Namibia should be reaffirmed. In our
view, the Council should keep the situation under constant review until the process is completed. In the event
that South Africa continues to defy the decisions of the
Council, the Council should consider imposing ,the
appropriate punitive measures under Chapter VII of the
Charter.

“I believe that the settlement of the Namibian question
is of overriding importance for the future peace and
prosperity of the entire region. For this, reason, I urge
that the Namibia problem be regarded as a primary
question in its own right, the solution of which will in
itself ease other tensions in the region and be in the
long-term interest of all concerned. . . . I must repeat
that I regard the independence of Namibia as the essential and primary issue, which we must now face up to
without further delay.” {S/15776, para. 20.1
60. I wish also to extend a well-deserved tribute to Mr,
Paul Lusaka, President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, and his colleagues in the Council for the valuable work they have done in preparing Namibia for
nationhood.

55. It will be recalled that, under resolution 439 (1978),
the Council warned South Africa that, if it did not cooperate with the Secretary-General in the implementation of resolutions 385 (1976), 43 1 (1978) and 435 (1978),
the Council would meet forthwith to initiate appropriate
actions under the Charter including measures contemplated under Chapter VII, so as to ensure South Africa’s
compliance with those resolutions.

61. In conclusion, I wish to commend the front-line
States for the steadfast support they have given to the
liberation struggle in southern Africa in spite of the heavy
odds they face. I also take this opportunity to reaffi
the
solidarity and support of the Government and people of
Uganda with the people of Namibia in their just struggle
for independence under the leadership of SWAPO, their
sole and authentic representative.

56. The OAU and SWAP0 have declared that they are
ready to proceed with the immediate implementation
of
the United Nations plan for Namibia. Thus the front-line
States and Nigeria have fulfilled their obligations in this
undertaking. Unfortunately, the Western contact group
has as yet to fulfil its part in this arrangement.

62. The PRESIDENT
(inrerprerarion from French):
Before .I call on the next speaker, I should like to welcome
to the Council table Mr. Witness Mangwende, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Zimbabwe. I warmly welcome him
on behalf of the Council.

57. It is high time the’ Council reasserted itself in the
fulfilment of its responsibilities. Uganda maintains that
resolution 435 (1978) remains the only basis for a peaceful settlement of the Namibian question. There can be no
satisfactory solution outside the framework of resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978).

63. The next speaker is the representative of the Federal
Republic of Germany. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

58. We in Uganda have always maintained that any
discussion of a settlement of the Namibian question must
be based on certain fundamental principles. These principles are: first, that the people of Namibia have an inalienable right to self-determination,
freedom and national
independence in a united Namibia which includes Walvis
Bay, Penguin Island and other offshore islands; secondly,
that Namibia is a special responsibility of the United
Nations; thirdly, that the occupation by South Africa
and its fraudulent constitutional
schemes for the socalled internal settlement are illegal and must be condemned; fourthly, that the exploitation of Namibia’s
resources by both South African and other foreign interests, while the illegal occupation continues, are illegal and
constitute a violation of the Charter; and tifthly, that the
people of Namibia, in the face of the occupier’s intransigence, have a right to wage through SWAPO, their sole

64. Mr. van WELL (Federal Republic of Germany):
Mr. President, thank you for permitting my delegation to
participate in this debate on Namibia. I am convinced
that under your able guidance, which we have been able
to witness on many previous occasions, this debate will
fulfil its purpose of doing everything possible to bring to
the long-tested people of Namibia their dearly-sought
independence at the earliest possible time.
65. My country, as is well known, has historic ties with
Namibia and therefore has taken a .particular interest in
the efforts of the United Nations to bring independence to
this last Territory in Africa, which, in our view, has for far
too long been waiting for the chance to take its fate into
its own hands. The other overriding reason for my
Government’s long-standing commitment to and support
6

70. In the view of my delegation, the present debate can
play an important part in improving conditions conducive to implementation.
The fact of this debate itself;
furthermore, the presence of a large number of Ministers
for Foreign Affairs from front-line and other African
States, as well as non-aligned countries, and the large
number of speakers in the debate all bear testimony to
the high importance attributed by the whole intemational community to the Namibian question. By this
demonstration,
important. general awareness is still
further heightened that the Namibian problem can no
longer remain unsolved.

for Namibian independence is our concern for peace and
stability in southern Africa.
66. It was with dismay and deep concern that my
Government learned of the latest escalation of violence in
South Africa and Mozambique, which has once more
claimed many human lives. The Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Genscher, has just stated:
“It is our declared policy to reject every instance of
the use of force in the pursuit of political goals, no
matter who resorts to such action. In our view, the
change urgently needed in South Africa should be
brought about by political consensus. We condemn
any’ breach of international law inherent in abuse of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of neighbouring States. This practice of violating national boundaries must be stopped immediately, since incursions of
this nature dangerously aggravate.tensions in sbuthern Africa and could become a serious threat to
peace.”

71. The comprehensive and objective report submitted
by the Secretary-General ‘[S/15776J has been welcomed
by my Government, as it expresses in a very commendable Way the concerns of the international community
over the delays retarding the independence of Namibia,
and the Secretary-General rightly makes himself the
spokesman of these concerns.
72. At the same time that these concerns are legitimately
voiced, my delegation-basing
itself on its experience in
these negotiations-has
to warn that the necessary climate of confidence must not be destroyed by understandable dismay at the prolonged lack of implementation.
To everyone in this Council chamber it is well known that
the pre-implementation
meeting at Geneva failed in January 1981 because of the prevailing distrust and lack of
confidence between the parties concerned, not excluding
distrust of the United Nations as a whole.

67. When my country first was elected to the Security
Council in 1977, after having joined the United Nations
in 1973, we considered,it our duty to join with four other
Western members of the Council in order to help actively
in bringing about a negotiated settlement for the question of Namibia. It was possible to define, within one
year’s time, a settlement plan which has been accepted by
all parties concerned, first of all by the Namibians themselves but also by the administering Power, South Africa,
and, not the least, by the international community as the
only way to the independence of Namibia. The plan
which the contact group worked out, in close COoperation with all parties concerned, has been endorsed
by resolution 435 (1978), which, to this day, is the only
basis for the coming independence of Namibia. I should
like to point out specifically that, without the cooperation of the front-line States, that is, Angola, Botswana, Mozambique, the United Republic of Tanzania
and Zambia, later joined by .Zimbabwe, and supported
by Nigeria, the result would not have been possible.
Their sense of the possible and feasible has been an
important asset in this negotiation process.

73. The contact group has undertaken, in the time since
that meeting, to strengthen the confidence between the
parties concerned in order to establish the basis for
implementation.
74. The first step on this way was to bring about a general agreement on the outlines of constitutional principles
which will be incorporated into the Constitution of an’
independent Namibia‘ by its dwn Constituent Assembly
to be elected according to the provisions of resolution 435
(1978). The discussions which the five Western States
undertook with SWAP0 and the internal parties in Namibia, as well as with South Africa, the front-line States
and the United Nations Secretariat showed that, after
some initial hesitation, this approach was considered to
be helpful. By the spring of 1982, the work on the constitutional principles was almost completed, and following
consultations of the contact group with the front-line
States, Nigeria and SWAP0 in July and August 1982,
final agreement was reached on these principles so that
they could be transmitted to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and issued as a document [S/25287).

68. My Government shares the deep regret and great
conccm that, in spite of the general acceptance of resolution 435 (1978), Namibia still has not gained independence. Almost five years have elapsed since the adoption
of resolution 435 (1978), during which untold efforts
were undertaken to bring this resolution to implementation. The history of these efforts is well known and has
been reflected by numerous speakers before me. I shall
not endeavour to recount them all. Suffice it to say that
the main reason for the lack of implementation
of resolution 435 (1978) is the absence of political resolve on the
part of the main party .to the conflict to live up to the
obligations undertaken by accepting this resolution.

75. As work on the constitutional principles drew to an
end, the contact group concentrated on other outstanding
issues which, likewise, had to be settled in order to generate the confidence necessary for the implementation
of
resolution 435 (1978). In the New York consultations of
July and August 1982, the contact group settled these
matters with the front-line States, Nigeria and SWAP0
and, in parallel talks in Washington, also with South

69. Accordingly, the main task before us in the ongoing
negotiations, as well as here in’ the present Council
debate, is to bring about the necessary conditions for
implementation
of resolution 435 (1978).
7

of the Charter of the United Nations with regard to the
peaceful settlement of disputes is not an empty phrase
but can become political reality even in difficult circumstances. Our hope is that the Namibian undertaking will
eventually, and soon, be crowned by full success. Failure
would only satisfy those who do not believe in the peaceful settlement of disputes and reconciliation. The Federal
Republic of Germany remains committed to those principles, which it accepted as obligatory when joining the
United Nations. We shall therefore do our share as reso-.
lutely as in the beginning to ensure final success in the
efforts to bring independence to Namibia as soon as possible by internationally recognized free and fair elections
on the basis of Council resolution 435 (1978).

Africa. As a result, on 24 September 1982, representatives
of the parties involved in these New York consultations
met with the Secretary-General and informed him that
the questions that had been raised as to the impartiality of
the United Nations as an arbiter for implementation and
with reference to the composition of UNTAG did not any
longer present difftculties with regard to the implementation of resolution 435 (1978).
76. A further result of the consultations in New York
last summer was the certainty that a decision concerning
the electoral system to be applied-either
proportional
representation or single-member constituencies-had
to
be made before the beginning of implementation
of resolution 435 (1978).

81. The Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr.
Genscher, spoke-yesterday at a public meeting held in
Bonn to celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the founding of the OAU, and made special reference to the question of Namibia. I should like to quote that passage of his
speech. He said:

77. All these efforts of last summer have improved the
necessary climate of confidence, and I appeal to everyone
committed to the independence of Namibia and .a11who
are involved in these negotiations to do their best not to
endanger what has been achieved so far. Although disappointment at the lack of progress may prompt angry
reactions in the media, the responsible interlocutors
should constantly have in mind the long way already
behind us and should not lose patience because the last
steps to the finish take more time than expected. Impatience may only lead to more obstacles and prolong the
way still to be covered.

“The Namibian people must be permitted at last to
exercise their right to determine their own political destiny. That is the aim of the Federal Government in its
unrelenting efforts to bring about a peace settlement
on the basis of Security Council resolution 435 (1978).
The swiftest possible implementation
of the United
Nations plan for a solution in Namibia, as I told the
European Parliament on 8 February of this year,
remains the priority aim of the Federal Government’s
policy on Namibia. It is actively pursuing this policy
together with its partners in the five-member Western
contact group. The European Ten are united in sup
port of this policy.‘*

78. Patience is required also from the members of the
contact group in view of regional security concerns.
While my delegation emphasizes that these concerns do
not form part of the mission that the contact group
undertook in 1977, we are still confronted with the fact
that such concerns exist and will have to be taken into
account by all who realistically aim at the implementation of resolution 435 (1978). The development of the
Namibia negotiations has shown that the presence of foreign troops in the region of southern Africa is a matter
causing suspicion and mistrust.

82. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Morocco. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
*
Mr. MRANI ZENTAR (Morocco) (interpretation
Em French): Allow me first of all to extend to you, Sir,
my warm congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and also to express my
pleasure at the fact that Zaire’s term of office is being
enhanced by the fact that you, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Zaire, have come here to occupy the Chair
during the Council’s consideration of an item that is of
particularly close concern to Africa. In addition, you
represent a country with which Morocco maintains exemplary brotherly relations and your long and rich personal
experience at the United Nations and in international relations, and the high esteem in which we ail hold you, guarantee that the Council’s deliberations will respond to the
hopes that the valiant people of Namibia and the people
of Africa in general have reposed in this series of
meetings.

79. My Government, like many others, is dismayed at
the slow progress and the many delays which we have
witnessed in our common effort to bring independence to
Namibia. Nevertheless, we are confident that the Council
will act on the basis of its responsibility towards Namibia
and with a sense of what is politically feasible, keeping in
mind the psychological factors involved so as not to give
anybody new pretexts for further delays.
80. I want to conclude my statement with words of
appreciation, to the Secretary-General first of all, and to
his Special Representative and the Secretariat as a whole,
for their impressive work and untiring efforts continually
undertaken in a cause to which my Government remains
deeply Committed. It has been the foresightedness, realism and result-oriented approach of our African negotiating partners that has contributed decisively to our
reaching this final stage in our joint diplomatic efforts.
We should stay and work together now that we have to
induce the confidence and political will necessary to
bring about the start of the implementation
of resolution
435 (1978). All of us have demonstrated that the principle

84. I should also like to pay a particular tribute to Mrs.
Jeane Kirkpatrick, the representative of the United States,
for the competent and elegant manner .in which she conducted the particuiariy delicate discussions last month.
8

85. I am grateful to you, Sir, and to all the other
members of the Council for having allowed me to participate in this meeting, and I should like at this point to
express an ardent hope, that of seeing the Council conclude in a positive fashion this debate that we hope will be
the last devoted to Namibia under colonial domination.

91. The action of the United Nations Council for Namibia, presided over by our brother Paul Lusaka,
deserves our praise because of the arduousness and complexity of the task entrusted to that body and the work it
has done as the legal authority charged with defending
the interests of the Namibian people.

86. The resumption of the consideration of the question
of Namibia by the Council, with the solemnity and prestige conferred upon it by the presence of many Ministers
for Foreign Affairs from four continents is a striking
illustration of the fact that the patience of the international community is exhausted. Indeed, to this very day,
neither the exhortations and condemnations nor the many
sanctions that have been adopted on the initiative of the
countries members of the Non-Aligned Movement or the
OAU have succeeded in prevailing upon the racist regime
of South Africa to face realities. The apartheid regime
arrogantly persists in inflicting on the brother people of
Namibia humiliation,
every refinement of violence and
the heavy weight of oppression. It is also increasing its acts
of aggression and political and economic destabilization
against neighbouring independent African States.

92. In adopting resolutions 385 (1976) and.435 (1978),
the Council has established a process and adopted a plan
designed to lead Namibia to independence. The acceptance of this process by all parties generated a momentum
charged with hope and optimism, which augured a rapid,
successful and final outcome to the Namibian problem.
93. In particular, the essential role entrusted to the
Secretary-General in the implementation
of this plan
reflected the concern of the Organization to assume by all
the most appropriate means its full responsibility in the
decolonization of Namibia. As indicated in the further
report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978)
concerning the question of Namibia [s/25776], tangible
progress, if not decisive progress, has been made on many
points. That is why we believe that strengthening the role
of the Secretary-General cannot but contribute to providing the decisive impetus for the final settlement of the
Namibian problem.

87. At the very moment the Council was beginning its
present debate, the Pretoria rkgime, far from responding
to the expectations of the international
community,
embarked upon a cynical aggressive operation against
the wholly peaceful civilian population of our brother
country, Mozambique. This new act of barbarism testifies once again to the total contempt in which the apartheid regime holds international decisions, respect for the
law, legality and, quite simply, universal morality.

94. My delegation would also like to mention, by way of
encouragement, the praiseworthy efforts of the members
of the contact group, thanks to which, we must acknowledge, certain difftculties have been overcome. But these
efforts, which, in our view, should continue, would
benefit from being intensified even further, because the
blind obstinacy of the apartheid regime calls for firm, coordinated and well-focused action, bringing to bear all
possible methods of effective pressure, methods that are,
for that matter, well known to South Africa’s partners
themselves.

88. Pretoria’s zeal in pursuing and extending its policy
of social and racial fragmentation, both in South Africa
itself and in Namibia, is an affront to the conscience of
mankind, and the Namibian people are justified in having recourse to every legitimate means at their disposal to
defend their survival, regain their independence and
ensure their country’s territorial integrity.

95. The implementation
of the United Nations plan,
which should bear in mind the legitimate impatience of
the Namibian people and all African peoples, should
include a binding time-table for the accession of Namibia
to independence. At the same time, provision should be
made for deterrent action to be taken vi&-vis South
Africa, to prevail upon it to co-operate with greater dedication in the implementation of United Nations decisions.
Particularly, stricter and more diligent enforcement of the
arms embargo against South Africa decreed by the Council in 1977 [resolution 428 (1977) should form part of the
set of urgent measures unanimously called for by the
Council.

89. It is precisely to break this cyc!e of violence, which
is becoming ever more intense, that the United Nations
has tackled with so much determination
the task of
bringing about a peaceful solution to the Namibian problem. In spite of the obstacles which the South African
authorities have contrived to create for years now to
divert the United Nations from a mission for which it
bears full and entire responsibility, and in spite of the
obstinacy of the racist regime which continues to refuse to
acknowledge the inevitable, the determination of the
United Nations should not be allowed to slacken or
weaken in any way.

96. The Council, which bears primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security, must
continue to play its essential role by adopting, without
further delay, additional concrete measures which are
necessary to compel South Africa to embark without
prevarication, and without ulterior motives on the process
that is currently under way and to bring peace rapidly
back to the region by finally doing justice by the martyred
Namibian people.

90. However, a great deal of ground has been covered
since the annulment pf the Mandate given by the League
of Nations to South Africa over the Territory of
Namibia. Important, if not definitive, milestones have
been erected in order to permit a peaceful, gradual and
final solution of the problem of the very last bastion of
colonialism in the continent of Africa.
9

97. In his report concerning the implementation of reso
lutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978), the Secretary-General
made a lucid and perspicacious analysis of the situation in
thii part of southern Africa, and drew conclusions which
should be supported by the Council. I should like to
quote, in particular, the following paragraph:
“The effects of delay are being felt profoundly not
only by the people of Namibia, for whose welfare the
United Nations has a special obligation, but also by
other States of the region. . . . the settlement of the
Namibian question is of overriding importance for the
future peace and prosperity of the entire region. For
this reason, I urge that the Namibian problem be
regarded as a primary question in its own right, the
solution of which will in itself ease other tensions in the
region and be in the long-term interest of all concerned.” [S/15776, para. 203.

cause the people of Namibia do not stand alone but
can count on the support of all peoples and Governments that are truly committed to justice in a peaceful
world.“4
102. The PRESIDENT
(interpreration from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Tunisia. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
103. Mr. SLIM (Tunisia) (interpretation from French):
First of all, I should like to thank you and the members
of the Council for allowing the delegation of Tunisia,
among other delegations, to participate in this important
debate on the question of Namibia.
104. By a happy coincidence, this meeting is taking
place under the presidency of a worthy son of Africa; this
is reassuring and comforting to us. We are certain that,
thanks to your great experience and qualities, the Council will prove equal to its responsibilities, especially at
this difficult time when .it is being put to the test.
Together with our warm congratulations, we wish to convey to you our fraternal wishes for success:

98. The clarity of this paragraph and the responsible
language in which it is couched by the Secretary-General
make it unnecessary for many of us to enter into further
detail in our comments in the Council.
99. With regard to Morocco itself, Morocco has supported since its earliest days the heroic and valiant struggle of the Namibian
people, and it undertakes to
continue to do so until the legitimate aspirations of this
fraternal people to independence, sovereignty and the
territorial integrity of Namibia, including Walvis Bay,
have been fully satisfied.

105. Our congratulations are also addressed to your
predecessor, Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick,
for the manner in
which she conducted the proceedings of the Council in
the month of April.
106. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Tunisia was to
have been here today to add his voice to those of his
colleagues, mandated by the Seventh Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries to come here to reaffirm the attachment of their
Governments and of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries as a whole to the maintenance of international
peace and security and to strengthening the role of the
United Nations and of the Council-mandated,
in other
words, to come here to make a statement of facts and to
formulate a request.

100. At the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, at New Delhi,
the head of the Moroccan delegation, Prince Sidi
Mohammed,
representing his father, King Hassan II,
declared in his historic statement:
“Morocco salutes the struggle of the fraternal
people of Namibia and reafftrms its unswerving sup
port of the struggle it is waging,for its total independence and territorial
integrity. It calls upon the
international community to act in conformity with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, to
redouble its efforts to thwart the manoeuvres of the
racist regime so that a start can be made on the process leading to a final solution of the Namibian problem, in accordance with Security Council resolution
435 (1978):

107. The statement of facts, particularly bitter in its
implacable reality, is that, despite the commitments which
have been made and the assurances which have been
given, Namibia is still not independent at this time.
108. The request, based on Article 24 of the Charter of
the United Nations and on the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security, conferred by Member States on this supreme organ of the
Organization, is that the Council should respond, this
time in a positive manner, to the urgent call of the intemational community and, in the light of this statement of
facts, take the necessary measures to ensure the implementation of its plan for the independence of Namibia.

101. In conclusion, the Moroccan delegation wishes to
state that it endorses the conclusions in the Paris Declaration on Namibia of April 1983, of which the Foreign
Minister of Senegal, Mr. Moustapha Niasse, President of
the International Conference in Support of the Struggle
of the Namibian People for Independence, gave us a
faithful and objective picture, and in particular of the
following paragraph of the Declaration which I have
great pleasure in quoting:

109. Being prevented by unforeseen commitments from
travelling to New York, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Tunisia expressly asked me to support the joint action
undertaken by his African and non-aligned colleagues in
the Council and to reaffhm, once again, formally here the

“The day is not far off when Namibia will be
genuinely independent. In the pursuit of their noble
10

complete and total solidarity of the Government of President Bourguiba with SWAP0 in its struggle for the dignity of our Namibian brothers and for the fulfilment of
their legitimate aspirations to independence and freedom.
We wish to ask the leader of SWAPO, the great freedom
fighter, Sam Nujoma, whose presence among us we welcome, to be kind enough to convey that message to his
people in Namibia.
110. Our intention in speaking today before the Council
is not and could not be to plead the cause of the independence of Namibia. In our view, that stage has definitely
passed. Nor is it our intention to give reason for the slightest hope of a spontaneous change of mind on the part of
the apartheid rigime installed in Pretoria, a r&me which
is based essentially on repression, oppression and aggression and which cannot of its own accord accept the language of negotiation or the concept of democracy or
elections.

ever measures have been proposed that could have any
definite effect or seemed likely to deprive the Pretoria
regime of the means of pursuing its policy or really to lead
Namibia to independence, the Organization found itself
unable to .move forward and in a position where it was
impossible to discharge its full responsibilities.
115. This is a matter for concern, because the solution
of this problem is in fact in our hands, in the hands of the
members of the Council, which has been specifically
charged with the defence of the principles contained in
the Charter and with ensuring their implementation,
in
the hands of those who bear a particular responsibility in
this matter, ever since 1978, when the Namibian people
and the peoples of Africa as a whole were assured that
the last bastion of colonialism, in that African land,
would come to an end, through the means which were
declared to be the most effective, at the end of 1981.
116. To the questions raised and requests made by the
international community in April 1981 in the Council
12267th to 2277th meerings], the chilling and brutal
response given at that time was accompanied, nevertheless, by appeals to patience and new promises. In the
early part of 1983, Namibia should have been welcomed
into the community of free and independent nations,
thus manifesting the effectiveness of the ways and means
which ha: been advocated.

11 I. Rather we wish to reflect on the role of the Organization and the manner in which it should discharge its
responsibilities, for the Namibian problem is none other
than that of the responsibility of the United Nations with
regard to a Territory over which it exercises the authority
of Administering Authority, with a view to leading it to
independence at the earliest possible date.
112. The responsibility of the Organization is indeed at
issue: first, at the general level, in view of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of I4 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the granting of independence to
colonial countries and peoples; and then at a specific
level, in view of the implementation
of the plan for the
settlement of the Namibian question, the United Nations
plan as it is called, endorsed in Council resolution 435
(1978). How has the United Nations lived up to that
responsibility?

117. However, what is the situation today? Namibia is
not independent. The repression of the Namibian people
is more intensive than ever. The exploitation of the natural resources belonging to the people of Namibia is being
accelerated. The acts of aggression committed one after
the other against the countries bordering on Namibia are
being carried out increasingly in a planned manner, as if
in execution of a policy aimed at intimidating not only
those independent and sovereign countries but even the
Security Council itself. The last act of aggression against
our brothers in Mozambique, committed on the very day
we began these deliberations,
can have no other
interpretation.

113. For years, it has been given to adopting resolutions and taking certain decisions. Almost 17 years ago,
in fact, South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia was officially terminated [General Assembly resolution 2145
(XX0 of 27 October 1966-J; approximately 12 years ago,
the Int,ernational Court of Justice declared illegal the
occupation of the Teriitory of Namibia;6 over seven
years ago, the Security Council declared that it was
imperative that free elections be held under United
Nations supervision and control in the entire Territory of
Namibia, regarded as a single political entity [resalution
385 (1976)]. Lastly, five years ago, the plan for the settlement of the Namibian question by peaceful means was
endorsed by the Council, in its resolution 435 (1978), and
thus by the international community. Nevertheless, we
must note that, despite this long record and despite many
decisions and resolutions,’ South Africa still continues
today its illegal occupation of Namibia and carries out in
that Territory its shameful exploitation of human and
natural resources.

118. But South Africa is not content with those practices alone; at the same time it resorts to other means to get
more support from its allies and to obtain absolute guarantees of impunity.
119. Thus, a worsening of the world economic crisis or
an increase in tension in international relations is used by
South Africa and its strategic allies to gain more time and
to prolong its illegal occupation of Namibia.
120. Thus, apparently motivated by the desire to counter the effects of the economic crisis, many of the partners
of Pretoria seem to brush aside,the last traces of a bad
conscience and with increasing openness attach importance to their economic and military relations with South
Africa, thereby agreeing to strengthen a @me which is
branded an outlaw by the universal conscience and under
international law.

114. The impression one gains is that the United
Nations has in actual fact been able to take only measures that deal with major principles and theories. When11

121. Thus, the resurgence of tension between East and
West and the threat of a return to the cold war provide the
pretext for trying to establish, after complicated bargaining,
an unacceptable link between the legitimate accession of
Namibia to independence and the questioning of the no less
legitimate right of independent States of the region freely to
choose their allies.

128. Tunisia, for its part, will continue to support the
Namibian cause in the context of respect for the options
and decisions which SWAP0 may find it useful to adopt,
SWAP0 alone being able to determine the course which
the Namibian people should follow in its struggle for
national liberation.
129. That being the case, my delegation cannot help
wondering whether the moment has come to yield to
pessimism and to latent feelings of despair or if it is still
possible to believe that the road to peace has not been
definitively blocked.

122. This is another example of the delaying tactics, by
now well-worn-whether
in southern Africa or the Middle East-which, under the pretext of whatever strategic
interest is at stake, permit the aggressor to enjoy ever
more complete impunity and to divert or neutralize any
reaction in the West.

130. If the Organization, the only body with legal
authority over Namibia until independence, cannotwhen its prestige and credibility are seriously threatenedrespond to the latest challenges by Pretoria, including
those issued two days ago at this very table, no real progress can be made either in southern Africa or elsewhere.

123. These are the realities we face today. Serious as they
may seem, we do not see any valid reason for continuing to
prevent the people of Namibia from exercising their right to
self-determination and independence, freedom and justice;
we do not see in them any valid reason why the United
Nations, which has contributed to defining those principles
and making them universal, should be prevented from fulfilling its responsibilities, or why the Security Council should
find it impossible to defend those principles and ensure
application of them throughout the world.

131. If, on the other hand, the Council can succeed in
establishing its efforts within the precise framework of the
purposes and principles defined long ago by the international community, if it shows that it has decided to take
the measures provided for in the Charter, if necessary, to
ensure the implementation
of its resolutions-if,
in a
word, certain Member States give evidence of a real political will and a desire to ignore legal niceties, political expediency and commercial or strategic considerations-it
will
then be possible to talk about success.That successwill be
that of justice and right; it will be that of the principles in
which all of us in the Organization believe; just as it will
be that of the United Nations, whose weakness and impstence are so often deplored at the very moment when it is
doing everything possible to fulfil its responsibilities and
rise to the level of its ambitions.

124. We are concerned lest the course taken by the negotiations of the contact group should lead them in the
wrong direction. The explanations which we have heard
are not reassuring. The lucid and unequivocal assessment
made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of one of its
members, which is also a permanent member of the Council, is enlightening and shattering at the same time.
125. The Council must remind the contact group of the
commitment it has undertaken and invite it to abide by it.
It must be emphasized that factors which are not relevant
to the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) should not
hamper the implementation
of that resolution, as is
stressed in the excellent report of the Secretary-General,
to whom I should like to pay a well-deserved tribute for
the persistent and praiseworthy efforts which he continues
to make in this matter. We reaffirm our confidence in the
Secretary-General and his team and express the hope that
they will pursue their valuable efforts to a successful
conclusion.

132. We hope that the Council will be able to meet our
questions and our expectations in connection with this
debate, the ultimate objective of which is nothing less
than to turn the last page of the history of decolonization.
133. The PRESIDENT
(interprerationfiom French): The
next speaker is the representative of Romania. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

126. We wish to reaffirm here that resolution 435
(1978) remains the only basis for a negotiated settlement
of the Namibian problem and should be implemented
without any further delay, unconditionally
and without
reservations or changes.

I

I:

134. Mr. MARINESCU
(Romania) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, permit me first of all to thank you
and the other members of the Council for affording me
the opportunity to participate in this exceptionally important debate.

127. This was the promise made to the people of Namibia and the commitment undertaken regarding them.
Acceptance of the plan by the legitimate representative of
the Namibian people, SWAPO, was at that price and on
that condition. Any new attempt at modifying or changing the plan, any further delay in implementing it, would
have the legitimate consequence of freeing SWAP0 and
all Africa from their commitment to the course advocated in the plan, a plan which, we must recall, was
originally proposed by the contact group.

135. Like other delegations, my delegation is very
pleased to see you, the representative of Zaire, a country
with which Romania maintains friendly relations based
on mutual esteem and respect, assume the presidency of
the Council. The fact that the representative of an African
country is presiding over the work of the Council at a
time when it is once again considering the problem of
Namibia only serves to strengthen the feeling of urgency
attaching to the solution of this problem.
12

143. Support for the struggle of the Namibian people,
led by its legitimate representative, SWAPO, and action
designed to compel South Africa to put an end to the
illegal occupation of Namibia and its policy of aggression
against African States constitute, in the view of the
Romania, an integral part of the overall efforts to
improve the world political climate, strengthen intemational peace and security and ensure respect for the right
of peoples to free and independent development.

136. I should also like to say to the Secretary-General
how much we appreciate his tireless efforts and to assure
him of the support of my country for his actions designed
to bring about the solution of the problem of Namibia.
137. It is 17 years-and many speakers have reminded
us of this-since the United Nations ended the Mandate
of South Africa over Namibia and assumed responsibility
for bringing the Territory to independence., Member
States and the international community have repeatedly
condemned the illegal occupation of Namibia and have
unequivocally demanded the withdrawal of the armed forces and the administration of South Africa from the Territory, so that the people of Namibia could exercise freely
their right to choose their own course of political, social
and economic development.

144. The deadlock which has already lasted too long in
the efforts to implement the plan so laboriously produced by the United Nations to ensure Namibia’s accession to independence, together with the deterioration of
the situation in southern Africa as a result of the policy
of apartheid and the aggressive actions of the racist South
African regime, have aroused the profound concern of
the international community.

138. This determination has been clearly reflected and
expressed in many resolutions of the General Assembly,
as well as in those of the Council, particularly resolutions
385 (1976) and 435 (1978), which lay down the plan for
bringing Namibia to independence.

145. At this crucial time for the destiny of the Namibian people, the United Nations must take resolute
action. The ability of the Council to act to implement its
own decisions is being tested, as is its capacity to intervene promptly and effectively when the independence of
peoples and international
stability and security are
seriously threatened.

139. The International
Conference in Support of the
Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence, held
in Paris, like the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at New
Delhi, were very important factors in the stepping-up of
efforts on the part of all progressive and democratic forces to end the occupation of Namibia, to strengthen support for the struggle of the Namibian people to exercise
without delay their right to independence and to a free,
independent and united homeland, and to ensure the final
elimination of colonialism and imperialist domination in
the African continent.

146. It is generally acknowledged, and has been reaffirmed throughout this debate, that the basis for a solution to the Namibian problem is resolution 435 (1978),
adopted unanimously by the Council. It is significant
that everything that depended upon the United Nations
concerning the implementation of the resolution has long
since been settled. Similarly, as has been demonstrated,
SWAP0 and the African States involved in the negotiations have adopted a constructive attitude, inspired by
the will to find a peaceful solution to the Namibian situation on the basis of the plan endorsed in resolution 435
(1978). However, whenever the process of negotiations
for the implementation
of this plan seemed to be on the
point of succeeding and leading to agreement, South
Africa has resorted to delaying tactics, combined with
acts of aggression against front-line African countries.
Running out of pretexts, South Africa has recently been
putting forward another argument, which is as illfounded as its predecessors, and is simply designed to
prolong that country’s illegal presence in Namibia by
attempting to link the process of the decolonization of
the Territory with problems which fall exclusively within
the sovereignty of other African countries.

140. The history of negotiations on independence for
Namibia is a story of the obstinate refusal of the Pretoria
authorities to understand the realities of the world today
and the sense of the political transformations which are
constantly taking place throughout the world. The cynicism with which South Africa has been defying the most
elementary norms of international law is reflected not
only in the maintenance of the colonial regime in Namibia
and the continuation of the abominable policy of apartheid but also in the many acts of aggression committed
against African countries.
141. ‘In the last few days, we have seen once again that
the colonialist policy of apartheid constantly engenders
violence and aggression. The extremely serious act of
aggression committed against Mozambique is the most
notable expression of this policy of violence and aggression in the pursuit of which there is no hesitation to resort
to any means available. This particularly grave situation
has persisted because the policy of the Pretoria authorities
is a permanent source of destabilization in the African
continent, a constant threat to the security of African States
and to international peace and security.

147. These problems, as stated in the report of the
Secretary-General “were neither raised nor envisaged at
the time when resolution 435 (1978) was adopted or in
the subsequent negotiations under United Nations auspices” [S/15776, para. 19J.
148. The arrogant attitude of South Africa, its constant
defiance of the will of the great majority of States, would
not have been possible if it had not benefited from the
co-operation and support of certain States, particularly
in the military and economic fields.

142. The de facto situation created in this part of the
world is all the more alarming because it exists at a time
when the international situation is deteriorating.
13

149. Indeed, not only has the embargo on oil and arms
deliveries to South Africa not become operative, but the
military potential of that country has actually increased,
and this has made it possible for it to adopt an even more
obstructionist attitude towards the demands of the
United Nations.
150. If we accept the United Nations plan, which has
been so often solemnly reaflirmed and has never been
challenged, we cannot countenance the addition to it of
elements designed to modify its content completely and
undermine its implementation.
151. Entirely relevant in this context is the appeal of the
Secretary-General to all concerned to strengthen and concert their efforts within the framework of the United
Nations and to demonstrate the necessary political will to
bring about the early independence of Namibia in accordance with the United Nations plan. We whole-heartedly
endorse the Secretary-General’s assessment to the effect
that the independence of Namibia is the essential and
primary issue, which must be faced up to without further
delay.

among the free nations of the world. We have noted with
satisfaction the Secretary-General’s determination to continue his efforts to that end.
156. We express the hope that this series of Security
Council meetings will produce concrete and effective
measures for implementing the independence plan for Namibia; that would bring to a speedy end a process that has
been delayed so often and so unjustly-the elimination of
one of the last vestiges of colonialism.
157. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The last speaker is the representative of Argentina. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
158. Mr.

MI@IZ
(Argentina) (interpretation from
Earlier this month, my delegation had an
opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, the representative
of a country with which the Argentine Republic has cordial relations, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of May. We are convinced
that with your leadership and well-known experience the
Council will be able to do effective work on the question
of Namibia. My delegation stands ready to co-operate
fully.
Spanish):

152. It is high time for the Council to bring its full
authority to bear in order to ensure the implementation of
its own resolutions, in particular resolution 435 (1978).
The gravity of the situation makes it necessary to give
consideration even to the application of sanctions, in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter, as has
quite rightly been called for by the African countries. We
take this opportunity to stress the responsibility of the
members of the contact group to ensure the implementation of the United Nations plan on independence for Namibia as a matter of urgency, and without compromising
in any way the freedom and sovereignty of the African
States.

159. The Council is once again considering the question of Namibia which is of major importance in the
decolonization process and for the consolidation of international peace and security. It is an historical imperative
to find a solution in order to ensure the early exercise of
the right to self-determination
and independence by the
people of Namibia and the emergence of that nation as a
sovereign State.
160. The presence of colonialism and any other form of
foreign domination is for the modem world a real and
unwarranted.historical
anachronism that must be ended
quickly so as to have a democratic system of international relations and so that the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations may become a reality.

153. The Romanian people, which throughout its history has waged a struggle marked by many sacrifices for its
national and social liberation, from the very beginning
gave its wholehearted political, diplomatic, moral and
material support to the struggle of the Namibian people,
under the leadership of SWAPO, in order to ensure by all
possible means, including armed struggle, their inalienable right to a free and dignified life.

161. The exercise of the right to self-determination and
national independence by the Namibian people is part of
that system of justice and democracy which the vast
majority of the international community and, in particular, the non-aligned and developing countries have
sought to attain since they became independent nations.

154. President Nicolae Ceaqescu has more than once
reaffirmed, in his meetings with the leaders of African
States and SWAPO, the militant solidarity of Romania
with the peoples of southern Africa in their struggle to
abolish the policy of apartheid and racial discrimination
and to put an end to the acts of aggression and subversion
of the South African racists against African countries.

-.
-.
-.
-.
-.
-.
-.

-.-.

162. At the International Conference in Support of the
Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence, held
in Paris from 25 to 29 April 1983, Argentina clearly reiterated its position on this question of decolonization, the
solution of which, having been arbitrarily postponed by
South Africa, is a serious threat to the peace and security
of the entire region of southern Africa.

155. I take this opportunity to reaffirm that Romania is
resolved, in close co-operation with the African countries
and all States devoted to the objectives of the Charter of
the United Nations, to continue to work at the intemational level to ensure that the Namibian people will be
able to exercise without delay their right to selfdetermination, so that Namibia can take its proper place

163. At that time, we said that Namibia’s independence
should come about on the basis of the following principles and decisions, which have been accepted by a virtually universal consensus of the Organization: first, the
14

question of Namibia is a decolonization problem and
must be resolved in accordance with the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples adopted on 14 December 1960 in General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV); secondly, Namibia is the
direct responsibility
of the United Nations and the
United Nations Council for Namibia is the legal Administering Authority for the Territory until its independence [General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27
October 19661; thirdly, in accordance with the 1971 advisory
opinion of the International
Court of Justice,‘j
South Africa must immediately terminate its administration of Namibia and thus put an end to its occupation of
the Territory; the States Members of the United Nations
have a duty to recognize the illegality of the South African presence in Namibia and the invalidity of its acts in
the name of or in regard to Namibia, and it is the duty of
States not members of the Organization to support the
measures adopted by the United Nations in respect of the
Territory; fourthly, Council resolutions 385 (1976), 435
(1978) and 439 (1978) constitute the legal framework for
a peaceful process leading to the independence of Namibia without delay, modification
or qualification;
fifthly, there must be full respect for the territorial integrity of Namibia, including Walvis Bay and the offshore
islands, in accordance with resolution 432 (1978),
unanimously adopted by the Council, and the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly; and, sixthly, there
must be strict compliance with the provisions of General
Assembly resolution 3295 (XXIX) of 13 December 1974
which endorsed Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the
Natural Resources of Namibia, enacted by the United
Nations Council for Namibia.5 In this connection, it goes
without saying that the arbitrary and continued exploitation of Namibia’s resources should be categorically condemned by the Organization, since that is adversely
affecting or destroying the material foundations necessary for an independent nation to have sustained economic and social development, free from any kind of
external dependence.

The time has come for South Africa, in the same spirit, to
cease its acts of intimidation and aggression against neighbouring States, such as the recent attack against Mozambique, eliminate the hateful system of apartheid and
abandon any attempt to perpetuate its colonial domination through an internal settlement.
166. At the same time, any kind of condition which violates the sovereignty of independent States or which may
be alien to the application of Council resolution 435
(1978) must be rejected. In this connection, we reiterate
our support for the position taken by the front-line States
in issuing the Lusaka communiquC of 4 September 1982
and the Havana communique of 20 February 1983.
167. There is no need to emphasize the importance of
this series of meetings of the Council for the Namibian
people and for SWAPO, its sole legitimate representative.
The Conference of Heads of State and Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, meeting at New Delhi, appealed
to the Council to meet as soon as possible to consider new
measures aimed at speeding up the implementation of the
plan for Namibia and designated 31 Ministers for Foreign
Affairs from Asia, Africa, Latin America and Europe to
take part in these meetings [see S/15675 and Corr. I and 2,
annex, sect. I. para. 49J. In so doing it clearly emphasized
that the cause of the Namibian nation enjoys respect and
practically universal consensus.
168. Consequently, my delegation expresses the hope
that the Council will heed the opinion of the vast majority of the international community, as expressed in the
Non-Aligned
Movement, the General Assembly and
other international forums. To that end, it must shoulder
its major responsibility for the application of resolution
435 (1978) and the adoption of all the necessary measures, including those provided for in Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, to demonstrate the real
and sincere existence of a political will to bring about the
independence of Namibia within the shortest possible
time.

164. Those principles and decisions I have listed, which
constitute the only legitimate framework accepted by
almost all members of the international community for
the early independence of Namibia,
were expressly
reflected in the Paris Declaration on Namibia and the
Programme of Action on Namibia’ adopted by acclamation at the recent Conference. The Secretary-General’s
important further report concerning the implementation
of Council resolution 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) [S/Z5776J
is imbued with the same philosophy aimed at speeding up
the process of decolonization of the Territory of Namibia,
which, historically
and despite all hindrances, is
inevitable.

169. At the same time, my country must emphasize
that effective action by the Council would be of considerable help to the very constructive work of the Secretary-General, who stated in his report that the question of Namibia was his special responsibility in view
of the unique relationship between the United Nations
and the people of Namibia. The efforts which the
Secretary-General has already undertaken with such
dedication and wisdom deserve the gratitude of all
the parties directly concerned and of the entire international community.

165. Today the vast majority of Member States have
once again come to the Council to show their respect for
international law and their faith that the organs of the
United Nations will shoulder their responsibilities so that
a final definitive thrust is given to the efforts to make
possible the legitimate exercise of the right to selfdetermination and independence of the Namibian people.

170. This cause of justice and dignity must not be subjected to further delay. Argentina attaches special importance to its participation
in this debate, to show its
present and future support for all measures adopted by
the Organization with a view to eliminating every manifestation of colonialism or foreign domination.. Such
15

situations, like the situation in Namibia, shock the conscience of nations that desire peace, justice and
development.
I;he meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

NOTES
’ Oflcial Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-eighth Session.
Supplement No. 24.

* A/CONF.120/13.
’ Oflcial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-seventh Session,
Plenary Meetings, 25th meeting.
’ See Report of the Znternational Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence. Paris 25-29 April 1983
(AKONF.120/13),
part three.
s See Oflcial Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifth Session,
Supplement No. 24, Vol. I, annex II.
6 Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South
Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Council
Resolution 276 (1970). Advisory Opinion, I. C. J. Reports 1971. p. 16.

-.
-.-.
*_
16

.
.,

i

.
.

HOti’

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SJi PROCURER

LES-PUBLICATIONi

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences dCpositaiFes
du monde entier. Informez-vous
auprts de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
it : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou Genkve.
KAK

I-lOJIYYMTb

Msnamir

OpraHa3auiiH

Ii WeHTCTBaX

Mara3mte
nponaxce
COMO

kI3AAHkitl

OPl-AHM3AlWi

G6acnnnemtbtx

I30 BCCX PdOHaX

MHpa.

Haunt4
HaBOIIRTe

Knx nAutWTe no anpecy: OpraHasauttn
N3RaH&iti, Hbio-tiopx
tint4 >KeHeBa.
CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

OEFbE.WiHEHHbIX

HAUMm

MO)KHO

KyniiTb

Mara3miax

CIlpaBKB

06 U3ZlaHtiRX

06aenuiietiHbix

DE LAS NACIONES

B xnnxciibix

B BFU.UeM KHRXHOM

Hawfi,
,iJNIDAS

Cetctnta

no
:

Las pubiicaciones
de Ias Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes del mundo. Cons&e a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations,

New York

00400

90-60205-March

1991-2.050
