United Nations

A/RES/58/238

General Assembly

Distr.: General
2 March 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 26

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 December 2003
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/58/L.30/Rev.1 and Add.1)]

58/238. United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 57/161 of 16 December 2002, in which it decided to
authorize the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Guatemala from 1 January to 31 December 2003,
Taking into account the fact that the Government of Guatemala has reaffirmed
its commitment to the full implementation of the peace agreements,
Underlining the fact that substantive aspects of the peace agreements have yet
to be implemented and that the timetable for implementation and verification
established by the Commission to Follow up the Implementation of the Peace
Agreements extends through 2004,
Taking into account the request of the Government of Guatemala for an
extension of the mandate of the Mission until the end of 2004, in view of the
desirability of maintaining the presence of the Mission during the first year of the
new Government, which will take office in January 2004,
Taking into account also the fact that civil society organizations in Guatemala
and the international community expressed concerns about potential setbacks to
implementation of the peace agreements should the Mission depart Guatemala
before a new Government had taken office and demonstrated its commitment to the
peace process,
Taking note of the fact that on 10 July 2003, under the auspices of the
Organization of American States, representatives of the main political parties of
Guatemala signed a declaration expressing support for the peace agreements as State
accords that should be incorporated into government plans for the peace process,
Taking into account the eighth report of the Secretary-General on the
verification of compliance with the peace agreements, 1
Taking into account also the fourteenth report of the Mission on human rights, 2

_______________
1
2

03 50880

A/58/267.
A/58/566.

A/RES/58/238

Taking into account further the report of the Commission for Historical
Clarification, 3
Stressing the positive role played by the Mission in support of the Guatemala
peace process, and emphasizing the need for the Mission to continue to enjoy the
full support of all parties concerned,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the
Mission 4 and the recommendations contained therein,
1.
Welcomes the eighth report of the Secretary-General on the verification
of compliance with the peace agreements;1
2.
Also welcomes the fourteenth report of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Guatemala on human rights;2
3.
Calls upon the Government of Guatemala to maintain its commitment to
the full implementation of the peace agreements;
4.
Also calls upon newly elected public officials to act on the commitments
made by representatives of the main political parties in July 2003 to support the
peace agreements as State accords that should be incorporated into government
plans for the peace process;
Takes note of the recommendations contained in the report of the
5.
Secretary-General on the work of the Mission4 aimed at ensuring that the Mission
responds adequately to the demands of the peace process until 31 December 2004,
in view of the many outstanding matters still to be addressed and the need to ensure
the commitment of the new Government to the peace agreements;
Notes that, while in 2003 the Mission verified four broad areas of the
6.
peace agreements, in 2004 it will concentrate only on two areas, human rights and
demilitarization and the strengthening of civilian power;
Also notes the results of the meeting of the Consultative Group for
7.
Guatemala, held in Guatemala City on 13 and 14 May 2003, at which all
participants agreed that the peace agreements should remain Guatemala’s essential
road map for development;
Further notes that, while advances were verified in certain areas, such as
8.
the passage of legislation against discrimination in its many manifestations, the
redeployment of military units and the development of a national reparations
programme for the victims of human rights violations committed during the armed
conflict, progress in the implementation of the peace agreements in the past year fell
short of expectations and was insufficient to inject new momentum into the peace
process;
Notes that the consolidation of the peace-building process remains a
9.
significant challenge which will require greater political will, the involvement of all
sectors of society and the continued engagement of the international community;
10. Notes with concern the climate of intimidation against justice officials,
human rights defenders, social activists and journalists;

_______________
3
4

2

A/53/928, annex.
A/58/262.

A/RES/58/238

11. Takes note of the agreement reached in March 2003 by the Government
of Guatemala and the Human Rights Ombudsman, with the support of civil society,
and currently being revised, to create a Commission for the Investigation of Illegal
Groups and Clandestine Security Apparatuses;
12. Welcomes the agreement signed on 1 December 2003 between the
Government of Guatemala and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights for the establishment of an office of the High Commissioner in
Guatemala, with a mandate to monitor the human rights situation in the country and
advise the Government on formulating and implementing policies, programmes and
measures to promote and protect human rights;
13. Calls upon the Government to further reduce military spending and to
allocate adequate budgets to those institutions and programmes that are given
priority under the peace accords;
14. Underlines the importance of implementing fully the Agreement on
Identity and Rights of Indigenous Peoples 5 as a key to fighting discrimination and
consolidating peace and equality in Guatemala, and highlights the need to
implement fully the Agreement on Social and Economic Aspects and Agrarian
Situation 6 as a means of addressing the root causes of the armed conflict;
15. Calls upon the Government to implement the recommendations of the
Commission for Historical Clarification, with a view to promoting national
reconciliation, upholding the right to truth and providing redress for the victims of
human rights abuses and violence committed during the thirty-six-year conflict;
16. Invites the international community, and in particular the specialized
agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system, to continue to
support the consolidation of the peace-building process, with the peace agreements
as the framework for their technical and financial assistance programmes and
projects, and stresses the continued importance of close cooperation among them in
the context of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework for
Guatemala;
17. Urges the international community to support financially, through
existing mechanisms of international cooperation, the strengthening of national
capacities to ensure the consolidation of the peace process in Guatemala;
18. Also urges the international community to support financially the
strengthening of the capacities of the specialized agencies, funds and programmes of
the United Nations system, including the future office of the High Commissioner in
Guatemala City, as the Mission prepares to intensify its work to ensure specific
follow-on by the entities of the United Nations system, as well as by members of the
international community, within the framework of a general transition strategy;
19. Stresses that, while the Mission has played a key role in promoting the
consolidation of peace and the observance of human rights and in verifying
compliance with the revised timetable for the implementation of pending
commitments under the peace agreements, the long-term success of the peace
process depends on the capacities and renewed commitment to the peace agreements
of Guatemalan institutions, both of the State and of civil society;

_______________
5
6

A/49/882-S/1995/256, annex.
A/50/956, annex.

3

A/RES/58/238

20. Requests the United Nations system in Guatemala to continue to monitor
and report annually, utilizing the methodology and indicators developed with the
Mission, on the implementation of the Agreement on Social and Economic Aspects
and Agrarian Situation as part of the national human development report of the
United Nations Development Programme;
21. Decides to authorize a final renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Guatemala from 1 January to 31 December 2004;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the implementation
of the present resolution to the General Assembly at the beginning of its fifty-ninth
session, as well as a final report on the work of the Mission before the end of that
session, together with the recommendations that he may deem appropriate.
79th plenary meeting
23 December 2003

4
