S/2018/277

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 March 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation concerning
Western Sahara
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2351
(2017), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) until 30 April 2018 and requested
me to provide a report to it on the situation in Western Sahara well before the end of
the mandate period. It covers developments since the previous report ( S/2017/307)
and describes the situation on the ground, the status and progress of the political
negotiations on Western Sahara, the implementation of resolution 2351 (2017) and
the existing challenges to the Mission’s operations and steps taken to address them.
2.
On 16 August 2017, I announced my decision to appoint Horst Koehler
(Germany) as my new Personal Envoy for Western Sahara, to replace Christopher
Ross (United States of America), whose mandate ended on 30 April 20 17. Mr. Koehler
took up his functions on 8 September. On 1 December, I also announced the
appointment of Colin Stewart (Canada) as my new Special Representative for Western
Sahara and Head of MINURSO, to succeed Kim Bolduc (Canada), who completed
her assignment on 22 November.

II. Recent developments
3.
The situation in Western Sahara, as far as MINURSO was able to observe,
remained generally calm during the reporting period. However, tensions between the
parties, including on the unresolved issues concerning Guerguerat, as well as security
concerns, continued to characterize the operational environment and mandate
implementation of MINURSO.
4.
On 28 April 2017, Frente Polisario withdrew its armed elements from the buffer
strip at Guerguerat, in the south of the Territory. MINURSO continued to maintain a
day-time presence in the area to monitor developments, augmented as necessary by
helicopter patrols. The Guerguerat area remained calm and free of the presence of
elements of either party for the reporting period until late December, when a small
group of Frente Polisario military briefly entered the buffer strip to deliver a message
to MINURSO observers to the effect that Frente Polisario would be blocking a car
rally scheduled to pass through the Territory to Mauritania. As of 4 January 2018, a
small group of apparently unarmed Frente Polisario elements established what the
Frente Polisario leadership described as a daylight-hour “monitoring post” inside the

18-05020 (E)

030418

*1805020*

S/2018/277

buffer strip, approximately 500 metres south-east of the MINURSO temporary
observation post. At the time of reporting, the elements remain in the location during
daylight hours. Frente Polisario assured MINURSO that the presence consists of
unarmed civilian “police”. On 24 January 2018, MINURSO was invited to observe
that there were no weapons in their vehicle.
5.
The Security Council, through operative paragraph 3 of its resolution 2351
(2017), recognized that the recent crisis in the buffer strip in Guerguerat raised
fundamental questions related to the ceasefire and related agreements and encouraged
me to explore ways in which such questions could be resolved. In this regard, the
Secretariat sent notes verbales to Morocco and Frente Polisario o n 2 June proposing
to address these questions, including through the deployment of an expert mission to
conduct in-depth consultations with the parties. The Secretariat also solicited
information on the questions referred to in paragraph 3 of resolution 2351 (2017).
The proposal was accepted by Frente Polisario in June. In August, Morocco responded
that military agreement No. 1 remained viable and a guarantee for the preservation of
the ceasefire. Therefore, it considered the proposed mission “untimely” and
“inappropriate”.
6.
In a letter dated 9 December 2017, the Secretary-General of Frente Polisario,
Brahim Ghali, protested inter alia that the crisis in Guerguerat had not been resolved,
that no United Nations expert mission had been deployed and that no concrete action
had been taken by the United Nations to implement the provisions of Security Council
resolution 2351 (2017). He warned that Frente Polisario would not “accept the
continuation of this state of affairs”.
7.
On 4 January 2018, the Permanent Representative of Morocco to the United
Nations addressed a letter to my Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, expressing concern over the developing situation in Guerguerat, stating
that the Frente Polisario presence inside the buffer strip is of a military nature, thus
constituting a violation of military agreement No. 1. The message was reiterated by
the Moroccan authorities during several exchanges with my Personal Envoy and with
my Under-Secretaries-General for Political Affairs and Peacekeeping Operations.
8.
On 6 January, I expressed deep concern about recent increased tensions in
Guerguerat, calling on the parties to exercise maximu m restraint and to avoid
escalating tensions. I also called for regular civilian and commercial traffic not to be
obstructed and for no action to be taken that might constitute a change to the status
quo of the buffer strip. In a letter addressed to the Se cretary-General of Frente
Polisario and dated 5 January, I requested that the parties refrain from actions that
could undermine the efforts of my Personal Envoy to relaunch the political process,
while also reiterating my commitment to the peaceful resolut ion of the conflict.
9.
In a letter dated 7 January, the Secretary-General of Frente Polisario urged that
the underlying causes of tensions in Guerguerat “be addressed effectively in the
context of a comprehensive approach in which the full implementation of the mandate
of MINURSO must take centre stage.” He also recalled that the decision by Frente
Polisario to withdraw its presence from Guerguerat in April 2017 was made to
facilitate the efforts of the United Nations and would be reviewed in the light of the
“commitments of all stakeholders”. With regard to the passage of civilian traffic
through the area, he lamented that this implied the expansion of Morocco “up to the
border of a third country and the implicit recognition that the final status of the
Territory has already been determined”. In conclusion, the Secretary-General of
Frente Polisario noted that Frente Polisario remained committed to engaging in
substantive negotiations without preconditions and to cooperating fully with me and
my Personal Envoy.

2/17

18-05020

S/2018/277

10. On 1 February, the Permanent Representative of Morocco, in a letter addressed
to my Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, reiterated the concern
of Morocco over the continued presence of Frente Polisario near Guerguerat.
Morocco also underscored that the presence endangered the relaunch of the political
process. On 5 February, the Moroccan Coordinator with MINURSO wrote to my
Special Representative in the same vein, asking him to continue and intensify his
engagement with Frente Polisario in order to obtain its immediate and unconditional
withdrawal.
11. On 6 November, King Mohammed VI delivered an address to mark the forty second anniversary of the Green March. He stated that Morocco remains committed
to engaging in the political process in the current dynamic that I called for and to
cooperating with my Personal Envoy. He indicated that the engagement of Morocco
rested on four established principles: (a) rejection of any solution other than the full
sovereignty of Morocco over Western Sahara and its autonomy proposal; (b) all
parties shouldering their responsibility to find a final solution; (c) respect for the
Security Council as the only international body tasked with overseeing the settlement
process; and (d) rejection of any “obsolete proposals designed to divert the settlement
process from the set terms of reference”. Morocco would not sit by and wait for the
desired solution to be found, but rather press ahead with its endeavours to promote
development in “[its] southern regions”, including enabling them to be a link between
Morocco and countries further south in Africa. Media reported that Frente Polisario
had denounced the speech as a “denial of Morocco’s commitments under the peace
process”.
12. During the reporting period, public life in Laayoune, insofar as MINURSO was
able to observe, remained mostly peaceful but marked by a number of demonstrations,
which Frente Polisario claims were violently repressed by Moroccan security forces.
Meanwhile, Moroccan investment in Western Sahara continued, and numerous
projects were either implemented or announced. Frente Polisario has repeatedly
protested illegal exploitation by Morocco of the natural resources of Western Sahara
and the creation of a new status quo on the ground.
13. Public life in the refugee camps near Tindouf, Algeria, remained peaceful and
free of major incidents, although frustrations continued among refugees about the
stalemate in the political process. A few sporadic demonstrations took place in the
refugee camps, protesting, for example, water shortages in the Smara camp in May
and electricity shortages in the Laayoune camp in January. A small protest was held
in Rabouni, near Tindouf, in May against the decision by Frente Polisario to withdraw
from Guerguerat, demanding that it be reconsidered. Frente Polisario officials
confirmed to MINURSO that two small-scale drug-related security incidents took
place in the Awsard and Smara camps. The steady decrease in humanitarian aid to the
refugees remained of concern. Donor appeals were issued by the World Food
Programme (WFP) and by the United Nations Resident Coordinator in Algeria, in
May and October respectively. In July, heavy winds caused damage to over
100 household shelters and a number of education facilities in t he Dakhla refugee
camp, resulting in a small number of injuries.
14. Frente Polisario repeatedly raised concerns with MINURSO about the increased
threat posed by illicit drug smuggling in Western Sahara, claiming that it originated
from Morocco. In June, Frente Polisario announced the arrest of 19 Moroccan
nationals on charges of drug trafficking. On 31 October, the 19 individuals were
sentenced to up to 16 years’ imprisonment. Frente Polisario informed MINURSO that
they were being held in a detention facility in Tifariti.
15. The Moroccan authorities wrote to me on five occasions to, inter alia, express
concern about the Frente Polisario being present and constructing sand walls in the
18-05020

3/17

S/2018/277

buffer strip near Guerguerat. The Permanent Representative of Morocco also wrote
to me to reiterate that the Western Sahara conflict lies within the exclusive
competency of the United Nations Security Council. He reiterated the categorical
opposition of Morocco to any involvement of the African Union in the political
process. In a letter dated 18 April 2017, the Permanent Representative described my
previous report on Western Sahara (S/2017/307) as being not balanced and criticized
certain omissions and shortcomings, in particular as they pertained to the human
rights and humanitarian situation in the refugee camps near Tindouf and relations
between MINURSO and Frente Polisario.
16. The Secretary-General of Frente Polisario wrote to me on 16 occasions,
deploring what he described as Moroccan violations of human rights, such as the
repression of peaceful demonstrations, the illegal detention of the co -defendants in
the Gdeim Izik case and the death of one Gdeim Izik prisoner; provocative actions in
the territorial waters off south-west Western Sahara; and the illegal exploitation of
natural resources, including by declaring an exclusive economic zone in the waters
adjacent to Western Sahara. He repeatedly called on the United Nations to institute a
human rights monitoring mechanism, implement the 1991 Settlement Plan for
Western Sahara, and to “protect the territorial integrity of the Non-Self-Governing
Territory of Western Sahara.” With respect to my previous report on Western Sahara,
the representative of Frente Polisario in New York expressed concern that the
characterization of Western Sahara as a non-self-governing territory was cited as a
Frente Polisario position, while it is the position of the United Nations General
Assembly. He also criticized my repeated calls upon the Frent e Polisario to withdraw
from Guerguerat.

III. Political activities
17. The appointment of my Personal Envoy was welcomed by the parties and
neighbouring States, who pledged to support his efforts. In New York, he held initial
consultations with representatives of the parties, neighbouring States, members of the
Security Council and the Group of Friends on Western Sahara, with a view to
relaunching the political process in a new spirit, with a new dynamic and ultimately
to achieving a just, durable and mutually acceptable solution to the conflict in Western
Sahara which will provide for the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara
in the context of arrangements consistent with the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations.
18. From 15 to 24 October, my Personal Envoy undertook his first visit to the
region. He travelled to Rabat, Rabouni, Tindouf, Algiers and Nouakchott. The main
objective of the visit was to engage with the parties and neighbouring States to
understand their position, build trust and assess first-hand the situation on the ground.
While all stakeholders reiterated long-held positions, I am encouraged that he was
able to hold discussions at the highest level throughout the region.
19. In Rabat, my Personal Envoy was received by King Mohammed VI, the Prime
Minister, Saadeddine Othmani, and the Minister of Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation, Nasser Bourita. The King welcomed the appointment of my Personal
Envoy and expressed his commitment to the negotiating process. The Prime Minister
also expressed his support for the efforts of my Personal Envoy to resolve the conflict.
Meanwhile, the Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Morocco
reiterated his country’s continued commitment to a political solution to the conflict
which is based on the Moroccan autonomy initiative of 2007. He stressed that the
resolution of the conflict in Western Sahara would require Algeria to take on a more
important role.

4/17

18-05020

S/2018/277

20. In Rabouni, my Personal Envoy met with the Secretary-General of Frente
Polisario, members of the Frente Polisario leadership, and representatives of women
and youth. The Secretary-General of Frente Polisario reiterated the movement ’s
unconditional commitment to a peaceful resolution of the conflict, while h ighlighting
the suffering of the Sahrawi people, in particular the youth and those living in refugee
camps. He called on Morocco to return to the negotiation table without preconditions.
During a visit to the Awsard refugee camp near Tindouf, my Personal E nvoy
witnessed the profound frustrations and emotions of a refugee population that
continues to endure the consequences of a conflict that has lasted for far too long. The
harsh conditions in the camps and the exasperation of many, in particular women and
youth, at the lack of prospects for a better future were the enduring images that my
Personal Envoy took away from the visit. While in Tindouf, my Personal Envoy was
also able to meet with the civilian personnel and military observers of MINURSO and
expressed his gratitude for their important work, which significantly contributes to
creating an operating environment conducive to the negotiating process.
21. In Algiers, my Personal Envoy met with the President of Algeria, Abdelaziz
Bouteflika, the Prime Minister, Ahmed Ouyahia, and the Minister of State and
Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation, Abdelkader Messahel. The
President emphasized his country’s continued support for any peaceful resolution that
was acceptable to the Frente Polisario and respected their right to self-determination.
He called on my Personal Envoy to contribute to building trust among all the
stakeholders. The Prime Minister conveyed a similar message. The Minister of State
and Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation emphasized the role of
Algeria as a neighbouring State as well as his country’s commitment to the principle
of self-determination.
22. In Nouakchott, my Personal Envoy met with the President of Mauritania,
Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz, the Prime Minister, Yahya Ould Hademine, and the
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Isselkou Ould Ahmed Izid Bih. All interlocutors
reiterated the long-standing position of Mauritania of “positive neutrality”, as well as
their willingness to fully support the efforts of my Personal Envoy.
23. Throughout the visit, my Personal Envoy underscored to all his interlocutors the
need to work together in a spirit of compromise and realism and to relaunch the
political process without preconditions. He called on them to show signs of good will
that would demonstrate their commitment to finding a mutually acceptable solution.
All stakeholders consulted during his first trip to the region were unanimous in
deploring the lack of regional cooperation caused by the conflict over Western Sahara
and the resulting loss of jobs, growth and opportunities for all the peoples in the
Maghreb region.
24. On 22 November, my Personal Envoy briefed the Security Council in New York
on his first visit to the region. He expressed cautious optimi sm, observing that he had
witnessed a “certain yearning” for a solution among all interlocutors. He invited the
Council to work with him in defining concrete next steps for the path forward and
called on Council members to reflect in their own positions th e new spirit that they
called for. The Council expressed public support for my Personal Envoy, noting that
his appointment and his visit to the region represented important contributions to
creating the new dynamic necessary to advance the political proces s.
25. Since his briefing to the Council, my Personal Envoy has continued his dialogue
with the leadership of the parties and neighbouring States. He also continued his
consultations with the members of the Group of Friends on Western Sahara, namely,
France, the Russian Federation, Spain, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States, as well as other interested stakeholders.

18-05020

5/17

S/2018/277

26. From 9 to 18 January, my Personal Envoy travelled to Addis Ababa, Brussels,
Kigali, London and Paris to meet with government representatives and interlocutors
of the African Union and the European Union, including the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, Moussa Faki Mahamat, and the High Representative of
the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President of the European
Commission, Federica Mogherini. In these discussions, the interlocutors pledged
support to my Personal Envoy’s efforts and acknowledged the lead of the United
Nations in the process. My Personal Envoy highlighted the political, socioeconomic
and security implications of the Western Sahara conflict on regional integration. On
6 February, my Personal Envoy travelled to Geneva to meet with the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees to discuss humanitarian assistance for Sahrawi
refugees in the camps near Tindouf.
27. On 14 December, in substantively identical letters, my Personal Envoy extended
invitations to the parties to the conflict and the neighbouring States to hold bilateral
in-depth consultations. They all responded positively to the invitation.
28. Thus, on 25 and 26 January, my Personal Envoy met the Secretary-General of
Frente Polisario in Berlin. Consultations addressed in depth the political,
socioeconomic and humanitarian dimensions of the conflict and the situation on both
sides of the berm. The meetings were also an opportunity to assess the political
process to date and to discuss new ideas for the way forward. On 6 March, my
Personal Envoy held consultations with the Minister of Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Morocco in Lisbon, which included a discussion of my
Personal Envoy’s activities of recent months, an exchange of views on potential ways
to structure future talks and on recent political developments. The Minister reiterated
the willingness of Morocco to work with my Envoy and publicly called the
consultations “rich and fruitful”.
29. On 8 February, my Personal Envoy met with the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Mauritania in Berlin. The Minister emphasized the i mportance of
preserving the good relations of Mauritania with all its neighbours, as well as his
country’s willingness to support the United Nations-led facilitation process. On
15 February, my Personal Envoy met with the Minister of State and Minister of
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Algeria in Berlin. The Minister
stressed the willingness of Algeria to support the political process in its capacity as
neighbouring country, while also stressing the importance of respecting the Sa hrawi
people’s right to self-determination.
30. I am encouraged by the positive responses by the representatives of the parties
and neighbouring States, for holding consultations in an open and frank atmosphere
that allowed my Personal Envoy to further explore their positions, as well as potential
ways to structure future talks.
31. On 21 March, my Personal Envoy briefed the Security Council, pursuant to
paragraph 11 of resolution 2351 (2017). The Council expressed full support for the
efforts of my Personal Envoy.

IV. Activities of MINURSO
A.

Operational activities
32. As at 1 March 2018, the military component of MINURSO consisted of
225 personnel, 14 of whom were female, against the authorized strength of 246.
MINURSO continued to encourage troop-contributing countries to seek greater
gender balance. From 1 April 2017 to 1 March 2018, MINURSO conducted

6/17

18-05020

S/2018/277

approximately 799,085 kilometres of ground patrols and 679 air patrols. Cooperation
between MINURSO team site commanders and the parties was generally satisfactory.
The reporting period included monthly visits to approximately 920 units,
headquarters and strongpoints and 28 training areas. M ilitary observers also visited
365 observation posts east and west of the berm and monitored over 292 notified
operational activities by both parties. MINURSO continued to maintain the temporary
observation post in Guerguerat established in August 2016, co mprising 10 military
observers, 1 doctor and one paramedic, assigned to monitor activities during daylight
hours.
33. As of 1 July, owing to a direct threat of kidnapping against international
personnel received in late June, patrolling east of the berm was restricted to a
100-kilometre radius from team sites. Normal patrolling activities continued west of
the berm. Night operations on both sides of the berm remained suspended. MINURSO
also immediately implemented additional precautionary measures and acce lerated the
reinforcement of the physical and operational security infrastructure at all nine team
sites. In its 2018–2019 budget submitted to the General Assembly (A/72/731), the
Mission proposed the acquisition of protective bunkers for all team sites east of the
berm.
34. In late December, Frente Polisario elements reappeared inside the buffer strip
near Guerguerat (see para. 4). Initially, Frente Polisario indicated that the presence
was associated with the Africa Eco Race, an off-road automobile rally, which was to
pass through the area on 8 January. Frente Polisario stated that it would block the
race, and on 4 January stopped and briefly delayed some civilian traffic, with a few
vehicles turning back. They subsequently clarified that they would not interfere with
the race, but only observe it as its passed through, which they did. MINURSO
encouraged Frente Polisario to withdraw from the area.
35. Morocco strongly objected to the Frente Polisario presence. O n 4 January,
MINURSO received advance notification by Morocco of the redeployment of
260 troops from Awsard to Bir Gandouz, about two hours from Guerguerat, to secure
the race if necessary. On 9 January, MINURSO was informed of the troops ’ return to
their initial location. MINURSO maintained dialogue with both parties and increased
air patrols and the hours of operation of the temporary observation post in the area.
36. As at 1 March, Frente Polisario elements were still present in the Guerguerat
area. MINURSO military observers continued to observe the situation during daylight
hours.
37. During the reporting period, MINURSO recorded five violations of military
agreement No. 1 by the Royal Moroccan Army in addition to 10 long -standing
violations (see S/2017/307, para. 36). Two of them were general and three consisted
of tactical reinforcements. The Royal Moroccan Army did not commit any freedom
of movement violations during the reporting period.
38. Meanwhile, MINURSO recorded seven violations of military agreement No. 1
by Frente Polisario, as well as five general and two freedom of movement violations.
These violations were in addition to the three long-standing violations referred to in
the previous report (see S/2017/307, para. 37).
39. In October and January, the Royal Moroccan Army complained to MINURSO
about two alleged night-time shooting incidents in subsectors Tichla and Bir
Gandouz, along the southern part of the berm, which it attributed to the Frente
Polisario military. On each occasion, the Royal Moroccan Army alleged that one of
its soldiers stationed at the berm was injured by gunfire emanating from the buffer
strip, while investigating suspicious noises. Frente Polisario claimed no knowledge
of either incident and informed MINURSO that it had no military forces present in
18-05020

7/17

S/2018/277

those areas when the incidents allegedly happened. As, owing to existing security
restrictions, the Mission does not conduct night patrols, it was unable to
independently verify the incident. The Permanent Representative of Morocco wrote
to the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations to raise the issue,
warning that Morocco would not tolerate such provocations in the futur e. MINURSO
also observed six demonstrations by Sahrawi civilians inside the buffer strip close to
the berm. 1 While such demonstrations were typically peaceful, on one occasion stones
were thrown by the demonstrators towards the Royal Moroccan Army, station ed at
the berm. The Royal Moroccan Army complained to MINURSO about the
demonstrations, considering them provocations and in violation of the ceasefire
agreements.

B.

Mine action
40. Landmines and other explosive remnants of war continue to endanger the lives
of MINURSO military observers, civilian personnel and logistical convoys. As at
1 March, 54 known cluster strike areas and 22 known minefields remained to be
addressed east of the berm. Since its relocation on 1 September 2016, the MINURSO
Mine Action Coordination Centre has operated from Tindouf, Algeria.
41. The Royal Moroccan Army reported that, from 1 April 2017 to 1 March 2018,
four accidents related to landmines or explosive remnants of war occurred east of the
berm, resulting in 4 local civilians being injured. West of the berm, 3 people were
killed and 15 injured as a result of accidents caused by landmines or explosive
remnants of war.
42. The Mine Action Coordination Centre, operated by the United Nations Mine
Action Service, conducted survey and clearance of 3,123,830 m 2 of land contaminated
by landmines and explosive remnants of war — releasing 24 medium and highpriority cluster strike areas and 11 minefields; 2,350,200 m 2 of route verifications east
of the berm, an equivalent of 391.7 km, to facilitate MINURSO ground patrols; the
destruction of a total of 102 items east of the berm; landmine safety training for
217 newly arrived personnel of MINURSO; and four landmine safety refresher
training sessions for 34 participants. The Mine Action Coordination Centre conducted
37 quality assurance assessments of its operations.
43. The Royal Moroccan Army reported the clearance of more than 144,770,000 m 2
of land to the west of the berm and the destruction of 1,121 items, including 1,008
items of unexploded ordnance, as well as 57 anti-tank and 56 anti-personnel mines.
44. The Mine Action Coordination Centre conducted communication and
coordination activities with Frente Polisario on mine action, to better ascertain the
impact of landmines and other explosive remnants of war in Western Sahara.

C.

Security
45. During the reporting period, MINURSO General Threat Assessment resulted in
a moderate security level throughout the Mission’s area of operation. East of the
berm, the threat of terrorism, on the basis of direct threats received during the
reporting period and earlier, was assessed as high. Owing to the level of threats in the
region, the security of MINURSO was strengthened.
46. As part of the MINURSO security risk management measures approved in
February 2017, the Mission’s Security Section developed a priority list for their

__________________
1

8/17

See also S/2017/307, para. 35; S/2016/355, para. 32; and S/2015/246, para. 24.
18-05020

S/2018/277

implementation. MINURSO is currently implementing these measures, focusing on
security east of the berm and intends to complete the priority list in the 2018/19
budget year.

D.

Substantive civilian activities
47. In the second half of April 2017, all the remaining MINURSO staff who had
been expelled from Laayoune in March 2016 returned to their duty station (see
S/2017/307, para. 14), allowing MINURSO to return to full functionality, as
stipulated in Security Council resolution 2285 (2016). Currently, 21 per cent of
international civilian staff and United Nations Volunteers and 18 per cent of local staff
are women. Despite challenges due to the nature and environment of the mission,
MINURSO is working to improve its gender balance.
48. Within the constraints imposed, MINURSO continued to provide regular
reporting and analysis to the Secretariat on developments in and affecting Western
Sahara. The Mission also continued to receive regular visits by representatives of
Member States.
49. After assuming his functions in late December, my Special Representative was
received by the Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Morocco
and the Minister of the Interior of Morocco, Abdelouafi Laftit, who renewed their
assurances of full cooperation with MINURSO on matters related to the Mission’s
mandate. They reiterated the official position of Morocco on the conflict in Western
Sahara and raised concerns about the resumed Frente Polisario presence in
Guerguerat. In March 2018, my Special Representative travelled to Tindouf, wher e
he visited the refugee camps, accompanied by Frente Polisario members. My Special
Representative and MINURSO endeavoured to maintain sustained, consultative and
transparent contacts with the parties, primarily through their respective coordination
offices.
50. East of the berm and in the refugee camps near Tindouf, Algeria, the Mission
enjoyed unhindered access to interlocutors, including representatives of Frente
Polisario, refugees and local and international civil society organizations.
51. The lack of progress in the political process, however, continued to affect
perceptions of MINURSO and the United Nations by the parties and the general
public from both sides.

E.

Challenges to the operations of the Mission
52. The parties’ diverging interpretations of the Mission’s mandate remained the
most significant challenge to the operation of the Mission. Morocco maintained that
the Mission’s mandate is essentially limited to ceasefire monitoring, supporting
demining and assisting UNHCR with confidence-building measures if these were to
resume after their interruption in 2014. Morocco did not agree with any MINURSO
activities beyond this interpretation, such as human rights monitoring or interaction
with the local population for the purposes of politica l reporting. Thus, the only
interlocutors that Morocco permitted west of the berm were members of the Moroccan
coordination office with MINURSO and the Royal Moroccan Army. Access to other
interlocutors (see S/2017/307, para. 51) has yet to be restored. Morocco argues that
standard peacekeeping functions do not apply to MINURSO, as the Mission ’s
mandate and activities need to take into account the specificities of the situation in
Western Sahara.

18-05020

9/17

S/2018/277

53. Frente Polisario continued to see organizing a referendum on self-determination
as the central element of the MINURSO mandate, with ceasefire monitoring and other
activities subordinate or instrumental to that aim. It also consistently called on the
United Nations to establish a human rights monitoring mechanism in Western Sahara.
54. The United Nations maintained that the Mission’s mandate was set out in
successive Security Council resolutions and includes independent reporting to the
Council on developments in and related to Western Sahara, for which it requires
unhindered access to interlocutors. Furthermore, effective situational awareness is
key to the Mission’s ability to fulfil its mandate and ensure the security of its
personnel and premises, regardless of mandate interpretation.
55. Regarding ceasefire monitoring and compliance, the lack of a joint commission,
as exists in other contexts, consisting of representatives of the parties and MINURSO,
also posed challenges to the prompt and timely handling of alle gations of violations,
as MINURSO needed to liaise with the parties separately for each allegation.
56. Security considerations continued to have a major impact on ceasefire
monitoring and resupply of logistics. Ground patrols east of the berm are limited in
range during the day and do not operate at night. Logistics convoys are vulnerable
and depend upon prior aerial reconnaissance of routes. Aerial patrols will become
more available thanks to a third helicopter, but will remain limited to daylight hours.
57. West of the berm, the Mission’s vehicles continued to bear Moroccan number
plates, affecting the perception of the Mission’s impartiality and contrary to the
agreement in principle reached with the Government of Morocco in 2015. Frente
Polisario also continued to protest the Moroccan practice of affixing stamps on the
passports of MINURSO staff members upon entry to and exit from Western Sahara
(see S/2017/307, para. 58).
58. In Guerguerat, MINURSO observers remained limited in their ability to observe
the area outside of the well-travelled portion of the road due to safety concerns (see
S/2017/307, para. 57), in particular, landmines and explosive remnants of war.
Therefore, observations on the ground continued to require the support of helicopter
reconnaissance.

V. Humanitarian activities and human rights
A.

Persons unaccounted for in the conflict
59. The International Committee of the Red Cross continued, as a neutral
intermediary, to seek opportunities to enhance dialogue and facilitate the exchange of
information between the parties, in respect of individuals who are still unaccounted
for in relation to past hostilities.

B.

Assistance to the protection of Western Saharan refugees
60. The United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
and its partners continued to provide international protection and assistance to
Sahrawi refugees living in the five camps near Tindouf, Algeria. However, the
consequences of underfunding on life-saving humanitarian assistance and the regular
refugee programme were clearly visible. For example, UNHCR could provide an
average of only 18 litres of drinking water per person per day, which is below the
minimum standard of 20 litres.

10/17

18-05020

S/2018/277

61. For humanitarian planning purposes, UNHCR deployed a technical mission in
January 2018 to review the Sahrawi in-camp population figure on the basis of sectoral
data. The humanitarian assistance provided by UNH CR and WFP continued to be
based on previous planning figures. WFP provided additional food rations to persons
with poor nutritional status. The number of vulnerable individuals as a subset of the
estimated population will be further examined on the basis of a multi-agency
vulnerability assessment.
62. The major public health issues affecting Saharawi refugees are
non-communicable diseases and chronic malnutrition. WFP provided nutritionally
balanced school meals for 40,500 children in the refugee camps, t o encourage
attendance and retention. The United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) continued
to provide maternal and child health programmes, including the immunization of
22,000 children. To prevent sexual and gender-based violence, UNHCR opened a safe
house for women in 2017.
63. To contribute to resilience and improve food security, UNICEF and WFP
introduced pilot projects for complementary activities. The main challenge for
humanitarian actors remained the funding shortfall. The humanitarian community
launched an appeal for USD 137.6 million during 2016/2017, of which only 47 per
cent was funded.

C.

Confidence-building measures
64. The confidence-building measures, pursuant to Security Council resolution
1282 (1999) and subsequent resolutions, to allow family links between Saharawi
refugees in the Tindouf camps and their communities of origin in the Western Sahara
Territory remain on hold.

D.

Human rights2
65. From 22 to 28 October, the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment visited Morocco to advise the
Government on establishing a national detention monitoring body to inspect places
of detention, as envisaged in the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture.
As at 27 February, the Government had not established or designated such a
mechanism. Discussions are ongoing. During its visit, the Subcommittee on
Prevention of Torture assessed the treatment of persons deprived of liberty and the
measures taken for their protection against torture and ill -treatment. It handed over a
confidential report to the Government.
66. Torture and ill-treatment in places of deprivation of liberty, including owing to
overcrowding and limited or no access to medical care, continued to be reported.
According to various sources, the lack of accountability for human rights violations
perpetrated against Sahrawis was a major concern during the reporting period, with
international and national organizations reporting a persisting lack of investigations
into allegations of such acts.
67. On 19 July, a Moroccan court of appeal sentenced 23 Sahrawi activists to prison
terms of between two years and life on charges relating to the killing of 11 Moroccan

__________________
2

18-05020

Gaps in human rights reporting remain, owing to the limited monitoring capacity of OHCHR. To
date, OHCHR has been able to conduct four assessment missions in Western Saha ra, in 2006,
2014 and 2015. In resolution 2351 (2017), the Security Council commended OHCHR missions
and encouraged all parties to continue cooperating with the Office, including through facilitating
further visits to the region.
11/17

S/2018/277

security officers in 2010. As at 5 February, the Gdeim Izik ’s case (see S/2017/307,
para. 74), was being reviewed by the Court of Cassation. The Office of the Unite d
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) received several
communications from lawyers and/or family members reporting serious breaches to
the principles of fair trial. The Secretary-General of Frente Polisario wrote to me
again on 21 July, denouncing the sentences. He also called on the United Nations to
request the immediate release of the 23 detainees.
68. Several Saharawi human rights groups continued to experience difficulties in
carrying out their activities, as the Government of Morocco r ejected their applications
for registration and, therefore, legal recognition.
69. Alleged harassment by the Moroccan authorities of Saharan human rights
defenders also remains of serious concern. Restrictions were reportedly imposed on
human rights defenders wanting to enter and leave the Territory. In 2017, according
to local and international sources, the Moroccan authorities continued to restrict
access to Western Sahara for foreign visitors, including journalists, human rights
defenders and lawyers from Morocco.
70. Although it remained difficult to obtain independent confirmation, various
sources reported that the Moroccan authorities continued to routinely prevent or
disperse gatherings in Western Sahara west of the berm. In several instances,
protesters and activists were allegedly subjected to arbitrary arrests, unfair trials and
imprisonment on ostensibly trumped-up charges. OHCHR received several
communications from local non-governmental organizations stating that the
Moroccan security forces had forcibly dispersed protests.
71. Available information indicates that Sahrawis continued allegedly to face
discrimination in the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights. During the
third universal periodic review of Morocco, in May, the Morocc an delegation
affirmed that all Moroccan citizens were equal before the law in terms of rights and
responsibilities. It ascertained that the people of the Sahara were an integral
component of the defence of the territorial integrity and national unity and were
associated in all development processes at the national, regional and local levels,
either through elected representative bodies, professional bodies or civil society
organizations that worked freely within the legal and constitutional framework of th e
country (see A/HRC/36/6, para. 31). Moroccan and international investments in the
territorial waters adjacent to Western Sahara remained a subject of contention
between the Government of Morocco and Frente Polisario.
72. The situation of the Sahrawi refugees raises multiple human rights concerns,
many linked to the non-realization of the right to self-determination, such as the dire
humanitarian situation they face, coupled with the lack of access to natural wealth
and resources in Western Sahara west of the berm.
73. The few local human rights groups that exist in the refugee camps reportedly
continued to operate freely, without any reported impediments. During the reporting
period, Frente Polisario expressed readiness to cooperate with United Nations human
rights mechanisms.

VI. African Union
74. During the reporting period, Morocco did not allow the African Union Observer
Mission to return to Laayoune and resume its collaboration with MINURSO. During
its thirtieth ordinary session, held from 28 to 29 January, in Addis Ababa, the
Assembly of the African Union supported the United Nations -led relaunching of the
negotiation process and reiterated its call upon the parties to engage in direct and
12/17

18-05020

S/2018/277

serious talks without preconditions and to fully cooperate with the Personal Envoy of
the Secretary-General of the United Nations. 3 The Assembly further urged Morocco
to allow the African Union Observer Mission to return to Laayoune.

VII. Financial aspects
75. The General Assembly, in its resolution 71/309, appropriated $52.0 million for
the maintenance of the Mission for the period from 1 July 2017 to 30 June 2018. My
proposed budget in the amount of $53.9 million (exclusive of budgeted voluntary
contributions in kind) for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from 1 July
2018 to 30 June 2019 was submitted to the Assembly for its consideration during the
second part of its resumed seventy-second session. Should the Security Council
decide to extend the mandate of MINURSO beyond 30 April 2018, the cost of
maintaining the Mission would be limited to the amounts approved by the Assembly.
76. As at 13 March 2018, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account for
MINURSO amounted to $ 41.7 million. Troop costs were reimbursed for the period
up to 31 October 2017, while the costs of contingent-owned major equipment and
self-sustainment were reimbursed for the period up to 30 September 2017, in
accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

VIII. Observations and recommendations
77. In my previous report (S/2017/307), I proposed that the negotiating process be
relaunched with a new dynamic and a new spirit that reflects the Security Council’s
guidance, with the aim of reaching a just, durable and mutually acceptable solution
to the conflict in Western Sahara that will provide for the self -determination of the
people of Western Sahara. The Security Council, in its resolution 2351 (2017),
affirmed its full support for this proposal. I am encouraged by the steps taken by my
Personal Envoy to relaunch the political process since his appointment. I welcome his
first visit to the region, where he was received at the highest level, as well as
subsequent in-depth bilateral consultations with the parties, neighbouring States and
other stakeholders. The numerous private and public expressions of support for the
efforts of my Personal Envoy are also an important signal that a new dynamic is
already in play.
78. To maintain this positive momentum, additional steps need to be taken by the
parties, neighbouring countries and other relevant interlocutors to reflect in their own
positions the new spirit and dynamic the Council has called for. In its resolutions
since the beginning of 2007, the Security Council has directed me to facilitate direct
negotiations between the parties without preconditions, in good faith, taking into
account the efforts made since 2006 and subsequent developments, working with
realism and a spirit of compromise. The Council has also called on the parties to show
political will, work in an atmosphere favouring dialogue and discuss each other ’s
proposals to prepare for a fifth round of formal negotiations. I call upon the parties to
continue to work with my Personal Envoy in this new spirit and dynamic and to
genuinely commit to the negotiating process in accordance with the guidance
provided by Security Council resolutions.
79. The negotiating process does not occur in a vacuum. In the era of global
interdependence, the socioeconomic, humanitarian and security implications of this
protracted conflict weigh heavily on regional and subregional integration. I would
__________________
3

18-05020

See Assembly/AU/6(XXX), para. 17. Available from https://au.int/sites/default/files/decision s/
33908-assembly_decisions_665_-_689_e.pdf.
13/17

S/2018/277

like to reiterate the Security Council’s call upon neighbouring States, Algeria and
Mauritania, to make important contributions to the political process and to increase
their engagement in the negotiating process.
80. I am concerned about the possible resumption of tensions following the renewed
presence of Frente Polisario in Guerguerat and the challenges that such actions by
either party may present to the ceasefire. I recognize the measured response of
Morocco in keeping its troops well away from the buffer strip during the tensions. I
call upon Frente Polisario to withdraw from the buffer strip as it did in April 2017. I
call upon both parties to exercise maximum restraint and to avoid escalating tensions,
and to refrain from taking any action which may constitute a change in the status quo
at the buffer strip. With respect to the efforts of the United Nations to address the
questions raised by the situation in Guerguerat, I welcome the positive response of
Frente Polisario to my proposal to deploy an expert mission as part of this process
and strongly encourage Morocco to reconsider this initiative so that both parties can
engage in a bona fide discussion on the matter.
81. Further, I remain deeply concerned about security in Western Sahara, in
particular in the vast and empty desert expanse east of the berm, where unar med
military observers of MINURSO remain vulnerable to threats by criminal and terrorist
groups. The Mission’s ground movements east of the berm remain particularly
vulnerable, considerably straining the limited aviation resources within the Mission
to verify their routes. MINURSO has also allocated considerable effort and resources
to upgrading its static security measures at all its locations, in particular east of the
berm. I proposed additional funding for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
to complete this essential work and to allow the Mission to move forward with
acquiring its third helicopter. I am grateful for the Council ’s continued support for
the Mission’s efforts to strengthen the security of its facilities and staff operating
under strenuous conditions.
82. MINURSO has conducted a range of reviews and assessments to strengthen
security, improve performance and reorganize staffing in order to achieve its goals
more efficiently and consider new technologies to reduce risk, improve force
protection and better implement the mandate assigned by the Security Council. A
number of these recommended measures will require adequate resources, for which
the support of the Security Council will be critical. Further to these initiatives I intend
to conduct, in mid-2018, a strategic review of MINURSO to provide an in-depth
analysis of the Mission and recommend measures to improve its mandate delivery.
83. The parties, while occasionally violating the letter of the ceasefire and military
agreements, on the whole respected the spirit of the agreements, while also engaging
promptly with MINURSO and the Secretariat when potential violations arose.
Longstanding violations have nonetheless had a significant impact on the balance of
military power and on the United Nations, which risks seeing its capabilities, integrity
and perceived independence gradually eroded.
84. The Mission’s effectiveness depends also on its ability to exercise the full range
of standard peacekeeping functions, to inform an impartial and independent
assessment of developments on the ground, as these may have a bearing on the
political process and the broader peace and stability in Western Sahara. I continue to
call for the support of the Security Council in this regard.
85. The contribution of MINURSO to maintaining the ceasefire remains as relevant
as ever, a central and necessary role in preventing conflict, thus creating the
conditions for the resumption of negotiations in the context of my efforts and those
of my Personal Envoy. Despite constraints, the Mission’s role in keeping the
Secretariat and the Security Council informed of developments in and related to
Western Sahara makes a significant contribution to progress in the negotiating
14/17

18-05020

S/2018/277

process, while also supporting regional stability. I therefore recommend that the
Council extend the mandate of MINURSO for a further 12 months, until 30 April
2019.
86. I remain concerned about the increasing level of exasperation among the refugee
communities in Tindouf, after more than 42 years in the camps, with limited hope.
While confidence-building measures, which remain currently suspended, have an
essential humanitarian component, they cannot be seen as a solution to the political
impasse. I therefore call upon all actors to support the pol itical process and work
towards an acceptable solution for the refugees which allows for a life in dignity.
87. I also note with great concern the chronic lack of funding for humanitarian
assistance despite increasing needs. For 2018, humanitarian needs f or UNHCR,
UNICEF and WFP are $58.5 million. I therefore call upon the international
community to continue its support for this vital humanitarian programme.
88. I urge the parties to respect and promote human rights, including in addressing
outstanding human rights issues and enhancing cooperation with the OHCHR and the
United Nations human rights mechanisms, and facilitate their follow -up missions.
Independent, impartial, comprehensive and sustained monitoring of the human rights
situation is necessary to ensure the protection of all people in Western Sahara.
89. The conflict over Western Sahara has lasted for too long and must be brought to
an end for the sake and the dignity of the population of Western Sahara, including
those who have been displaced for more than four decades, as well as for the stability
of the wider region, which is facing myriad political, economic and security
challenges. In this regard, the work of my Personal Envoy, MINURSO and of the
United Nations agencies remains indispensable.
90. I am grateful to the neighbouring States, the Members of the Group of Friends
on Western Sahara and other relevant interlocutors for lending their support to the
political process. I would like to express my particular appreciation to the
Government of Spain for continuing to facilitate the visits of my Personal Envoy to
the region by providing an aircraft. I wish to extend my sincere thanks to my Personal
Envoy for Western Sahara, Horst Koehler, for his engagement with the parties and
neighbouring States. Similarly, I am grateful to my Special Representative for
Western Sahara and Head of MINURSO, Colin Stewart, his predecessor, Kim Bolduc,
and Major General Wang Xiaojun, for their dedicated leadership of MINURSO.
Finally, I would also like to thank the men and women of MINURSO for their
dedicated and committed work, in difficult circumstances.

18-05020

15/17

S/2018/277

Annex
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
Contributions as at 1 March 2018
Military observers a

Troops a

Civilian police b

Total

Argentina

3

–

–

3

Austria

5

–

–

5

Bangladesh

6

20

–

26

Brazil

10

–

–

10

Bhutan

2

–

–

2

China

12

–

–

12

Croatia

7

–

–

7

Djibouti

2

–

–

2

Egypt

19

–

–

19

Ecuador

4

–

–

4

El Salvador

2

–

–

2

Finland

–

–

1

1

France

2

–

–

2

Germany

3

–

–

3

Ghana

6

7

–

13

Guinea

5

–

–

5

Honduras

12

–

–

12

Hungary

7

–

–

7

India

3

–

–

3

Indonesia

5

–

–

5

Ireland

3

–

–

3

Kazakhstan

3

–

–

3

Malawi

3

–

–

3

Mexico

4

–

–

4

Mongolia

4

–

–

4

Montenegro

2

–

–

2

Nepal

5

–

–

5

Nigeria

6

–

–

6

Pakistan

14

–

–

14

Poland

1

–

–

1

Portugal

–

–

1

1

Republic of Korea

4

–

–

4

Russian Federation

16

–

–

16

Sri Lanka

4

–

–

4

Sweden

4

–

–

4

Switzerland

2

–

–

2

Togo

2

–

–

2

Yemen

6

–

–

6

198

27

2

227

Country

Total
a

Authorized strength is 246, including the Force Commander.
Authorized strength is 12.
c
Actual strength on the ground, for military and civilian police, including the Force Commander.

b

16/17

18-05020

S/2018/277

18-05020

17/17
