A /75/PV.73

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

73rd plenary meeting

Monday, 7 June 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 118
Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs
(b) Election of members of the Economic and
Social Council
Note verbale dated 18 May 2021 from the
Permanent Mission of Portugal to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretariat
(A/75/894)
The President: As indicated in my letter dated
2 June, at this meeting the Assembly will proceed to
the election of 18 members of the Economic and Social
Council to replace those whose term of office expires
on 31 December 2021 and, at the same time, a byelection to elect four members of the Council to fill the
four seats of the members that will relinquish their seats
before the end of their terms, in accordance with rule
140 of the rules of procedure.
The 18 outgoing members are: Angola, Armenia,
Brazil, Canada, Egypt, Ethiopia, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Jamaica, Kenya, Luxembourg, Mali, the
Netherlands, Pakistan, Paraguay, Saudi Arabia,
Turkmenistan, Ukraine and the United States of
America. Pursuant to rule 146 of the rules of procedure,
those countries are eligible for immediate re-election.
In accordance with paragraph 4 of resolution 2847
(XXVI) of 20 December 1971 and taking into account
the number of States that will remain members of the
Council after 1 January 2022, the 18 members should

be elected as follows: five from among the African
States, four from among the Asia-Pacific States, two
from among the Eastern European States, three from
among the Latin American and Caribbean States and
four from among the Western European and other
States. The ballot papers, marked “A”, “B”, “C”, “D”
and “E”, reflect that pattern.
In connection with the by-election of four members
of the Council, I would like to draw the attention of
members to note verbale A/75/894 dated 18 May from the
Permanent Mission of Portugal to the United Nations, in
which the Mission, in its capacity as Chair of the Group
of Western European and other States for the month of
May, announced that Australia would relinquish its seat
on 31 December 2021 for the remainder of the term,
in favour of New Zealand; Finland would relinquish its
seat on 31 December 2021 for the remainder of the term,
in favour of Denmark; Germany would relinquish its
seat on 31 December 2021 for the remainder of the term,
in favour of Israel; and Switzerland would relinquish
its seat on 31 December 2021 for the remainder of the
term, in favour of Greece.
As a result, four vacancies will occur and new
members must be elected to fill the unexpired terms
of Australia, Finland and Switzerland, commencing
on 1 January 2022 and expiring on 31 December 2022,
and the unexpired term of Germany, commencing on
1 January 2022 and expiring on 31 December 2023.
In accordance with paragraph 4 of resolution 2847
(XXVI) of 20 December 1971 and taking into account
that the vacancies will occur from among the Western

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-14195 (E)

*2114195*

A/75/PV.73

European and other States, the new members should
be elected from that region. I should like to inform the
Assembly that those candidates — not exceeding the
number of seats to be filled — that receive the greatest
number of votes and a two-thirds majority of those
present and voting will be declared elected.
If the number of candidates obtaining a twothird majority is less than the number of members to
be elected, there shall be additional ballots to fill the
remaining places, the voting being restricted to the
candidates obtaining the greatest number of votes in
the previous ballot, up to a number not more than twice
the number of places remaining to be filled. Also,
consistent with past practice in the case of a tie vote and
when it becomes necessary to determine the candidates
to be elected or the ones to proceed to the next round
of restricted balloting, there will be a special restricted
ballot limited to those candidates that have obtained an
equal number of votes.
As of 1 January 2022, the following States
will be represented on the Economic and Social
Council: Argentina, Austria, Bangladesh, Benin, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Botswana, Bulgaria,
China, Colombia, the Congo, France, Gabon,
Guatemala, Indonesia, Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Mexico, Montenegro, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Norway, Panama, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, the
Russian Federation, Solomon Islands, Thailand, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
and Zimbabwe.
I would ask the Assembly to note that, as
mentioned previously, Australia, Finland, Germany
and Switzerland will relinquish their seats at the end
of 2021. The names of these States should therefore not
appear on the ballot papers.
Regarding candidatures, I have been informed of
the following. For the five vacant seats from among
the African States, five endorsed candidates have
been communicated, namely Côte d’Ivoire, Eswatini,
Mauritius, Tunisia and the United Republic of
Tanzania. For the four vacant seats from among the
Asia-Pacific States, four endorsed candidates have
been communicated, namely Afghanistan, India,
Kazakhstan and Oman. For the two vacant seats from
among the Eastern European States, two candidates
have been communicated, namely Croatia and the Czech
Republic. For the three vacant seats from among the
Latin American and Caribbean States, three candidates
2/13

07/06/2021

have been communicated, namely Belize, Chile and
Peru. For the four vacant seats from among the Western
European and other States, four endorsed candidates
have been communicated, namely Belgium, Canada,
Italy and the United States of America. In accordance
with rule 92 of the rules of procedure, we shall now
proceed to the election by secret ballot.
I should like to remind representatives that
pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of procedure, after
the President has announced the beginning of voting
no representative shall interrupt the voting except on
a point of order in connection with the actual conduct
of the voting. Any announcements, including those
concerning the withdrawal of candidatures, should
therefore be made prior to the commencement of the
voting process, that is to say before the announcement
of the beginning of the voting process.
As indicated in my letter dated 2 June, all
representatives were advised to pick up their ballot
papers from the East Documents Counter, located
towards the back of the General Assembly Hall, before
being seated. I request representatives to use only these
ballot papers. Representatives are requested to remain
in their seats until they are called to cast their ballots
in the ballot boxes located at the base of the podium.
While the 1+1 format outlined in my letter dated 21 May
will apply to this meeting, only one representative per
delegation should walk from the national seat to cast
the ballot. I would like to remind members that they are
voting on the election of 18 members of the Economic
and Social Council and the by-election of four members
from the Western European and other States.
In accordance with resolution 71/323 of
8 September 2017, the names of the States that have
been communicated to the Secretariat have been printed
on the ballot papers for each of the regional groups.
Additional blank lines corresponding to the number of
vacant seats to be filled for each of the regional groups
have been provided on the ballot papers for inscribing
other States if desirable.
I request representatives to use only those ballot
papers that have been distributed and to put an “X”
in the boxes next to the names of the States from the
relevant region for which they wish to vote, and/or to
write other eligible names on the blank lines. If the box
next to the name of a State is checked, the name of that
State does not have to be repeated on the blank line.
21-14195

07/06/2021

The total number of checked boxes and/or
handwritten names should not exceed the number of
vacant seats to be filled as indicated on the ballot paper.
A ballot paper will be declared invalid if it contains
more names of States from the relevant region than the
number of seats allocated to it.
Accordingly, for the ballot papers marked “A” for
African States, the total number of checked boxes and/
or handwritten names should not exceed five; for the
ballot papers marked “B” for Asia-Pacific States, the
total number of checked boxes and/or handwritten
names should not exceed four; for the ballot papers
marked “C” for Eastern European States, the total
number of checked boxes and/or handwritten names
should not exceed two; for the ballot papers marked
“D” for Latin American and Caribbean States, the total
number of checked boxes and/or handwritten names
should not exceed three; and for the ballot papers
marked “E” for Western European and other States,
the total number of checked boxes and/or handwritten
names should not exceed four.
Equally, for the ballot papers marked “By-election”
for Western European and other States, the total number
of checked boxes and/or handwritten names should not
exceed four.
A ballot paper will be declared invalid if none of the
names of the States on that ballot for which votes were
cast belongs to the relevant region. If a ballot paper of a
region contains one of the following, the ballot remains
valid but the vote for those States will not be counted:
States that do not belong to the region concerned or
States that continue to be members of the Council.
If a ballot paper contains any notation other than
votes in favour of specific candidates, those notations
will be disregarded. If a mistake is made in filling
out the ballot paper, delegations should request a new
ballot paper from the Secretariat at the East Documents
Counter. Representatives of the following States have
agreed to serve as tellers: Guatemala, Japan, Norway,
the Republic of Moldova and South Africa.
Two ballot boxes have been placed at the front of
the General Assembly Hall where tellers will be able
to observe them and the casting of ballots — one
ballot box for the election of the 18 members of the
Council and one for the by-election of four members of
the Council.

A/75/PV.73

For the casting of ballots, the Secretary will call
the name of each delegation following the General
Assembly protocol seating arrangement, starting from
the delegation of Iceland, and will ask representatives
concerned to proceed to cast their ballots.
Representatives are requested to practice physical
distancing of no less than two metres and to proceed to
cast their ballot only when the previous representative
has completed casting their ballot. That will continue
until the last representative has cast their ballot.
After casting their ballots, representatives will
leave the General Assembly Hall through the exit on
the west side and return to their seats through the
doors located on the east side. Signs marked “re-entry”
have been placed to guide representatives back to the
General Assembly Hall.
Once all ballots have been cast, the voting will
be declared closed and the meeting will continue with
the consideration of other items, as announced in the
Journal of the United Nations. The tellers, accompanied
by Secretariat staff, will proceed to the Trusteeship
Council Chamber for the counting of the ballots.
Upon receipt of the results certified by the tellers,
the results will be announced. The proceedings of the
plenary meeting, including the announcement of the
results, will be webcast.
May I take it that the General Assembly agrees to
these procedures?
It was so decided.
The President: We shall now begin the voting
process. I request representatives to use only those
ballot papers that have been provided to them.
At the invitation of the President, the representatives
of Guatemala, Japan, Norway, Republic of Moldova
and South Africa acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 3.30 pm and resumed
at 3.50 p.m.
The President: As I announced earlier, while the
votes are being counted, the General Assembly will
continue with the plenary meeting to take up agenda
items 7 and 111.

21-141953/13

A/75/PV.73

The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 118.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda
and allocation of items: reports of the General
Committee
Second report of the General Committee
(A/75/250/Add. 1)
The President: I should like to draw the attention
of representatives to the second report of the General
Committee (A/75/250/Add. 1). The General Committee
recommends to the General Assembly that an additional
item entitled “Appointment of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations” be included in the agenda of
the current session under heading I (Organizational,
administrative and other matters).
May I take it that the General Assembly decides to
include this item in the agenda of the current session
under heading I (Organizational, administrative and
other matters)?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Committee also
recommends that the item be considered directly in
plenary meeting.
May I take it that the General Assembly decides to
consider the item directly in plenary meeting?
It was so decided.
The President: I should like to inform members
that the item entitled “Appointment of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations” becomes item 184 of the
agenda of the current session.

07/06/2021

A/75/L.94, jointly proposed by Belarus, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Russian Federation, the Syrian
Arab Republic, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
and my own country, China.
We thank the Permanent Representatives of Georgia
and the Philippines for their efforts as co-facilitators
of draft resolution A/75/L.93, entitled, “Modalities,
format and organization of the high-level meeting of
the General Assembly on the appraisal of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons”. We strongly support and actively participate
in global efforts in combating trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, and look forward to the
upcoming high-level meeting to renew our commitment
to addressing that serious challenge to humankind.
We strongly support a comprehensive approach and
partnership among Member States, the United Nations
system and all relevant stakeholders in implementing
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons. We welcome and appreciate
the important contributions made by civil society,
including non-governmental organizations (NGOs),
in engaging constructively with Member States and
the United Nations system to combat trafficking in
persons, provide assistance to victims and survivors
and raise awareness.
We are glad to see that currently almost 6,000
NGOs enjoy active consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council. We are also pleased to
see that in past years the General Assembly has agreed
to the consensus approach of allowing the participation,
on a non-objection basis, of NGOs that do not have
consultative status with the Council, while respecting
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly and the
intergovernmental nature of its work.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of China to introduce draft amendment
A/75/L.94.

That practice has worked successfully for many
years. However, we regret that since February,
the decades-long consensus has been broken. The
established rules of procedure and methods of work of
the United Nations were challenged. An unnecessary
division was provoked, and the unity and solidarity of
Member States were undermined. We also need to point
out that, when consensus cannot be achieved among
Member States, it is the long-standing practice of
United Nations negotiations to revert to the previously
agreed language as the best way out.

Mr. Guo Jiakun (China): I have the honour to
introduce the amendment contained in document

We therefore regret that, despite hours of
consultations and various efforts, the concerns of

Agenda item 111 (continued)
Crime prevention and criminal justice
Draft resolution (A/75/L.93)
Draft amendment (A/75/L.94)

4/13

21-14195

07/06/2021

several delegations were not properly addressed. The
controversial text, which was non-consensual and put
to the vote in the General Assembly, remains before the
Assembly for action, although the silent procedure was
broken by a number of delegations.
Since that is the case, Belarus, China, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Russian Federation, the Syrian
Arab Republic and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
have accordingly proposed draft amendment A/75/L.94,
which contains verbatim the language of resolution
71/287. entitled “Modalities, format and organization
of the high-level meeting on the appraisal of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons”, which was adopted by consensus without
reservation. We believe that consensual language is in
the best interest of all Member States.
In that regard, we call on all Member States to
vote in favour of the draft amendment. By voting in
favour of it, they will be supporting the most important
principle of consensus. They will be supporting unity,
not division. They will be supporting NGO participation
based on long-established and effective practice, in line
with the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
Please vote in favour of the draft amendment. We count
on the support of Member States.
The President: Before we proceed to take a
decision on draft resolution A/75/L.93 and draft
amendment A/75/L.94 thereto, delegations wishing to
make a statement in explanation of vote before the vote
on the draft resolution and/or the draft amendment are
invited to do so now in one intervention. May I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Guerra (Portugal): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union and its 27 member States.
The European Union would like to thank the President
of the General Assembly and the co-facilitators, Georgia
and the Philippines, for their efforts and transparent
consultations carried out on draft resolution A/75/L.93
on the modalities, format and organization of the highlevel meeting of the General Assembly on the appraisal
of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons. Agreeing on the modalities for
the high-level meeting today is an important milestone
for the issue of trafficking in persons and we therefore
welcome the draft resolution.

A/75/PV.73

Let me turn to the importance of civil society
participation. The European Union welcomes the zero
draft, which allows the participation of a diverse range
of civil society experts in such a transversal issue as
trafficking in persons. Such contributions will greatly
enrich our discussions. The European Union attaches
great importance to the participation of civil society
organizations at the United Nations. It is a high priority.
As we strongly supported the language of resolution
75/260 on the organization of the 2021 high-level meeting
on HIV/AIDS and resolution 75/282 on countering the
use of information and communications technologies
for criminal purposes, we welcome that paragraph 9 of
the zero draft contains that agreed language.
We regret that paragraph 9 of draft resolution
A/75/L.93 is being put to the vote. We cannot support
an amendment that deviates from the language of the
zero draft. On the contrary, we support paragraph 9,
which not only provides more transparency with regard
to the participation of civil society organizations
but also ensures that the power of decision on the
participation of civil society organizations remains
with the Assembly. The final decision on the list of
civil society organizations must not be that of a single
Member State.
Civil society makes an indispensable contribution
to our work on countless issues, including the promotion
and protection of human rights. Let us not forget that in
a world that is increasingly hostile to non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), it is all the more incumbent
upon the United Nations and its Member States to
facilitate access for and participation of NGOs at the
United Nations.
Trafficking in persons is a multidimensional and
complex issue. We need to hear all those voices so that
they can share their broad experiences at the highlevel event. For those reasons, the European Union
cannot support draft amendment A/75/L.94 concerning
paragraph 9 of draft resolution A/75/L.93 and will vote
against it. We also call on other members to do the same.
Ms. Nemroff (United States of America): The
United States wishes to thank Georgia and the
Philippines for draft resolution A/75/L.93 on the
modalities, format and organization of the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on the appraisal of
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons. We place importance on the

21-141955/13

A/75/PV.73

07/06/2021

Global Plan of Action and look forward to the highlevel meeting to be held in November.

paragraph 9 by Russia, Syria, Iran and China, as
contained in document A/75/L.94.

Primarily, I want to say today that we support
the co-facilitators’ text, as it has been submitted to
the General Assembly, including paragraph 9, which
ensures the inclusive participation of civil society,
accountability and transparency, by bringing it to the
whole General Assembly for a decision. We call on
members to vote against draft amendment A/75/L.94.

Colleagues around the room today will be forgiven
for perhaps feeling a slight sense of déja vu as we come
to this subject, because this is the third time in just
over three months that we as the General Assembly
are being asked to opine on this matter. It is the same
question; it is the third time of asking. We are very
pleased on this occasion that it is the people proposing
the draft amendment who are having to propose to
make a change to the text, as the co-facilitators have
included the language in operative paragraph 9 because
it is the agreed language of the General Assembly. It
is the language that the Assembly adopted in the votes
taken on 23 February, for the HIV modalities resolution
(see A/75/PV.55), and again on 26 May concerning
the Ad Hoc Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive
International Convention on Countering the Use of
Information and Communications Technologies for
Criminal Purposes (see A/75/PV.71).

Those modalities were adopted in recent resolutions,
as already mentioned by other delegations, including
the consensual modalities text in resolution 75/282 on
countering the use of information and communications
technologies for criminal purposes, which was adopted
by the General Assembly just a few days ago in this
very Hall. Moreover, those very same modalities were
used successfully in the preparations for the 2021 highlevel meeting on HIV/AIDS, for which the General
Assembly — again in this very Hall — adopted the list
of non-governmental organizations by consensus about
a week ago.
We regret that some members wish to weaken
the draft resolution’s references to transparency and
accountability for NGO participation in the meeting. It
is critical that we enable the meaningful participation
of civil society and ensure that its views are heard in
order to inform this important discussion.
Once again, we urge all delegations to vote
against this draft amendment, which would walk back
recent precedent.
Finally, I just wanted to mention that the procedures
that are set out in operative paragraph 9 of the text are
a long-standing practice and precedent of this body for
high-level events and conferences. We are disappointed
that some Member States continue to distort this fact
and elide it in our conversations about civil society. I
would like to correct that in the record today.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): I wanted to start
by, like others, thanking the co-facilitators, Georgia
and the Philippines, for the modalities draft resolution
(A/75/L.93) that we have before us today. It is the result
of a lot of hard work on their part and on the part of
colleagues around the room.
But I am not going to focus my words today on the
issue of trafficking; the United Kingdom’s position on
that is well known. I wanted to instead turn, as others
have, to the amendment being proposed to operative
6/13

The reason that the General Assembly, I believe,
adopted the language that we have before us in the text
is because it does what we want it to do. It means that
civil society can actively participate in the meeting on
trafficking, and, critically, it means that any one State
that wishes to prevent civil society from participating
does not have a veto. That is the crux of the matter.
The draft amendment that is being put to the Assembly
today is an attempt to give Member States a veto over
civil-society participation.
The language in the text as it stands allows the
General Assembly as a whole to make decisions on
civil-society participation, and that is why we should
vote against this draft amendment.
It is also worth noting that human trafficking is
an issue that benefits enormously from the wisdom,
perspective and experience of the civil-society actors
out there who deal with the matter of trafficking on
a day-to-day basis. It is absolutely right that as the
General Assembly considers the matter, it should be
able to hear from all those experienced individuals
and groups.
Now, as my United States colleague has just
said, it is being put to the Assembly by the delegation
proposing this draft amendment that in some way, the
way in which we are approaching this is a departure
from consensus. That is simply not true. This is a return
21-14195

07/06/2021

A/75/PV.73

to the consensus that was established on texts as far
back as 2001, 2006 and 2011.

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.

I urge all members to vote against the draft
amendment and in doing so vote for civil-society
participation, vote against the ability to veto civilsociety participation, and vote for a meeting on
trafficking that is rich in knowledge and experience.

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of draft amendment A/75/L.94
and in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become co-sponsors:
Algeria, the Comoros and Egypt.

Ms. Allan (Australia): I make this statement
on behalf of Canada, New Zealand and my own
country, Australia.
At the outset, we, too, would like to express
our thanks to Georgia and the Philippines for their
leadership on draft resolution A/75/L.93 and the
open and constructive way in which they have
facilitated negotiations.
We regret the submission of draft amendment
A/75/L.94, which seeks to take power away from the
General Assembly. Decisions about meetings of the
General Assembly should be made by the Assembly,
not by individual Member States. That is one of the
fundamental principles that guides our work. It is why
we have spent the last few months negotiating on this
modalities draft resolution.
But that principle is at stake in today’s vote. Under
the draft resolution submitted by the facilitators, if a
Member State were to object to the participation of a
civil-society organization in the high-level meeting,
the General Assembly would have the ability to make
the final decision on that organization’s participation.
That puts decision-making power in all of our hands,
not just those of one Member State. If adopted, the
draft amendment would give an individual Member
State the ability to unilaterally and anonymously block
a civil-society organization from participation in the
meeting without even having to disclose why. In recent
months, there has been a surge of support in this body
for a more transparent and collective approach to civilsociety participation. This draft amendment seeks to
take us backwards.
At a time when the coronavirus disease pandemic
has contributed to the shrinking of civic space, taking
steps to ensure civil-society inclusion is more important
than ever. Ensuring participation in the high-level
meetings of the Assembly is one such step. We urge all
delegations to vote against the draft amendment.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.

The President: Before we proceed to take a decision
on draft resolution A/75/L.93, in accordance with rule
90 of the rules of procedure, the Assembly shall first
take a decision on draft amendment A/75/L.94.
We turn first to draft amendment A/75/L.94. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Belarus, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
China, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Dominica, Egypt, Eritrea,
India, Iraq, Jamaica, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Madagascar, Mauritania, Nicaragua,
Pakistan, Russian Federation, Senegal, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Estonia, Eswatini, Fiji, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Namibia, Netherlands,
New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, TimorLeste, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Uruguay

21-141957/13

A/75/PV.73

Abstaining:
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belize, Bhutan,
Brunei Darussalam, Chad, Djibouti, Ghana,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Indonesia,
Kuwait, Liberia, Malaysia, Mali, Mozambique,
Nepal, Niger, Oman, Philippines, Rwanda, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Thailand,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, United Arab Emirates,
Yemen, Zambia
Draft amendment A/75/L.94 was rejected by 29
votes to 82, with 34 abstentions.
The President: Since draft amendment A/75/L.94
was not adopted, we shall proceed to take a decision on
draft resolution A/75/L.93.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic on a point of order.
Ms. Ali (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation
would like to thank the permanent delegations of
Georgia and the Philippines for their efforts as
facilitators of draft resolution A/75/L.93, “Modalities,
format and organization of the high-level meeting of
the General Assembly on the appraisal of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons”.
My country continues to engage in international
efforts to combat human trafficking, particularly given
the proliferation of transnational crime and its negative
impact on development, peace, stability and security,
as well as the increasing nexus in some cases between
such crimes and terrorism. We look forward to the
convening of the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on the appraisal of the United Nations Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons in
order to renew our commitment to address that grave
challenge for all humankind.
My delegation therefore participated positively,
transparently and in good faith in the negotiations
on draft resolution A/75/L.93. At every step, we
emphasized the need for the draft resolution to be
adopted by consensus, given our commitment to
the established working procedures of the General
Assembly, particularly with regard to the participation
of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in
its meetings.
8/13

07/06/2021

From the beginning, we have been keen to proceed
on the basis of consensus. Regrettably, the negotiations
were diverted from their desired course through the
insertion by some of controversial language that was
not voted on with regard to the non-objection rule
in particular, which has been used successfully in
previous years.
We regret that the concerns of my country and a
sizeable number of other delegations were not taken
into consideration. Our concerns should not be seen as
an objection to the participation of NGOs in General
Assembly meetings. However, we are of the view that
the participation of NGOs that do not enjoy consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council must be
in line with the applicable rules of procedure of the
United Nations, given the intergovernmental nature of
those organizations.
What is taking place today — the insertion
into the text of language that has not been agreed
upon — constitutes a grave violation of the rules
of procedure and creates gross precedents that will
undermine the multilateral work and the spirit of
pluralism that we must preserve among Member States.
My delegation therefore requests a recorded vote on
operative paragraph 9 of draft resolution A/75/L.93.
We also call on all delegations that share our concerns
and worries regarding attempts to undermine the
non-objection rule in particular, and the working
procedures of the General Assembly in general, to vote
against it.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): I apologize
for taking the floor. I would like to make clear
our understanding that as amendment A/75/L.94,
concerning paragraph 9 of draft resolution A/75/L.93,
has been rejected, we are now being asked to vote on
paragraph 9 of draft resolution A/75/L.93. The United
Kingdom intends to vote in favour of paragraph 9
as contained in the original text of draft resolution
A/75/L.93.
Ms. Ali (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to
only clarify that we will vote against paragraph 9 of
draft resolution A/75/L.93.
Mr. Guo Jiakun (China): I do not want to prolong
the process, but according to the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly, since the vote has begun, if
there is no procedural point of order the floor should
not be used for explanations of vote before the voting.
21-14195

07/06/2021

The President: A recorded vote has been requested
on draft resolution A/75/L.93. A separate, recorded
vote has been requested on paragraph 9 of the draft
resolution. I shall first put to the vote paragraph 9.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Cote d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Estonia, Eswatini, Fiji, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Timor-Leste, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom, United States, Uruguay
Against:
Belarus, China, Comoros, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Dominica, Eritrea, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Nicaragua, Russian
Federation, Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cameroon, Chad, Egypt, Guinea, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Jamaica, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Mozambique, Nepal, Oman, Pakistan, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and
Principe, Senegal, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Yemen, Zambia
Paragraph 9 of draft resolution A/75/L.93 was
retained by 100 votes to 12, with 31 abstentions.

A/75/PV.73

The President: The Assembly will now take action
on draft resolution A/75/L.93, entitled “Modalities,
format and organization of the high-level meeting of
the General Assembly on the appraisal of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/75/L.93?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 75/283).

A/75/L.93

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote after the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): Allow me to thank the Permanent
Representatives of Georgia and the Philippines for
coordinating the negotiations on the modalities for
holding a high-level meeting on trafficking in persons.
The Russian Federation attaches great importance to
international efforts to eliminate trafficking.
Our support for the consensus-based adoption
of resolution 75/283 is a result of our dedication to
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons and our intention to work together
with all interested parties to successfully implement
the Global Plan of Action. Achieving substantial results
toward eliminating the crime of trafficking in persons
is possible only if there is political will and if there are
united efforts of States and constructive and mutually
respectful dialogue.
Regrettably, the process of negotiations and the
attitude of our partners showed a complete lack of
willingness to reach agreement, even on procedural
documents. What is telling is that our colleagues
have not attempted to achieve consensus on such
an important issue. The leadership has acted out of
political motivations and not with the intention to help
with human trafficking. It is already clear now how
negotiations will take place on the final document,
now that we know the difficulties that we will have
to encounter.
The practice of including items in a draft resolution
does not lead to a consensus-based outcome. This
practice could put an end to the usefulness of any
document. If a political declaration reflects only the
interests of a well- known group of States, it will

21-141959/13

A/75/PV.73

come with a cost, which is the case with the resolution
adopted today.
I would also like to underscore the following.
I disagree with the appraisal of those delegations
that believe that our draft amendment is distorting
something. What was adopted today is not agreed- upon
language. It is flagrantly non-consensus-based wording.
Our delegation is convinced that the contribution of
civil society organizations is crucial for the functioning
of the United Nations. However, this should be ensured
in accordance with the rules of procedure and with
established methods and practice. Any attempts to
politicize this issue or blur the lines of intergovernmental
work in the Organization is unacceptable in that regard.
The Russian Federation therefore disassociates itself
from the consensus on paragraph 9 of resolution 75/283
just adopted.
Mr. Guo Jiakun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
pays great attention to combating human trafficking,
and we expect the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly to be held successfully. However, regrettably,
the General Assembly adopted resolution 75/283 on the
modalities of the high-level meeting without a consensus.
Once again, the rules of procedure and practices
developed by the General Assembly over the years as
well as the non-objection-basis approach are being
challenged, and consensus and unity among Member
States have thereby once again been undermined.
In view of the foregoing, China cannot but
disassociate itself from the consensus on paragraph
9 of the resolution. China appeals to the general
membership to continue to conduct broad-based and
in-depth discussions in pursuit of the maximum possible
consensus and unity. China is ready and willing to engage
in open and constructive consultations with the various
parties in an effort to ensure that non-governmental
organizations can actively participate in work of the
United Nations and play their due role on the basis of
maintaining the General Assembly’s rules of procedure
and practices.
Mr. Poveda Brito (Bolivian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela wishes to express its gratitude to
the Permanent Representatives of the Philippines and
Georgia and their teams for their efforts throughout the
process of negotiating resolution 75/283 on an issue of
primary importance for the world, namely, the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
10/13

07/06/2021

in Persons. Aware of the complexities of the issue
and the various positions on it and recognizing the
constructive spirit that animated negotiating parties
at all times, we also reiterate Venezuela’s support for
community-based and civil society organizations,
the academic and private sectors among others that
contribute to the United Nations system in multiple
areas and whose efforts, based on pluralism and gender
equity, have made positive contributions to the work of
the Organization.
Together with other countries, Venezuela
co-sponsored draft amendment A/75/L.94 with the
intention of establishing that the reaction to the
modalities of participation of non-governmental
organizations has not been sufficiently debated and
that the current formulation of resolution 75/283 does
not constitute a consensus among the Member States,
that consensus having been broken following decades
of being preserved in the Organization. It is striking
how for some States there are issues that require an
almost infinite amount of discussion and debate when
consensus has not been reached, but there are others
for which there is no need for this debate to take place
despite the expressed differences and a lack of consensus
that has recently been made plain in the context of other
United Nations processes that have also been addressed
in this same Hall. That shows a double standard and
selectivity in the approach to certain issues.
Substantive results require that these issues be
dealt with without polarization, realistically and in a
spirit of transparency so that, in future United Nations
processes, a consensus formula on the participation of
non-governmental organizations is adopted that favours
both the United Nations system and these organizations
themselves.
For all of the foregoing reasons, Venezuela would
prefer that the previously agreed formulation be
maintained as It is language that had been agreed by
all States for decades, or until a new consensus formula
is reached. Accordingly, it voted in favour of the draft
amendment A/75/L.94 and disassociates itself from
paragraph 9 of resolution 75/283.
Mr. Zareian (Islamic Republic of Iran):
While appreciating the efforts by the Permanent
Representatives of Georgia and the Philippines
and emphasizing the importance of civil society’s
constructive engagement with Member States and the
United Nations system, my delegation would like to
21-14195

07/06/2021

explain its position on paragraph 9 of resolution 75/283
just adopted.
My delegation is of the view that the current wording
of operative paragraph 9 does not adequately address
the concerns raised by many delegations during the
informal discussions. In addition, the wording does not
have consensual terms, and it is not a well-established
practice based on previous resolutions on modalities.
The delegation of the Islamic Republic of Iran therefore
disassociates itself from operative paragraph 9 of draft
resolution A/75/L.93.
My delegation would like to request that this
explanation of vote be included in the relevant report.
Mr. Pilipenko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
Republic of Belarus supports the consensus-based
adoption of resolution 75/283, entitled “Modalities,
format and organization of the high-level meeting of
the General Assembly on the appraisal of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons”.
Human trafficking is one of the most dangerous
global challenges today. Belarus attaches great
importance to the prevention and suppression of this
criminal act in all its forms and manifestations. That is
true in the context of international cooperation and at
the national level.
We believe that the United Nations Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, adopted in
2010, is an effective tool that allows for the regulation of
approaches to preventing human trafficking, protecting
and rehabilitating its victims, and prosecuting those
who have committed such crimes.
As coordinator of the Group of Friends United
against Human Trafficking, Belarus will continue to
make every effort to enhance the coordination of efforts
against human trafficking. We view the forthcoming
high-level meeting on the appraisal of the plan of
action as a key element in galvanizing actions against
human trafficking throughout the world. It will serve
as an important venue for exchanging state-of-the-art
knowledge, opinions and experience.
Apart from substantive matters, we view this
resolution as an important element in laying out the
specific procedures and modalities for the upcoming
meeting. In that regard, we are concerned about the
manner in which negotiations were carried out and
about the inclusion in the final draft of language that

A/75/PV.73

was known to be controversial. We are also concerned
about the retreat from the consensus that was reached.
In that regard, Belarus signed on as a co-sponsor of
the amendment to operative paragraph 9, based on the
consensus-based text, and voted in its favour.
The Republic of Belarus has consistently supported
the achievement of consensus on all issues on the
international agenda. That is precisely the approach
that underpins the multilateral system. In that regard,
the Republic of Belarus is compelled to disassociate
itself from operative paragraph 9, as it is not
consensus-based.
Ms. Ali (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic):
We once again thank the Permanent Representatives of
Georgia and the Philippines for facilitating the adoption
of resolution 75/283.
My country’s delegation regrets that our concerns
as well as those of a sizable number of other delegations
were not taken into account. We had hoped that the
negotiation process would take another turn in line
with the spirit of unanimity we aspire to when adopting
any draft resolution here in the General Assembly or in
any other United Nations body.
Needless to say, the long-standing practice for
negotiations in the United Nations is, in the absence
of consensus among Member States, to revert to the
previously agreed language as the best solution. That
is challenged today, and therefore the solidarity that is
required in our work is undermined. The co-facilitators
maintained the language of operative paragraph 9
despite the objections made by a number of delegations,
including that of my country.
The objective of the draft amendment was to
maintain consensus and avert resort to avenues that
we do not need. Therefore, my delegation disassociates
itself from the consensus on operative paragraph 9 of
draft amendment A/75/L.93, particularly concerning
the non-objection basis. We hope to avoid that in future
whether in the General Assembly or any other United
Nations body.
Mr. Izourar (Algeria): My delegation would like
to thank the Permanent Missions of the Philippines and
Georgia for their valuable efforts as the co-facilitators
of draft resolution A/75/L.93, entitled “Modalities,
format and organization of the high-level meeting of
the General Assembly on the appraisal of the United

21-1419511/13

A/75/PV.73

07/06/2021

Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons”.

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.

Allow me to highlight the fact that Algeria has
been strongly and constructively engaged throughout
the negotiation process, based on our firm commitment
to the implementation of the United Nations Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons.
Indeed, Algeria supports the efforts of the international
community to address the phenomenon of trafficking
in persons and at the national level has continued to
implement its 2019-2021 national anti-trafficking
action plan. It will be endowed, by the end of 2021, with
a specific and exhaustive law intended to fight human
trafficking and protect all victims. This is to say how
important and crucial this high-level meeting is to my
delegation. That is why Algeria joined the consensus in
adopting resolution 75/283, despite our strong concerns
regarding operative paragraph 9.

I would like to express my sincere appreciation
to His Excellency Kaha Imnadze, Permanent
Representative of Georgia to the United Nations, and
His Excellency Enrique Austria Manalo, Permanent
Representative of the Philippines to the United Nations,
who ably and patiently conducted the discussions and
complex negotiations in the informal consultations on
draft resolution A/75/L.93. I am sure that the members
of the Assembly join me in extending to them our
sincere appreciation.

In that regard, I would like to indicate that
my delegation is concerned by the non-consensual
language adopted in operative paragraph 9 of the
resolution, which alters the non-objection-basis clause
on the participation of non-governmental organizations
in General Assembly meetings. That alteration, in our
view, will only cause our proceedings to further deviate
from the established and consensual General Assembly
rules of procedure. Any modification of the agreed
procedure for the participation of non-governmental
organizations should be discussed and duly agreed
within the appropriate framework, consistent with
resolution 1993/31 of the Economic and Social Council,
on the relationship between the United Nations and
non-governmental organizations.

The meeting was suspended at 4.40 p.m. and
resumed at 6 p.m.

Let me also indicate that despite our firm belief
in the positive contribution of civil society to our
work, we are appalled to note that this matter is
an issue of changing existing procedures without
consensus on the part of the entire membership. We
therefore believe that it is wiser to avoid any misuse
of the non-objection-basis clause, which would only
undermine the intergovernmental nature of our work
as well as the sovereign right of States Members of the
United Nations to pronounce themselves on this issue.
My delegation therefore disassociates itself
from operative paragraph 9 and does not consider
that paragraph part of the agreed language of any
future processes.
12/13

The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 111.
As ballots are still being counted for the election
of the members of the Economic and Social Council, I
shall suspend the meeting for one hour.

Agenda item 118 (b)
Election of members of the Economic and Social
Council
The President: The result of the voting is as follows:
By-election — Western European and other States
(4 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
187
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
187
Abstentions:
3
Number of members present and voting:
184
Required two-thirds majority:
123
Number of votes obtained:
Greece
178
New Zealand
175
Denmark
173
Israel 1
53
Iceland
1
Liechtenstein
1
Malta
1
San Marino
1
Group A — African States (5 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:

187
1
186
0
21-14195

07/06/2021

Number of members present and voting:
Required two-thirds majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Côte d’Ivoire
Tunisia
United Republic of Tanzania
Mauritius
Eswatini

A/75/PV.73

186
124
183
183
182
181
177

Group B — Asia and Pacific States (4 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
187
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
187
Abstentions:
1
Number of members present and voting:
186
Required two-thirds majority:
124
Number of votes obtained:
Oman
182
Afghanistan
181
Kazakhstan
180
India
179
Group C — Eastern European States (2 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
187
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
187
Abstentions:
2
Number of members present and voting:
185
Required two-thirds majority:
124
Number of votes obtained:
Croatia
180
Czech Republic
176
Romania
1
Slovenia
1
Hungary
1
Group D — Latin American and Caribbean States
(3 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
187
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
187
Abstentions:
4
Number of members present and voting:
183
Required two-thirds majority:
122
Number of votes obtained:
Belize
179
Chile
178

Peru
Honduras

175
1

Group E — Western European and other States
(4 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
187
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
187
Abstentions:
5
Number of members present and voting:
182
Required two-thirds majority:
122
Number of votes obtained:
Italy
175
Canada
169
Belgium
167
United States of America
166
Luxembourg
1
Spain
1
Switzerland
1
Having obtained the required two-thirds majority,
Denmark, Greece, New Zealand have been elected
members of the Economic and Social Council for
a term of office beginning on 1 January 2022 and
ending on 31 December 2022. Israel has been
elected a member for a term of office beginning on
1 January 2022 and ending on 31 December 2023.
Having obtained the required two-thirds majority
of members present and voting and the greatest
number of votes, the following 18 States are elected
members of the Economic and Social Council for
a three-year term beginning on 1 January 2022:
Afghanistan, Belgium, Belize, Canada, Chile, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Eswatini,
India, Italy, Kazakhstan, Mauritius, Oman, Peru,
Tunisia, the United Republic of Tanzania and the
United States of America.
The President: I congratulate the States that have
been elected members of the Economic and Social
Council and I thank the tellers for their assistance.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 118.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

21-1419513/13
