UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/92
29 January 1999
ORIGINAL:

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL:
SANCTIONS COMMITTEES

ENGLISH

WORK OF THE

I.
The President of the Security Council wishes to state that all members of
the Security Council have indicated their agreement that the following practical
proposals will be used to improve the work of the sanctions committees in
accordance with the resolutions concerned.
1.
The sanctions committees should establish appropriate arrangements and
channels of communication with organs, organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system, as well as other intergovernmental and regional organizations,
neighbouring countries and other countries and parties concerned, in order to
improve the monitoring of the implementation of sanctions regimes and the
assessment of their humanitarian consequences on the population of the target
State and their economic consequences on neighbouring and other States.
2.
The Chairpersons of the sanctions committees should make visits to the
regions concerned, as appropriate, in order to obtain first-hand accounts of the
impact of sanctions regimes and the results and difficulties in their
implementation.
3.
Member States should provide the sanctions committees with all information
available on alleged violations of arms embargoes, and other sanctions regimes.
Sanctions committees should seek to clarify all cases of alleged violations.
4.
The Secretariat should be requested to provide the sanctions committees
with information from published sources, radio, television or other media
concerning alleged violations of the sanctions regimes or other issues relevant
to the activities of the committees.
5.
The guidelines of the sanctions committees should include clear provisions
for strict action to be taken by the committees on alleged violations of the
sanctions regimes.
6.
The sanctions committees should, as far as possible, harmonize their
guidelines and routines of work.
7.
The technical effectiveness of the mandatory measures should be
periodically assessed by the sanctions committees on the basis of inputs from
99-02321 (E)

290199

/...

S/1999/92
English
Page 2

Member States, reports prepared by the Secretariat and other available sources
of information.
8.
The practice of hearing technical presentations of information by
organizations assisting in the enforcement of Security Council sanctions during
closed meetings of the sanctions committees should be continued. The target or
affected countries, as well as concerned organizations, should be better able to
exercise the right of explaining or presenting their points of view to the
sanctions committees, while taking fully into consideration current committee
practices. The presentations should be expert and comprehensive.
9.
The Secretariat should be requested to provide, whenever necessary, its
assessment of the humanitarian and economic impact of sanctions to the sanctions
committees.
10. Periodic meetings of the sanctions committees should be held for
discussions on the humanitarian and economic impact of sanctions.
11. The sanctions committees should monitor, throughout the sanctions regime,
the humanitarian impact of sanctions on vulnerable groups, including children,
and make required adjustments of the exemption mechanisms to facilitate the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. The indicators for assessment developed by
the Secretariat could be used by the committees.
12. The sanctions committees should consider and monitor the possible impact of
sanctions on the diplomatic efforts towards implementing Security Council
resolutions and make required adjustments on the exemption mechanisms as
appropriate.
13. In discharging their mandates, the sanctions committees should as much as
possible seek to utilize the expertise and practical assistance of Member
States, United Nations agencies, regional organizations and all humanitarian and
other relevant organizations.
14. United Nations agencies as well as humanitarian organizations and other
relevant organizations should benefit from special, simplified procedures in
requesting humanitarian exemptions, in order to facilitate the implementation of
their humanitarian programmes.
15. Consideration should be given to how humanitarian organizations could have
the possibility to apply for humanitarian exemptions directly to the sanctions
committees.
16. Foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and medical supplies should be exempted from
United Nations sanctions regimes. Basic or standard medical and agricultural
equipment and basic or standard educational items should also be exempted.
Consideration should be given to the drawing up of lists for that purpose.
Other essential humanitarian goods should be considered for exemption. In this
regard, it is recognized that efforts should be made to allow the population of
the targeted countries to have access to appropriate resources and procedures
for financing humanitarian imports.

/...

S/1999/92
English
Page 3

17. Sanctions committees should consider ways to ensure that exemptions to
sanctions regimes on religious grounds be made more effective.
18. The transparency of the sanctions committees’ work should be increased,
inter alia, through substantive and detailed briefings by the Chairpersons.
19. Summary records of the sanctions committees’ formal meetings should be made
available promptly.
20. Public information on the sanctions committees’ work should be made
available on the Internet and other means of communication.
II. The members of the Council will continue their consideration of ways to
improve the work of the sanctions committee.

-----
