UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/21
30 April 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3371st meeting of the Security Council, held on 30 April 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
concerning Rwanda", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council is appalled at continuing reports of the
slaughter of innocent civilians in Kigali and other parts of Rwanda, and
reported preparations for further massacres. It endorses the concern
expressed by the Central Organ for Conflict Prevention, Management and
Resolution of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) that the massacres
and wanton killings have continued unabated in a systematic manner in
Rwanda. It recalls that such killings have already been condemned by the
Security Council in its resolution 912 (1994) of 21 April 1994.
"Attacks on defenceless civilians have occurred throughout the
country, especially in areas under the control of members or supporters of
the armed forces of the interim Government of Rwanda. The Security Council
demands that the interim Government of Rwanda and the Rwandese Patriotic
Front take effective measures to prevent any attacks on civilians in areas
under their control. It calls on the leadership of both parties to condemn
publicly such attacks and to commit themselves to ensuring that persons who
instigate or participate in such attacks are prosecuted and punished.
"The Security Council condemns all these breaches of international
humanitarian law in Rwanda, particularly those perpetrated against the
civilian population, and recalls that persons who instigate or participate
in such acts are individually responsible. In this context, the Security
Council recalls that the killing of members of an ethnic group with the
intention of destroying such a group in whole or in part constitutes a
crime punishable under international law.
"The Security Council reiterates the demand in its resolution
912 (1994) for an immediate cease-fire and cessation of hostilities between
the forces of the interim Government of Rwanda and the Rwandese Patriotic
Front. It commends the efforts by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Force Commander of the United Nations Assistance

94-19986 (E)

300494

/...

S/PRST/1994/21
English
Page 2

Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) to mediate such an outcome, and requests them
to continue their efforts in liaison with countries of the region and the
OAU. It also commends the courage and determination of UNAMIR personnel in
affording protection to civilians who sought refuge with UNAMIR.
"The Security Council welcomes the efforts that have been made by
countries of the region, with the assistance of the Organization of African
Unity, to bring about an end to the fighting and the killings in Rwanda.
It also commends the efforts of States, United Nations agencies, and
non-governmental organizations to provide emergency humanitarian assistance
to the suffering people of Rwanda.
"The Security Council is deeply concerned at the situation of the many
thousands of refugees and displaced persons who have been forced to flee
the fighting and killings in Rwanda.
"The Security Council calls on all States to assist the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other
humanitarian and relief agencies operating in the area in meeting the
urgent humanitarian needs in Rwanda and its bordering States. The Council
calls on States bordering Rwanda, working with the OAU, to provide
appropriate protection to refugees and to facilitate transfer of goods and
supplies to meet the needs of the displaced persons within Rwanda.
"The Security Council calls on all Rwandan parties to guarantee the
protection of displaced persons and refugees in Rwanda and refugees outside
Rwanda and to ensure safe passage for humanitarian assistance.
"The Security Council underlines the urgent need for coordinated
international action to help bring peace to Rwanda and to alleviate the
suffering of the Rwandan people. It requests the Secretary-General, in
consultation with the Secretary-General of the OAU and countries of the
region, to take appropriate measures to ensure that international efforts
to assist the situation in Rwanda are carried out in an effective and
coordinated manner, and to ensure that all relevant parties are kept fully
informed.
"The Security Council emphasizes the importance of Kigali airport for
the provision of international relief efforts to Rwanda, as well as for the
requirements of UNAMIR. It calls on the parties to allow the airport to be
kept open at all times for such purposes.
"The Security Council stresses the importance of ensuring that the
situation in Rwanda does not affect adversely the security and stability of
neighbouring countries.
"The Security Council warns that the situation in Rwanda would be
further seriously aggravated if either of the parties were to have access
to additional arms. It appeals to all States to refrain from providing
arms or any military assistance to the parties to the conflict. It states
its willingness in principle to consider promptly the application of an
arms embargo to Rwanda.
/...

S/PRST/1994/21
English
Page 3

"The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to preserving the unity
and territorial integrity of Rwanda. It reiterates its conviction that the
Arusha Peace Agreement remains the only viable framework for the resolution
of the Rwanda conflict and serves as the basis for peace, national unity
and reconciliation in the country. It calls again on the parties to renew
their commitment to this Agreement.
"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General:
"(a) in consultation with the Secretary-General of the OAU, to report
further on action which may be undertaken with a view to assisting in the
restoration of law and order in Rwanda and in providing security for
displaced persons;
"(b) to work with UNHCR, the OAU and countries of the region to take
such preventive diplomatic steps as may be necessary to prevent the spread
of violence and atrocities to neighbouring countries;
"(c) to explore urgently ways of extending humanitarian relief
assistance to refugees and displaced persons;
"(d) to consult UNHCR on measures to provide humanitarian assistance
to those displaced persons congregated along the borders with Tanzania,
Uganda, Zaire and Burundi;
"(e) to bring to its attention any information that he might receive
concerning arms flows into Rwanda, and to consult the countries of the
region and the OAU about the practical implementation of an arms embargo on
Rwanda; and
"(f) to make proposals for investigation of the reports of serious
violations of international humanitarian law during the conflict.
"The Security Council states its intention to consider urgently the
letter of the Secretary-General dated 29 April 1994 (S/1994/518) and
further recommendations that the Secretary-General may provide."

-----
