VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

of Racial Discrimination118 and of the International
Covenants on Human Rights, 119
Bearing in mind the international instruments elaborated by the International Labour Organisation, notably
the Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1975,120 and the Recommendation concerning
Migrant Workers, 1975,121 adopted by the General Conference of the International Labour Organisation,
Taking account of the provisions relating to the question of migrant workers of the Declaration and the Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, 122
Recalling that the family is the natural and fundamental element of society and has a right to protection
by society and by the State and that, in this context, the
families of migrant workers are entitled to the same
protection as the migrant workers themselves,
Recognizing, therefore, the need to devote all necessary attention to the families, in particular the children,
of migrant workers in all spheres, notably those of
housing, health and education,
Reaffirming that the relationship between worker and
employer is in itself a source of rights and obligations
and that consequently a violation, or even a limitation,
of those rights of migrant workers may be tantamount
to a violation of the principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Continuing to express its deep concern at the fact
that, despite the general effort made by the States Members of the United Nations, the regional intergovernmental organizations and the various agencies of the
United Nations, migrant workers still are not exercising
their rights in the sphere of work as defined by the relevant international instruments,
Affirming that close co-operation between the Commission on Human Rights, the Commission for Social
Development, the International Labour Organisation,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Orga~ization and the World Health Organization will
~ntnbut_e to. the sear~h for solutions aimed at improvmg the situation of migrant workers and their families,
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolution 1979/13 of 9 May 1979,
Recalling its resolution 33/163 of 20 December
1978,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
of 18 October 1979 and the addendum thereto; 128
2. Welcomes the large number of replies submitted
by Member States and the international organizations
concerned favouring the elaboration of an international
convention on the protection of the rights of all migrant
workers and their families;
3. Decides to create at its thirty-fifth session a working group open to all Member States to elaborate an
international convention on the protection of the rights
of all migrant workers and their families;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in application of
the provisions of Economic and Social Council resolution 1979/13, to give the working group all necessary
118 Resolution 2106 A
119 Resolution 2200 A
120

{XX), annex.
(XXI), annex.
International Labour Office, Official Bulletin, vol. L VIII,
1975, series A, No. l, Convention No. 143.
121 /bid., No. 1, Recommendation No. 151.
122 Report of the World Conference to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination, Geneva, 14-25 August /978 (United Nations publication, 'Sales No. E.79.XIV.2), chap. II.
1 2 s A/34/535 and Add.I.

189

support, with a view to facilitating the elaboration of
the international convention on the protection of the
rights of all migrant workers and their families;
5. Invites the international organizations concerned
to participate in the work of the working group and to
co-operate with a view to the elaboration of such a
convention.
106th plenary meeting
17 December 1979
34 / 173.

Exchange of information on banned hazard.
ous chemicals and unsafe pharmaceutical
products

The General Assembly,
A ware that the exportation of banned hazardous
chemicals and unsafe pharmaceutical products could
have serious and adverse effects on the health of peoples
in the importing countries,
Recognizing the urgent need to take concrete measures to prevent adverse effects on health on a worldwide basis and, to that end, mindful of the importance
of objective information about banned hazardous chemicals and unsafe pharmaceutical products,
1. Urges Member States to exchange information
on hazardous chemicals and unsafe pharmaceutical products that have been banned in their territories and to
discourage, in consultation with importing countries, the
exportation of su~h products to other countries;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations agencies and bodies concerned,
especially the World Health Organization, to assist Governments in exchanging information and to submit a
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session, through the Economic and Social Council, about
the experience of Member States and the United Nations agencies and bodies concerned.
106th plenary meeting
17 December 1979
34/174.

Assistance to student refugees from Namibia,
Zimbabwe and South Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 31/126 of 16 December
1976, 32/119 of 16 December 1977 and 33/164 of
20 December 1978, in which it, inter alia, reaffirmed
that humanitarian assistance by the international community to all those persecuted under repressive and
discriminatory legislation in South Africa, Namibia and
Southern Rhodesia is appropriate and essential,
Deeply concerned by the discriminatory education
policies and repressive measures being applied by the
Government of South Africa against black students in
that country,
Noting Security Council resolution 417 (1977) of
31 October 1977 in which the Council, inter alia, demanded the abolishment of the "Bantu education" system and all other measures of apartheid and racial
discrimination,
Noting with concern the continued influx into Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia of student refugees from South Africa as well as from Namibia and
Zimbabwe and the urgent need to provide facilities for
their care, health and education,

190

General Alsemb)y-Thlrty-fourth Session

Conscious of the burden placed on the limited financial, material and administrative resources of the host
countries by the influx of those student refugees,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral124 containing the findings of the review missions
sent by him to Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia in May 1979 to examine the status of the programmes of assistance to South African student refugees,
Recognizing the urgent need to establish an assistance programme for student refugees from Namibia
and Zimbabwe,
Disturbed by the adverse effects which the application of apartheid, particularly the bantustan policy, is
having on settled communities living in South Africa
in areas bordering Lesotho and Swaziland, and by the
consequent flight of large numbers of families, including children of school age, into Lesotho and Swaziland,
l. Endorses the assessment and recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General and
commends him and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on their efforts to mobilize resources
and organize the programme of assistance to South
African student refugees in the host countries;
2. Decides to enlarge the assistance programme for
South African student refugees living in Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia to include the care, health,
education and other needs of student refugees from
Namibia and Zimbabwe;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other relevant agencies and organizations of
the United Nations system, to make every effort to
mobilize assistance to facilitate the resettlement of refugee families from the border areas of South Africa and
to provide adequately for the well-being of the children
concerned;
4. Expresses its appreciation that the Governments
of Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia continue
to grant asylum and make educational and other facilities available to the student refugees in spite of the
pressure which the continuing influx of those refugees
exerts on facilities in their countries;
5. Notes with appreciation the efforts made by
Member States, the United Nations system and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to
assist the host countries;
6. Requests the Secretary-General and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to organize
and implement an effective programme of educational
and other appropriate assistance for student refugees
from southern Africa who have found asylum in Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia;
7. Urges all States and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to contribute generously to
the assistance programmes for those students, both
through financial support and by offering further opportunities for their education and vocational training,
as well as by financial and material contributions for
their care and maintenance;
8. Calls upon all agencies and programmes of the
United Nations system, including the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the
United Nations Children's Fund, the United Nations
Development Programme, the International Labour Organisation, the United Nations Trust Fund for South
Africa and the World Food Programme, to co-operate
iHA/34/345.

with the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in the implementation of
humanitarian programmes of assistance for the student
refugees frotn Namibia, Zimbabwe and South Africa
who have found asylum in Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia;
9. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to keep the matter under review and to apprise
the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular
session of 1980, of the current status of the programmes,
and to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth
session on the implementation of the present resolution.

106th plenary meeting
17 December 1979

34/175.

Effective action against mass and flagrant
violations of human rights

The General Assembly,
Mindful of the importance given in the Charter of
the United Nations to promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all
without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Recognizing that, in accordance with the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,1 25 the ideal of free human
beings enjoying civil and political freedom and freedom
from fear and want can be achieved only if conditions are created whereby everybody may enjoy his
civil and political rights as well as his economic, social
and cultural rights,
Conscious of the responsibility of the United Nations,
expressed inter alia in General Assembly resolution 32/
130 of 16 December 1977, in dealing with situations
of mass and flagrant violations of human rights,
Believing that disregard and contempt for human
rights have resulted in barbarous acts which have outraged the conscience of mankind,
Recalling the statements made at the current session
of the General Assembly by representatives of countries
which have recently experienced mass and flagrant
violations of human rights,
I. Expresses satisfaction that during the current
year several situations of mass and flagrant violations
of human rights have ceased, though many serious situations remain to be resolved;
2. Notes with appreciation the assistance being offered by the Secretary-General and by various United
Nations bodies to countries which have recently experienced situations of mass and flagrant violations of
human rights;
3. Reaffirms that mass and flagrant violations of
human rights are of special concern to the United
Nations;
4. Urges the appropriate United Nations bodies,
within their mandates, particularly the Commission on
Human Rights, to take timely and effective action in
existing and future cases of mass and flagrant violations of human rights;
5. Stresses the important role that the SecretaryGeneral can play in situations of mass and flagrant violations of human rights.
106th plenary meeting
17 December 1979
m Resolution 217 A (Ill).
