·Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the Third Committee

(e) Formulate projects which offer additional opportunities for the increasingly effective integration
in such national programmes of externa! assistance;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to support the
United Nations Children's Fund in this policy, especially by making available adequate and appropriate
technical services, including in particular those relating
to social services for children and to training programmes;
3. Commends the report entitled "Survey of the
needs of children" to Governments for study and for
distribution to their national agencies which have
responsibilities in the field of child welfare i
4. Commends the Secretary-General and the specialized agencies for their continued collaboration with the
Fund in programmes for the promotion of child welfare ¡
5. Expresses the hope that those agencies will cooperate fully with the implementation of the new emphasis and approach of the programmes of the Fund,
particularly by assisting countries wishing to draw up
and implement longer-term programmes for child welfare within the framework of their economic and social
development plans ;
6. Requests the resident representatives of the Technical Assistance Board, in promoting the co-ordination
of these efforts, to continue to offer every possible
assistance to the Governments and agencies concerned ;
7. Expresses its conviction that the progressive outlook of the Fund, the new emphasis and approach in
its policy and its capacity to adapt programmes to the
evolving needs of the developing countries will be
recognized by a continuation and strengthening of the
financial support necessary to sustain both its traditiom1.l and its extended activities;
8. Expresses its appreciation of, and encourages,
the participation of the non-governmental organizations
both in efforts to promote the work oí the Fund in
developing countries and in the task of increasing the
resources available to the Fund.
1081st plenary meeting,
18 December 1961.

1679 (XVI). Human rights fellowships
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 926 (X) oí 14 December
1955 authorizing the Secretary-General to provide advisory services in the field of human rights in the
form of advisory services oí experts, fellowships and
scholarships, and seminars,
N qting that a number oí seminars have been successfully organized under that programme, and also that
services of experts are available in response to requests
from Member States, but that thus far seminars are
the only part of the programme that has been developed,
Believing that fellowships can further contribute to
the promotion of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms by providing opportunities for qualified persons concerned with matters relating to human
rights to enlarge their knowledge and experience,
Noting that the Economic and Social Council has
expressed similar views in its resolution 825 (XXXII)
of 27 July 1961, adopted on the recommendation of
the Commission on Human Rights,

31

Noting further that the present resources of the
programme of advisory ~ervices in the field of ~uman
rights have proved suffic1ent only for the convemng of
three seminars each year,
l. Decides, therefore, that the resources for the
programme of advisory services in the field of human
rights should be increased to permit the provision of
a number of human rights fellowships each year, in
addition to the seminars ¡
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in publicizing
that programme, to draw the attention of Member
States to the fact that funds are available for fellowships under the programme anq to the reports of the
seminars already held, as well as to the problems and
questions discussed in those seminars, as a sourc~ of
suggestions for topics which may be usefully exam1_ned
and studied by recipients of human rights fellowsh1ps;

3. Further requests the Secretary-General to draw
the attention oí Member States to the reports of the
various seminars thus far convened in the hope that
they will provide information and stimuli to Members
with similar interests who did not participate in the
seminars.
1081st plenary meeting,
18 December 1961.

1680 (XVI). Draft Convention and draft Reeommendation on Consent to Marriage, Minimum Age of Marriage and Registration of
Marriages
The General Assembly,
Having noted the progress made in the preparation
of a draft Convention on Consent to Marriage, Minimum Age oí Marriage and Registration oí Marriages,
Decides to assign priority, at its seventeenth session,
to the consideration oí the remaining articles of the
draft Convention on Consent to Marriage, Mínimum
Age of Marriage and Registration of Marriages and
to that oí the draft Recommendation approved by the
Commission on the Status of Women, devoting to that
consideration the number of meetings necessary for its
completion.
1081st plenary meeting,
18 December 1961.

1681 (XVI). Draft Convention on Freedom
of Information
The General Assembly,
Having made progress in the preparation of the draft
Convention on Freedom oí Information at its fourteenth, fifteenth and sixteenth sessions,
N ot having been able, however, to complete the draft
Convention,
Decides to take up the ítem entitled "Draft Convention on Freedom of Information" as soon as possible at its seventeenth session and at that session to
devote as many meetings as pos:;ible to the consideration
of that item.
1081st plenary meeting,
18 Decemher 1961.
