United Nations

asdf

Security Council

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Seventieth year

7450th meeting

Wednesday, 27 May 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Jakubonė/Ms. Murmokaitė . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lithuania)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Casimiro
Mr. Mohamed Mohamed
Mr. Espinoza
Ms. Chen Qingru
Mr. Cabouat
Mr. Omaish
Mr. Rosdi
Ms. McDowell
Mr. Aliyu
Mr. Zagaynov
Ms. Del Río Novo
Ms. Robbins
Mr. DiBiase
Mr. Guerra Sansonetti

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
The protection of journalists in conflict situations
Letter dated 1 May 2015 from the Permanent Representative of Lithuania to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2015/307)

15-15400 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1515400*

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of Georgia.
Mr. Dondua (Georgia): I would like to begin by
thanking the Lithuanian presidency and, personally,
my good friend Minister Linkevičius, for bringing this
important issue back to the Council. Today’s discussion
is timely, especially since there has been only one debate
on the matter (see S/PV.7003), two years ago, following
the landmark resolution 1738 (2006). We believe the
Council should address this important issue more
actively and frequently, as we face an ever-increasing
and worrying trend of violence against journalists in
both conflict and non-conflict situations, including by
non-State actors.
Timely and credible information is an essential
tool for the international community to adequately
assess a situation and, where possible, to prevent or
respond to an emerging crisis. It would therefore be no
overstatement to say that the information obtained by
journalists often contributes directly to international
peace and security. We note with deep concern that the
number of journalists killed while doing their job has
been consistently increasing in recent years. The most
brutal and appalling examples are the recent beheadings
of journalists by Daesh.
Areas controlled by non-State actors and terrorist
groups, as well as territories under foreign occupation,
are zones of high risk for journalists, with threats to
their lives from actors operating in total denial of
established legal norms. Regrettably, my country is one
of those that has witnessed the death of journalists on
its soil, during the 2008 war with Russia. Along with
other civilians, three journalists were killed and four
wounded while exercising their professional functions,
including a Dutch journalist who died in a Russian
missile strike on civilian targets on 12 August 2008.
Barbed-wire fences and other artificial obstacles along
the occupation line have been installed, not only to
disrupt people-to-people contacts and humanitarian
access, but also to prevent journalists from entering
the occupied territories and shedding light on the dire
2/47

27/05/2015

human rights situation on the ground. In April 2014, the
occupation troops illegally detained three journalists
from a Georgian television channel who were working
on a report about the installation of barbed-wire fences
in the area. None of those cases was subjected to a
proper investigation, owing to a lack of political will on
the part of the authorities in effective control.
Unfortunately, such is the trend worldwide.
Appalling findings are set out in the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report on the protection of civilians
(S/2013/689). The perpetrators were apprehended
and prosecuted in less than 5 per cent of the cases,
and accountability for perpetrators of attacks on
journalists is virtually non-existent. We believe that the
United Nations should start to counter this dangerous
tendency by declaring unequivocally that a regime of
military occupation cannot serve as an excuse from the
responsibility of all stakeholders to ensure a safe and
enabling environment for journalists to perform their
work independently, without undue interference or fear
of censorship, persecution or prosecution. We should
redouble our efforts to increase the effectiveness of the
existing legal and political means to that end.
In that context, we commend the work of the Human
Rights Council, which last September adopted by
consensus resolution 27/5, on the safety of journalists.
We welcome the fact that the resolution is focused on
ending impunity. It sends a critical and unambiguous
message that there is no excuse for allowing attacks
against and murders of journalists and media workers
to go unpunished. We call on Member States where
journalists are at risk to heed the specific legal and
policy measures set out in the resolution and implement
them without delay, in close cooperation with the
United Nations, other relevant international entities,
civil society organizations and journalistic networks.
We share the view that identifying journalists as
a special category of persons that should be protected
in the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
operations and special political missions is an important
first step in ensuring their protection.To that end, given
the critical role of the Secretary-General, and while
encouraging him to continue including the issue of the
protection of journalists in armed conflict in his reports
on the protection of civilians, we would also suggest
considering the possibility of specific reporting by the
Secretary-General on the subject.
Another worrying development is related to the
manipulation of information. Where State-run mass
15-15400

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

media are engaged in fierce propaganda that encourages
extreme forms of nationalism and violent ideology
while attempting to justify the grabbing and annexing
of foreign lands, social radicalization and militarization
become normal phenomena.
In conclusion, may I once again express my
country’s firm commitment and readiness to actively
contribute to and support the freedom of expression and
the safety of journalists worldwide, as they constitute
the cornerstone of free and pluralistic media.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to pay tribute to His Excellency Mr. Linas Antanas
Linkevičius for his initiative in organizing this open
debate. I would also like to thank Mr. Jan Eliasson,
Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Christophe Deloire,
Director-General of Reporters Without Borders, and
Ms. Mariane Pearl for their respective briefings.
According to the Committee to Protect Journalists,
27 journalists have been killed so far this year,
including Japanese journalist Kenji Goto. Attacks
against journalists are not just attacks against
individual persons, but also affronts to the ideals of
freedom of expression and freedom of the press, which
are the foundations of democracy. Japan is absolutely
set against such acts of depravity and is determined
to work together with international society to prevent
further tragedies.
The perpetrator commonly known as Jihadi John
murdered Mr. Kenji Goto, Mr. James Foley, Mr. David
Haines and many others. He, together with other
perpetrators, continues to walk freely under blue skies.
Japan strongly condemns those despicable acts of
terror. We must hold the perpetrators responsible for
their deplorable acts and bring them to justice.
The reality, however, is grim. Less than 5 per
cent of well-known perpetrators have actually been
apprehended and prosecuted in the past 10 years,
despite continuing reaffirmations in numerous United
Nations resolutions of our determination to put an
end to impunity for the perpetrators. In the light of
that circumstance, Japan appreciates the decision of
the Security Council to adopt a new resolution on the
matter (resolution 2222 (2015)). But we should not stop
there.

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is
included in the mandates of 10 ongoing peacekeeping
operations. Journalists are civilians; therefore, it is
the duty of United Nations peacekeepers to protect
journalists under their mandates. We should go a
little further. As the concept note for this open debate
(S/2015/307, annex) suggests, we should recall that
journalists are subject to protection under the Geneva
Conventions and their Additional Protocol I, in order
to ensure their security. Identifying journalists as a
special category in the text of resolutions would increase
awareness and eventually save more journalists’ lives.
Japan recognizes the significant role of the reports
of the Secretary-General on both peacekeeping
operations and the protection of civilians, which
would include information on the situation regarding
journalists’ safety.
In February, the Prime Minister of Japan,
Mr. Shinzo Abe, made a statement in which he resolutely
condemned those impermissible and outrageous acts of
terrorism. Japan will never give in to terrorism. Mr. Abe
has pledged assistance totalling some $200 million for
those countries contending with the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), to help build human capacity,
infrastructure, et cetera. Japan will steadfastly fulfil
its responsibility in the international community in
combating terrorism.
At the time of the adoption of the Security Council
resolution 1738 (2006), the safety of journalists in areas
under the control of brutal non-State actors and terrorist
groups such as ISIL was not on the list of agenda items.
Now, it is time to address this significant issue, which
cannot be overlooked. The Security Council must take
decisive measures to tackle the issue of serious crimes
committed by non-State actors and extremist groups
and never allow any impunity for such perpetrators.
International society must fight against acts of
terror so that the foundational values of contemporary
democracy, including freedom of expression and
freedom of the press, shall not be shaken. Japan has
committed itself to engaging in that endeavour of great
importance.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mrs. Gatto (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement to be made by the observer of the European
Union and wishes to add a few remarks in its national
capacity.

15-154003/47

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

I thank Lithuania for convening this meeting and
proposing a new resolution (resolution 2222 (2015)) on
the important subject of the protection of journalists in
armed conflict.
I will refrain from repeating a basic fact, namely,
that journalists are increasingly subject to all kinds of
hostile acts, including torture and killing. We have all
heard the details. I do wish, however, to remember the
Italian journalists who have made the ultimate sacrifice
in many theaters of war, most recently in Ukraine, Gaza
and Afghanistan. They shall not be forgotten.
In paying tribute to our own victims, let us not
forget that most of the journalists who have lost their
lives are local.
Journalists are a distinct category by virtue of
the social function they perform. For example, many
issues make it onto the agenda of the Security Council
thanks to brave reporters and their ability to draw the
attention of international public opinion to some of
the grave crises in the world today. When we speak of
armed-conflict scenarios, that unique ability merits
full protection.
Thanks to resolution 1738 (2006) and to resolution
2222 (2015), which we have just adopted and which Italy
co-sponsored, awareness has been raised that journalists
need to be protected just as much as regular civilians,
in accordance with the provisions of humanitarian law.
In conflict situations, journalists are not just civilians;
they are our gateway to the world — to both the good
and the bad of the world. The protection they deserve
as human beings stems also from the precious gift of
information they provide to all of us.
That leads me to a second reflection: what if
journalists have different or even unorthodox views?
We believe that is a good thing. Journalists bring
diverse opinions to their work. That is why we need
many of them, because many eyes and many brains
will provide many different perspectives, leaving
it to readers and listeners to make up their minds on
the basis of a variety of sources. That is the benefit of
pluralism, which depends on freedom of the press and of
expression. That is what we call impartial information.
It is a treasure that journalists offer to us every day,
every minute and every second. We have to protect and
encourage pluralism.
My third point stems from the troubling rise in the
number of journalists abducted, killed, blackmailed,
tortured and even raped — a crime to which women
4/47

27/05/2015

journalists in particular are prey. According to the
Secretary-General’s most recent report (S/2013/689),
all too often, impunity seems to be the rule in hostile
situations where journalists are victims. That is
unacceptable. Greater efforts must be made to ensure
that perpetrators of any attack or hostile act towards
them are brought to justice.
My final point is that journalists, especially when
they are reporting on armed-conflict scenarios, render
an invaluable service to all those who work to promote
peace and security. However, the more dangerous
conflict situations become for journalists, the less
people will be willing to choose that career, resulting in
less information and less pluralism. We cannot accept
that the self-censorship implicit in threats to personal
safety might undermine the richness of pluralism.
The protection of journalists in dangerous situations
is a multifaceted question. The answer should be
holistic, starting with the recognition that journalists
deserve full protection. On that basis, we must pursue
an action-oriented strategy.
I would like to end with two proposals. First,
education, which is a key word in many fields, is one
here as well. Most journalist victims of hostile acts are
local. That may be due to a lack of proper training on
how to work in dangerous situations. We should fill
that gap. Secondly, with regard to non-State actors,
specific attention should be given to situations in
which non-State actors are the perpetrators of hostile
acts against journalists, which seems to be increasingly
the case. In that context as well, we have to respond by
drafting ad hoc strategies.
I conclude by underscoring the important role that
all countries as well as the bodies of the United Nations
can play in promoting this agenda. We have to act
together. Let us engage collectively.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): My delegation would
like to commend and thank your delegation, Madam
President, for organizing today’s very timely debate.
I will not repeat some of the basic facts and
figures that we heard this morning, but I would like
to emphasize that local journalists, freelancers and
women are in a particularly vulnerable position. Female
journalists encounter abuses similar to those met by
their male counterparts, but they have also endured

15-15400

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

appalling levels of sexual violence. Despite those
obstacles, female journalists have continued to display
impressive dedication to their work, relaying important
stories of people caught in some of the world’s deadliest
conflicts, such as the one in Syria.

I should also say that media organizations also have
an obligation to help ensure the safety of journalists
in armed conflict. Proper training and resources
must be made available to local staff, freelancers and
international war correspondents alike.

The Council has an important role to play in
promoting the safety of journalists, media professionals
and associated personnel in conflict situations. It is
not just an important aspect of the Council’s work on
the protection of civilians, it is also an issue of selfinterest for the Council. After all, the Council itself
has to rely on information received from journalists.
Such independent reporting is particularly crucial in
situations of escalated violent conflict, when other
reliable sources of information may be hard to come by.

The freedom of expression and of information are
essential human rights and are among the main pillars
of a free society. The work of journalists is also an
indispensable tool for the Council, be it in the context
of early warning and prevention or in the middle of
violent conflict. Their activities are not only under
fire by missiles and bullets, but are also threatened by
other means: illegal surveillance, censorship, reprisals
and violence. Oppressive Governments and groups
wage silent wars by suppressing access to information
and imprisoning those who dare to report the facts.
Countering those actions should be high on the
Council’s agenda.

In considering the Council’s role, we must recognize
the dramatic changes in the world’s media landscape.
Technology has altered the ways we consume news,
social media has opened new channels for distribution
of information, and smartphones have fuelled the rise
of the citizen journalist. Furthermore, some extremist
groups consider journalists as enemies rather than
neutral observers. They will not hesitate to target them
openly, just as they routinely disregard other basic rules
of international humanitarian law.
It is therefore time for the Council to pay greater
attention to the protection of journalists. We particularly
welcome the adoption of the resolution today (resolution
2222 (2015)) and its strong references to international
humanitarian law, which guarantees equal protection
for journalists and civilians. In many conflict zones,
however, respect for international humanitarian law has
completely eroded. We strongly support efforts aimed at
increasing compliance with international humanitarian
law for this reason and many others, in particular the
joint initiative by the International Committee of the
Red Cross and Switzerland.
Attacks against journalists in conflict situations are
not only serious violations of international humanitarian
law, but also in and of themselves are attacks on the
freedom of expression. Governments are obliged to
protect journalists as a matter of human rights law.
We must increase our efforts towards accountability
for those crimes, with a view to increasing deterrence.
The primary responsibility in that regard falls upon
domestic justice systems. The International Criminal
Court, where it has jurisdiction or such jurisdiction is
conferred by the Security Council, could also play an
important role.

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States. I
shall deliver a shortened version of our statement. The
full text will be found on our website. The candidate
countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland, Serbia and Albania;
the country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
I want to thank the Lithuanian presidency of the
Council for bringing back this important issue to this
forum. Let me also thank Deputy Secretary-General
Eliasson for his briefing, and Mariane Pearl and
Christophe Deloire for their testimonies.
We also welcome the adoption of resolution 2222
(2015) on the topic of this debate.
At the time of the last Security Council debate (see
S/PV.7003) we regretted the high number of journalists
killed while doing their jobs. Sadly, today we cannot
but note that this figure continues to increase with an
unparalleled level of viciousness shown by the barbaric
executions committed by Daesh.
The freedom of opinion and of expression are
fundamental rights of every human being. Indispensable
for individual dignity and fulfilment, they also constitute

15-154005/47

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

essential foundations for democracy, the rule of law,
peace, stability, sustainable inclusive development and
participation in public affairs. Journalists’ work often
puts them at specific risk of intimidation and violence.
Such attacks and intimidation are not only an attack on
the victim, but also on the very essence of article 19 of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
States must take active steps to prevent violence
and to promote a safe environment for journalists and
other media actors, thereby enabling them to carry out
their work independently, without undue interference
and without fear of violence or persecution. The EU
attaches the highest priority to the safety of journalists
and other media actors and encourages all States to
take all the appropriate steps to ensure the protection
of journalists, both in terms of preventive measures
and by urging effective investigations when violations
or abuses occur. In that context, the April 2015 Doha
Declaration includes language calling for States to act
in that regard.
European Union member States subscribe to
freedom, democracy, respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms and the rule of law, on which the
European Union is based. Accession to the European
Union is based on the adherence to those principles,
which include the freedom of expression, of opinion
and of information. We all have an obligation to
react to the worrying trend of the increased level of
intimidation and violence that journalists, media actors
and other individuals face in many countries across
the world because of their job. In that context, we
must not forget that female journalists are more often
subject to harassment and sexual violence. The EU
has repeatedly condemned attacks against journalists
and bloggers through several public statements, in
other international forums, such as the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, and in the
framework of the European Union’s bilateral relations
with third countries.
The European Union is also active in supporting
concrete actions in the field of the protection of
journalists, including in countries in crisis. For example,
we have funded a programme to protect journalists
and bloggers, especially young and inexperienced
ones, providing them with administrative, material or
financial support when needed. The programme also
provides judicial support for journalists and bloggers
who are detained or facing trial and, in the most
extreme cases, moves them to a safe location. We also

6/47

27/05/2015

have an emergency fund scheme to protect human rights
defenders, including journalists, which was recently
expanded to help cyberdissidents build self-protection
skills.
The protection of journalists and support for
independent media are also among the top priorities
of the European Endowment for Democracy, which
is supporting independent media and journalists,
including bloggers, social media activists, et cetera, in
the EU neighbourhood and beyond.
Article 10 of the European Convention on Human
Rights guarantees the right to the freedom of expression
and information. The Council of Europe launched an
Internet platform aimed at protecting journalism and
promoting the safety of journalists. The platform is
a reliable tool to compile, process and disseminate
factual data in Council of Europe member States,
verified by independent partners, concerning physical
threats to journalists or risk to the confidentiality of
media sources, as well as other forms of intimidation.
It also enables the initiation of a dialogue with the
States concerned on possible remedies and protective
measures.
We must recall that, according to international
humanitarian law, journalists engaged in dangerous
professional missions in areas of armed conflict shall
be considered as civilians and shall be respected and
protected as such. We call on all parties to armed
conflict to respect their obligations under international
human rights law and international humanitarian law,
including the Geneva Conventions and the Additional
Protocols thereto. We furthermore call on all parties to
conflict to allow, within the framework of applicable
rules and procedures, media access and coverage in
situations of international and non-international armed
conflict.
Almost half of the journalists killed in 2014 died
in the Middle East. Approximately 38 per cent of the
total died in combat or cross-fire. That clearly shows
that more are killed outside of combat. Alhough it is
vital that we protect journalists and media actors in
conflict, we must also ensure their safety outside of
combat. They serve an invaluable role in preventing
conflict and holding Governments to account. The
EU condemns any Government that intimidates or
suppresses independent and free press.
We encourage the Secretary-General to continue
including the issue of the protection of journalists in

15-15400

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

armed conflicts in his reports on the protection of
civilians, and encourage peacekeeping and special
political missions to also include this issue in existing
reporting, as relevant. We also encourage the Security
Council to address the protection of journalists in
situations of armed conflict, including through public
statements.
The Council is not alone in addressing this issue.
The General Assembly and the Human Rights Council
have adopted annual consensual resolutions on the
safety of journalists and the issue of impunity. In that
context, the United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety
of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, a work led by
UNESCO with the aim of greater cooperation among
United Nations organizations, is a key document.
If today we are discussing this matter, it is not
because the United Nations is not paying attention to the
issue. It is, first, because States are not doing enough to
promote a safe and enabling environment for journalists
to work independently, without undue interference and
without fear of censorship, persecution or prosecution;
and, secondly, because they need to do more to bring to
justice the perpetrators of attacks on journalists.
Let me conclude by expressing the European
Union’s tribute to, and support for, all those who fight
for the respect of freedom of expression and for a free,
pluralistic press and other media.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Bamrungphong (Thailand): Thailand is
participating in this important debate because it shares
the international community’s concern at the increasing
direct attacks against civilians, including journalists,
particularly those committed by non-State actors and
terrorist groups. We therefore thank Lithuania for
its initiative to discuss this issue and for the detailed
concept note (S/2015/307, annex). We also appreciate
the informative briefings by Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson, Mr. Christophe Deloire, Director-General
of Reporters Without Borders, and Ms. Mariane Pearl.
It is clearly stated in rule 34 of the International
Committee of the Red Cross Customary International
Humanitarian Law that civilian journalists engaged in
professional missions in areas of armed conflict must
be respected and protected as long as they are not
taking a direct part in hostilities. Hence a deliberate
act of violence against journalists in armed conflict in
all forms is unacceptable and unjustifiable. An attack

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

deliberately targeted at civilians amounts to a war
crime, and perpetrators must be held accountable.
Impunity emboldens perpetrators to continue
their brutal acts and inflames the situation. The
ending of impunity is one of the suppressing factors.
Thailand is alarmed by statistical evidence that there
are no convictions in 90 per cent of cases of attacks
against journalists. This issue must not remain
unaddressed. Ending impunity must begin at national
level, encompassing political will, the strengthening
of the judicial system and effective law enforcement.
Cooperation and sharing of information among law
enforcement authorities at all levels needs to be
enhanced and strengthened. We share the view that
legal frameworks and mechanisms are sufficiently in
place, but they must be efficiently enforced and fully
implemented.
Thailand also sees the need to increase the number
of independent commissions of inquiry and factfinding missions in order to bring to justice those
who have committed brutal acts against civilians and
journalists. The Security Council must be clear and
strong in its messages and resolutions that violations
against civilians and journalists will not be tolerated.
Targeted sanctions imposed on individuals and
entities involved in heinous crimes against civilians
are among the tools the Council may apply. However,
doing so must ensure fair and clear procedures for
placing individuals and entities on sanction lists, and
for removing them. And sanctions need to be fully
implemented by Member States.
The safety of journalists is at highest risk in
terrorist-controlled areas. Thailand joins the call for
all parties to respect and uphold international norms
and laws to protect civilians and journalists. However,
it may be ironic and unrealistic to expect that those who
intentionally defy the law by committing unlawful acts
of violence and terror for their tactical objectives to
respect the law. What else can we do to protect civilians
and journalists in such circumstances?
Thailand supports mandating peacekeeping
missions to protect civilians. Apart from physical
protection, guidance and regular assessment of a
situation by peacekeeping operations could provide
useful information and reliable alerts for journalists
and media professionals on the ground. Engagement
between journalists and peacekeeping operations would
help to increase the safety of journalists, and would

15-154007/47

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

by no means change their civilian and independent
status owing to the principle of the impartiality of the
peacekeeping operation. At the same time, journalists
and media professionals should strictly follow the
guidance of the peacekeeping operation for their own
safety.
To protect journalists, several issues need further
deliberation. While totally understanding the freedom,
responsibility and rights of the media, their safety
cannot be compromised. There should be a clear
guideline on when they should leave conflict zones
to limit the risk. For the safety of journalists in some
active conflict zones, we may need to replace the
presence of correspondents with modern technology
and equipment. That may not be a perfect substitute,
but it may be considered as an alternative to prevent the
loss of life.
I wish to conclude by paying tribute to journalists
and media professionals who risk or have lost their
lives to provide us with substantive and real-time
information from the ground. Their responsible and
constructive role can greatly contribute throughout the
conflict cycle — from conflict prevention, to conflict
management and conflict resolution. They deserve
better protection. That responsibility lies in our hands.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Hungary.
Mr. Hetesy (Hungary): Hungary is deeply
committed to the protection of civilians and welcomes
the Lithuanian presidency’s initiative on the protection
of journalists in conflict situations. We also thank
today’s speakers for their informative briefings.
While we fully support the statement recently
delivered by the observer of the European Union,
Hungary would like to add the following comments in
its national capacity.
For people in conflict situations, access to quality
and timely information can be a matter of life and
death. Furthermore, the unhindered work of journalists
has a mitigating effect on a conflict and on the worst
violations. Conversely, restrictions or attacks on
independent media, together with biased propaganda,
easily contribute to escalation. Yet in the past decade,
attacks against journalists reporting from conflict zones
have steadily increased in both number and severity. As
others have already mentioned, there is also have the
gender factor. According to a 2014 survey, nearly half
of women journalists said they had experienced sexual
8/47

27/05/2015

harassment. Many of those crimes remain unreported
for fear of reprisals and stigmatization. When incidents
do receive public attention, blaming the victim is a
frequent phenomenon.
Mushrooming conflicts, asymmetrical warfare
and also a hunger for negative sensations in reporting
will continuously send media workers into harm’s way.
Therefore, we must protect those on whom our access
to information partially depends. We commend the
Security Council for adopting resolution 2222 (2015)
today. Hungary is a proud co-sponsor of the resolution.
As many have also pointed out, outside these
walls General Assembly resolution 68/163, on the
safety of journalists and the issue of impunity, also
recommends practical measures to promote a safe and
enabling environment for media workers. Furthermore,
the resolution clearly identifies the threat posed
by non-State actors, including terrorist groups and
criminal organizations.
As your concept note (S/2015/307, annex) points
out, Madam President, the vast majority of these crimes
still go unpunished. Since 2014, the International Day to
End Impunity for Crimes against Journalists has served
to ensure that this issue receives constant attention.
While accountability for crimes can help prevent future
attacks, we must also point out that ending impunity is
first and foremost a State responsibility.
However, the increased number of attacks on
journalists is a symptom of a much broader problem
related to the diminishing respect for international
human rights law and humanitarian law obligations
in conflict situations. Therefore, besides treating
the symptom we will also have to focus on the
root causes. Based on that understanding, violence
against journalists can be addressed only through the
cooperation of States, United Nations agencies and the
relevant stakeholders.
The United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of
Journalists and the Issue of Impunity is the first holistic
effort to address these issues. We commend UNESCO
as the overall coordinator of the implementation of the
Plan of Action. We also urge the Security Council to
build on the resolution adopted today in order to further
contribute to these endeavours in conflict situations.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations.

15-15400

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Mr. António (spoke in French): Allow me to
start by congratulating you, Madam President, on
the very topical choice for our debate here today, as
well as for the outstanding concept note (S/2015/307,
annex) prepared by your delegation to better frame the
parameters for our discussions. I should also like to
convey my gratitude to the Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Jan Eliasson, as well as the Director-General of
Reporters Without Borders for their very exhaustive
briefings.
The testimony of Ms. Mariane Pearl says a great
deal about the serious and alarming risks that journalists
expose themselves to on the ground in conflict areas.
The continuing deterioration of conditions for carrying
out this profession in many hotspots throughout the
world, including Africa, quite rightly underlines the
scale of the challenges to be met at international and
regional levels to ensure that journalists in practice
enjoy the necessary protection.
Despite the setting up of a normative framework
to that end, including the 1977 Additional Protocols to
the Geneva Conventions, as well as Security Council
resolution 1738 (2006), which clearly guarantee that
journalists cover armed conflict situations as civilians,
the dangers facing journalists continue to increase.
It quickly becomes apparent that the problem
does not stem from a lack of international norms,
but rather from the absence of their thorough
implementation — including their application in areas
controlled by non-State actors. Defying fundamental
rights, these entities often use violence to silence voices
of dissent. In Africa, terrorist groups such Al-Qaida in
the Islamic Maghreb, Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab and
other negative forces are increasingly implicated in
abuses against journalists who attempt to investigate
and expose their criminal activities.
The plight of journalists working in conflict areas
in Africa remains a major concern for the African
Union. This critical situaton reflects not just a serious
violation of the freedom of expression, but also an
affront to shared democratic values and
​​
human rights.
In partnership with civil society and representatives
of the media, the African Union Commission is fully
committed to fighting against restrictions imposed on
journalists in conflict zones. This commitment includes
raising the awareness of State and non-State actors of
the need to ensure the safety of journalists. To that end,
in September 2010, the African Union held a workshop

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

on the security and protection of African journalists,
which, in addition to Member States, brought together
representatives of the Federation of African Journalists,
the International Federation of Journalists and the
African International Trade Union Confederation.
The action of the African Union in this area
was also bolstered by the establishment of follow-up
mechanisms to monitor the implementation of member
States’ commitments falling within the the mandate of
the Special Rapporteur on the freedom of expression
and access to information in Africa. Moreover, the
issue of attacks carried out against journalists in
periods of conflict was given special attention by the
African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights,
which, in 2002, adopted the Declaration of Principles
on Freedom of Expression in Africa. The Declaration
recalls the centrality of access to information as well as
its importance in promoting and protecting fundamental
human rights — while encouraging democratic
values, accountability and sustainable development.
While underscoring respect for the non-combatant
status of journalists, it also highlights the need for
States to take the necessary measures to prevent such
violence, prosecute the offenders and bring them to
justice — ensuring that victims have access to effective
remedy.
Furthermore, during its fourty-ninth ordinary
session, held from 28 April to 12 May 2011, in Banjul,
the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights
adopted a resolution devoted entirely to the security
of journalists and media practitioners in Africa. That
resolution, which notes the deterioration of the situation
of journalists and media professionals in certain regions
of the continent, calls on all parties involved in armed
conflict to respect the independence and freedom of
journalists in the exercise of their profession and to
ensure their security in accordance with the rules of
international humanitarian law.
Before I conclude, Madam President, allow me to
stress the need to step up efforts to achieve our goal,
which is to silence weapons. By their very nature and
regardless of our efforts, armed conflicts will continue
to lead to situations of abuse and violation of human
rights.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Archbishop Bernardito Cleopas Auza,
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See.

15-154009/47

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Archbishop Auza: I would like to thank Lithuania
for organizing this important debate and to express my
delegation’s appreciation for Lithuania’s presidency
this month.
At the outset, the Holy See offers prayers for the
journalists who have lost their lives in the faithful
exercise of their profession, and expresses solidarity
and sympathies to their families. Let us acknowledge
their tremendous contribution to our world.
Society has a right to objective information, and
it is through the observance of this exigency that the
media are at the service of the common good. The
role of journalists in providing information is among
the principal instruments of democratic participation.
In promoting access to and providing information,
dedicated journalists in conflict settings provide a lifeline
to those trapped behind combat lines or caught up in the
crossfire. They also offer policymakers — including
the Security Council — the information necessary to
make informed and responsible decisions on how to end
conflicts and assist those affected by them.
My delegation deplores the fact that hundreds of
journalists were killed over the past decade. While
danger is sadly a constant feature of life in conflict
situations, there is no excuse for parties in conflict not
to respect and protect journalists. Parties in conflict
are obviously not always reliable sources of objective
information. The exigencies of, and the need to justify,
military operations often trump the right to objectivity
in information. Here lies the fundamental importance
of journalists dedicated to truth and to the promotion of
the common good. Here lies, as well, the grave danger
that a party or parties in conflict would specifically
target journalists faithful to their duty of objective
reporting.
Today’s debate has highlighted a number of tools
already at the disposal of the international community.
The Geneva Conventions and their Additional
Protocols grant protection for journalists and civilians
in conflict settings. However, military protection
policies and judicial accountability mechanisms remain
insufficient, and in many places are non-existent. It is
in fact unacceptable that only fewer than than 5 per
cent of the cases of murders of journalists end in the
prosecution of the perpetrators.
The protection of journalists in conflict situation
gains more urgency in the context of the new challenges
that today’s conflict situations present. My delegation

10/47

27/05/2015

believes it is relevant to re-examine the current rights
and protections of journalists in conflict situations,
to see if they are still adequate, or whether more
specific protection measures for journalists are
needed — in as much that they are a special category
of civilians — particularly in the context of conflicts
perpetrated by non-State actors.
While it is the duty of Governments to ensure that
the measures already in place to protect journalists are
fully applied, more often than not, in conflict situations
State institutions break down or are impeded. Indeed,
conflicts are frequently symptoms of deeper problems,
including the weakness of State institutions themselves.
To that end, the international community can play an
important role in providing technical and financial
assistance for needy countries to improve policies
both to protect journalists and to address violations of
already existing rules for their rights and protection.
Media organizations also have responsibilities
in ensuring the safety of their journalists. Journalists
themselves should exercise tact, especially in situations
in which the duty to objective reporting seems to
collide with respect for the cultural values and religious
beliefs of peoples involved in the conflict. While lack
of objective information is a disservice to the truth,
could put lives at risk and misguide policymakers and
the public in general, lack of respect for cultural values
and religious beliefs could only exacerbate the conflict.
My delegation salutes those who put their lives on
the line so that the cries of those trapped in conflict
situations can be heard and the voices of those longing
for peace can find an echo. May the appreciation we
have for journalists’ valuable work translate itself into
greater efforts to protect them better in armed conflicts.
Above all, let us all work together to banish wars and
conflicts, so that no one may ever have to risk life and
limb.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative from Finland.
Mr. Sauer (Finland): Finland aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the obseraver of the
European Union.
We thank the briefers for their presentations. We
would also like to thank Lithuania for convening this
high-level open debate on the protection of journalists
in armed conflicts — a theme that needs our full
attention.

15-15400

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

We welcome the important resolution the Council
adopted today (resolution 2222 (2015)), which Finland
also co-sponsored.
In recent years and months there have been too
many reports of journalists being killed or kidnapped
in conflict areas. Journalists, bloggers and others who
defend human rights and report on violations of human
rights or international humanitarian law in fragile or
conflict situations often put their lives at great risk.
They are being persecuted because of their work in
shedding light on injustices. They are to be respected
and protected, not targeted. All attacks against
journalists must be investigated, and perpetrators must
be brought to justice. Impunity is not an option. Finland
strongly supports the United Nations Plan of Action on
the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity,
initiated and coordinated by UNESCO.
Women and girls are often the most vulnerable in
conflict situations. Furthermore, female journalists
face a greater risk of discrimination and violence than
their male colleagues. All Governments must guarantee
a safe environment for all media professionals so they
can perform their work independently and freely. We
also need to pay special attention to promoting a safe
environment for female journalists.
We know that stable and peaceful societies are
based on respect for human rights and the principles of
democracy, transparency and the rule of law. A truly
democratic society requires freedom of expression
and assembly, free media and a safe environment for
journalists. Finland is proud at having ranked number
one for five years in succession in the World Press
Freedom Index, which measures the performance of
countries according to a range of criteria, including
media pluralism and independence and respect for the
safety and freedom of journalists.
Media professionals, journalists and human rights
defenders can play an important role in preventing
conflicts by providing and disseminating valuable early
warning information. They report on the inequality,
discrimination and flagrant human rights violations
that often underlie conflicts, thus providing the
international community with the pieces of the puzzle
that enable us to form a comprehensive picture and act
accordingly.
In terms of early warning, an excellent example
is the Council of Europe’s platform to promote the
protection of journalism and the safety of journalists,

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

which is an open web page where partner organizations
can post alerts. These alerts are concrete cases, and
they contain information on the country and the type
and source of threat. The platform has been open
since the beginning of April, and at the moment there
are 49 active alerts concerning 15 States. The idea of
the platform is to offer a transparent early warning
mechanism and provide information for the use of
Council of Europe bodies.
Finland strongly believes that all human rights also
apply online. Respect for human rights and international
law is also crucial to all activities in cyberspace.
Finland supports openness and transparency online
and equal access to the Internet. For journalists these
are an imperative. The Internet provides an important
means for enhancing the participation of civil society,
including human rights defenders and non-governmental
organizations.
In May 2016, Finland will be proud to host the main
event of the UNESCO World Press Freedom Day, with
a focus on the freedom of information and tackling
questions related, inter alia, to freedom online and the
issue of impunity. The event also coincides with the
fiftieth anniversary of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights.
I believe that we all share great respect for all those
journalists who risk their lives in order to report on the
injustices of our world. We owe it to them to provide the
protection they need to carry out their work.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank the Lithuanian presidency for
convening today’s important meeting. It is my pleasure
to deliver a statement today on behalf of my country,
the Syrian Arab Republic.
As I am addressing the Security Council today,
the Qatari satellite television channel Al-Jazeera is
broadcasting an interview with a terrorist called Abu
Muhammad Al-Julani, who is the leader of the terrorist
so-called Al-Nusra Front, which is an organization on
the Security Council’s Al-Qaida sanctions list. That
interview is designed to incite terrorism and threaten
the Government and the people of Syria.
As the Council well knows, such an interview is
a flagrant violation of the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council on terrorism, in particular resolution

15-1540011/47

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

1624 (2005), which prohibits incitement to terrorism.
It is clear that the Qatari regime is trying, through
such an interview with the commander of a terrorist
organization on a Security Council sanctions list, to
whitewash the image of the Al-Nusra Front, just as the
mafia launders dirty money, by portraying it as the
moderate opposition. It needs to be known that, in his
interview on the Qatari satellite television channel, this
terrorist, Al-Julani, directed various threats against a
number of States Members of the United Nations.
The Syrian Government has always dealt with
the media in all openness. From the very first weeks
of what is called a crisis, it enacted a new law on
media in a reform effort that aims at enhancing the
freedom and transparency of the work of the media. In
cooperation with the former Joint Special Envoy of the
United Nations and the League of Arab States on the
Syrian crisis, Mr. Kofi Annan, the Syrian Government
committed to implementing his six-point peace plan,
including point 5, relating to the access and work of
journalists. This Syrian commitment was reflected
in the delivery of authorizations to enter and work
in the country to hundreds of Arab and non-Arab
foreign journalists. That was confirmed at the time by
Mr. Annan, when his Office said that it had verified
journalists’ access to Syria and that the requests he
received then were only requests to extend the periods
of visits.
The Syrian Government still welcomes and receives
journalists who wish to enter Syria, but it requires that
they do so in a legal manner and through the official
border crossing points in order to be able to work freely.
The Syrian Government attaches great importance to
the safety and security of journalists and asks them not
to enter Syria illegally, which would put them in harm’s
way. It also requests that journalists avoid the places
where terrorists groups, especially Daesh and the
Al-Nusra Front, are present. It is unfortunate that some
foreign journalists have become victims of terrorism,
having faced aggression, abductions, detentions and
murder, just like their Syrian counterparts.
The Syrian Government has made great efforts, in
cooperation with the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, to free the
abducted journalists and evacuate the wounded and the
remains from the areas where armed terrorist groups
are found and repatriate them. Nevertheless, some
journalists unfortunately continue to illegally infiltrate
Syrian territory through our borders with neighbouring

12/47

27/05/2015

countries, sometimes with the help of armed groups or
with the assistance of the authorities of neighbouring
States, which leads some of them to face grave danger.
Others are arrested and then released and allowed to
leave Syria.
On behalf of my Government, I have addressed
official letters to the Secretary-General and successive
Presidents of the Security Council reaffirming that we
seek to guarantee the safety and security of journalists
wishing to work in Syria. We ask them to abide by
official regulations, to stay out of danger and not to put
themselves in situations where the Syrian authorities
would be unable to guarantee their safety.
For the fifth consecutive year, an unprecedented
media campaign continues to incite terrorism and
violence, sow divisions and concoct lies concerning
the events taking place in my country, in flagrant
violation of resolution 1624 (2005) and media ethics, or
what is left of such ethics if they even exist. Numerous
global television channels and Internet websites openly
promote terrorism, attract and recruit foreign terrorist
fighters and bring them to Syria from all parts of the
globe, in deliberate violation of relevant Security
Council resolutions and other international counterterrorism instruments.
While this is happening, a suspicious paralysis
has beset the Security Council and its subcommittees,
coinciding with attempts to silence the Syrian media
by targeting their institutions through terrorist acts
of sabotage, and by abducting and assassinating its
personnel. Those terrorist attacks have caused the
deaths of 33 journalists and media personnel working
with Syrian media institutions, and scores of others have
been attacked, injured, kidnapped and held in detention
by armed terrorist groups that certain powerful
members of the Security Council pride themselves on
training, openly, in Turkey, Jordan and other countries.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I would like to begin
by expressing my deep appreciation to the presidency
of Lithuania for convening this open debate on the
protection of journalists.
This subject is particularly important to Indonesia
for two reasons. The first is that we understand the
significance of the free flow of information to our efforts
to institutionalize transparency and accountability.
Journalists are often a critical part of that process.
15-15400

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The second is that, in conflict situations, transparency
is often the first victim. As a result, journalism and
journalists journey into peril. Examples of such peril,
and the tragedy that consequently befalls journalists,
are not hard to find in recent or contemporary conflicts.
Indonesia is deeply concerned about incidents of
violence and deliberate attacks against journalists,
media professionals and associated personnel. The
irony is that, although we now live in a world where the
free flow of information and freedom of expression are
deemed to be basic and essential elements of democratic
societies, independent journalism is often the target of
various actors who wish to keep the inconvenient truth
hidden.
Amid this distressing but increasing trend, we
might continue to ask how international humanitarian
law protects journalists and other media professionals.
There should be no doubt that international law sets
out clear provisions for the protection of journalists in
such situations. Journalists in armed conflict should
be considered civilians and therefore be afforded the
protections to which civilians are entitled. Such assaults
and the ensuing tragedies are therefore in violation of
international humanitarian law. As we all know, the
Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols
explicitly provide protections for media personnel. In
that regard, it is important to underscore that in both
international and non-international armed conflicts, an
intentional attack on a civilian may amount to a war
crime under the Rome Statute.
Another important reference that we need to
strengthen further in this context is resolution 1738
(2006) on the protection of journalists in armed conflict,
which highlights the obligation of all States and parties
in armed conflicts to comply fully with international
humanitarian law. It also condemns deliberate attacks
against journalists, media professionals and associated
personnel in armed conflicts, and calls upon all parties
to put an end to such practices.
The obvious conundrum is that many of today’s
conflicts are not being fought between States — that is,
between signatories to international legal instruments.
Instead, these conflicts involve insurgents, terrorists
and groups with no recognition of, let alone any respect
whatsoever for, international humanitarian law. In
effect, they are actors who often delight in the negative
publicity their heinous acts bring them. In other
words, this debate deals as much with the protection
of civilians in armed conflict as it does with the very

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

nature of impunity, as enjoyed by outlaws involved in
conflicts. This critical element makes the extremely
daunting task of protecting journalists in conflict as
important as protecting other civilians, and presents an
enormous challenge to the Council in its consideration
of this agenda item.
The important role that journalists play in monitoring
the observance of international humanitarian law often
means that, in conflict situations, they are vulnerable to
being targeted by those who wish to protect or maintain
their own impunity. My delegation therefore believes
that steps taken to prevent impunity can function as the
most important deterrent against the perpetration of
attacks on journalists. Needless to say, we fully concur
that effective investigations of attacks on journalists
and the relentless prosecution of perpetrators are, in the
end, a potent means of protecting journalists.
We also call on news organizations to work in close
cooperation with relevant stakeholders, including,
the United Nations and its peacekeepers, to improve
the safety of media personnel during assignments in
conflict zones. While underlining the need for media
personnel to be prepared to confront the risks inherent
in war zones, my delegation believes that it is also
important for them to be well informed and up to date
on the provisions of international humanitarian law so
that they can take advantage of its provision for their
protection when covering conflict situations, and can
report on and monitor the observance of international
humanitarian law.
My delegation is of the view that it would be an
advantage in this context if the dissemination of
international humanitarian law were to be further
extended to all relevant stakeholders in armed conflicts,
including by embedding it in the process of mediation
between or among parties to conflict and in the training
of United Nations peacekeepers and related actors.
Undoubtedly, the raising of awareness of international
humanitarian law to the public at large in peacetime,
in the context of preventive action, is also essential
and will further promote respect for the rule of law
and inculcate the principles of humanity, which curtail
violence and preserve peace as desired by us all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Riecken (Austria): Austria fully aligns itself
with the statement delivered earlier on behalf of the
European Union.

15-1540013/47

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Let me thank the Lithuanian presidency for
convening today’s open debate. The protection of
journalists is a priority for Austria. We are continuously
witnessing high numbers of targeted and often deadly
attacks on journalists. Over 600 journalists and media
workers have been killed over the past 10 years, and
attacks on journalists are occurring in virtually all
regions of the world. We are particularly appalled by
the unprecedented cruelty of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) and other terrorist groups.
Since only the beginning of 2015, 30 journalists
have been killed, according to the International Press
Institute, either because of their reporting or simply
because they were journalists. It must be emphasized
that the clear majority of attacks against journalists take
place in situations that cannot be qualified as traditional
or typical armed conflict situations. Journalists
reporting, for instance, on organized crime, corruption,
protests and popular uprisings easily become targets of
assault, arbitrary arrest, harassment or intimidation.
Those attacks aim to silent critical voices and greatly
impede the right to the freedom of expression.
In recent years, the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the Human Rights Council have shown
increasing international awareness by adopting
resolutions condemning attacks against journalists.
They have called upon all States to act on their legal
obligations to promote a safe and enabling environment
for journalists, so that they can perform their work
independently and without undue interference. Austria
will continue to play an active role to raise political
awareness of the problem. We also particularly welcome
the significant efforts of UNESCO in implementing
the United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of
Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.
While it is the responsibility of States to ensure that
journalists’ right to protection as civilians is respected,
all parties to a conflict, including non-State actors, must
comply with the rules of international humanitarian law
as well as international criminal law, which establish
clear obligations for individuals. The Security Council
has an important role to play in that regard and must
regularly address the issue of the safety of journalists
in a substantial manner, including in its countryspecific deliberations. The Council should strongly
condemn attacks against journalists whenever they
occur as they are a direct threat to free and democratic
societies. Austria encourages the Secretary-General to
include more detailed information on the situation of

14/47

27/05/2015

and threats against journalists in his future reports on
the protection of civilians. The Security Council should
also make better use of the expertise of United Nations
experts, including the relevant special procedures of the
Human Rights Council and UNESCO representatives,
and invite these experts for briefings.
Furthermore, it would be crucial for United Nations
missions, agencies and offices to be better prepared
to become the first points of contact for journalists
under threat, especially in conflict situations. Taking
into account recent experiences from the situation of
non-international conflicts, Austrian authorities have
responded to increasing expectations to ensure the
protection to our own journalists reporting from conflict
zones by introducing an identity card for journalists in
accordance with article 79 of the Additional Protocol I
of the Geneva Conventions.
Impunity for those responsible for attacks has
been recognized as the biggest obstacle for the
effective protection of journalists. Nine out of 10
crimes committed against journalists go unpunished.
Therefore, States must strengthen accountability
for attacks, in particular by vigorously condemning
such attacks when they occur, by investigating them
promptly and effectively in order to duly sanction those
responsible, and by providing compensation to the
victims where appropriate. We should therefore also
consider how regional justice mechanisms, such as ad
hoc tribunals and the International Criminal Court,
based on its existing competence, can contribute to
ensuring accountability if efforts at the national level
do not bring the expected results.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Mr. Ruiz Blanco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Madam President, we are grateful to your country for
convening this open debate, which focuses our attention
and that of the world on the situation facing journalists
in the practice of their profession in times of serious
crisis on the international scene.
Multiple reports on this issue persistently show
a serious deterioration in the conditions in which
journalists work and the dangers they have faced over
the past few years. I believe that these conditions
signal serious concerns within a much broader context.
They reflect the deterioration in international security
and serve as indicators of the tenuous humanitarian
situation confronting many countries.

15-15400

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

For Colombia, the freedoms of thought, opinion
and expression, as well as the ability of all parties and
opposition movements to freely express themselves
without restriction, are not only values recognized
and defended legally, but are fundamental, core
legal principles of our societies and values of our
Governments, which have confronted harsh and violent
wars and forces, including those that have sought
unsuccessfully to silence and destroy Colombian
democracy. Colombia has learned many lessons based
on past events that undermined our democracy. Those
lessons have served as a route to understanding the
fundamental importance of journalism in providing not
only visibility for those conflicts that occur globally
and locally, but also a way to confront and expose those
that threaten the lives of our citizens, institutions and
democratic values.
In the 1980s and early 1990s, while our central
Government was directly fighting the transnational
network of drug trafficking mafias, it was courageous
journalists who dared to denounce the criminal
activities of those mafias and to publish them on the
front page of newspapers like El Espectador, a daily that
has suffered, without changing its editorial position,
the devastating consequences of the assassination
of its director, Don Guillermo Cano, and some of its
journalists, including the almost total destruction of
its facilities by a car bomb. UNESCO has recognized
the courage of this exceptional journalist by attaching
his name to the Guillermo Cano World Press Freedom
Prize.
The Government of Colombia promotes and
protects the freedom of the press. As President Juan
Manuel Santos Calderón, a journalist by profession,
has stated on several occasions, journalists in Colombia
can be assured that the Colombian State has all the
means available to promote and protect, come what
may, their freedom and independence and their selfsacrificing work, without exceptions of any kind. That
is why I want to highlight some measures that we have
developed for specific targeted actions that will have an
impact on the promotion of freedom of expression and
the security of journalists.
First, we have established a public policy whereby,
beginning in 2012, we have integrated all national
security agencies, under the coordination of the Ministry
of Interior, together with civil society organizations,
to strengthen, guarantee and defend the right to the
freedom of expression in the practice of journalism.

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

The process has involved more than 20 State agencies,
23 civil society organizations, 8 universities and media
outlets.
Our second measure was to establish a national
protection unit, to which United States Ambassador
Samantha Power referred this morning. The national
protection unit has provided protection to more than
137 journalists who were subject to threats, providing
them with the necessary means for their protection,
including armoured vehicles and escorts for the most
serious cases, on behalf of the Colombian Federation
of Journalists.
Our third measure was to establish, through the
national Attorney General’s office, an action plan to
strengthen investigations into serious violations of
journalists’ rights, as well as institutional capacities and
the results of judicial inquiries so as to deliver effective
justice in such cases. The work enjoys the support of
the Foundation for Press Freedom and INTERPOL.
I can therefore state with firm conviction that
defending and effectively protecting those who have
chosen to work as journalists in Colombia is the task
of the Government of President Santos Calderón, in
accordance with our Constitution, which in its article 20
“guarantees to all persons the freedom to express
and disseminate their thoughts and opinions, to
receive true and impartial information and to
establish mass media organizations. The mass
media are free and have a social responsibility”.
In closing, I should like to quote once again a
journalist who was also our Nobel Prize laureate, Gabriel
García Márquez, who, in speaking of journalism, said:
“It can only be digested and humanized by its brutal
confrontation with reality”.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Madam President, allow
me at the outset to thank the Lithuanian presidency for
holding this open debate, thus giving us an opportunity
to reaffirm our commitment to promoting freedom of
opinion and expression as a fundamental right and an
essential precondition for democracy, the rule of law,
peace and stability.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union and welcomes
the adoption of Security Council resolution 2222

15-1540015/47

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

(2015) on this topic earlier today, which we were glad
to co-sponsor.
Free, diverse, objective and independent media are
indispensable in any society determined to promote
and protect freedom of opinion and expression. Without
free journalism, many injustices might go unnoticed
by the international community, and much human
suffering would fade into oblivion without a single word
of protest. Every day journalists are on the front lines,
sometimes on the domestic fields of political and social
battles, providing us with important information and
inside views, but some of them are on real battlefields,
reporting from burning crisis areas and risking their
lives for information or a video clip that speaks
volumes and will make a difference. In areas where few
dare to go, journalists serve as our eyes and ears, and
often as our conscience. Their need for protection is,
unfortunately, very real, and it is well deserved.
Croatia is deeply worried about the continuing
attacks on independent journalism in certain countries,
as well as by the escalating trend of intimidation,
harassment, arrests, torture and prosecution of
journalists worldwide. We strongly condemn all actions
that suppress freedom of the press, including the brutal
murders of journalists by terrorist groups in Iraq and
Syria, the murderous attacks against media outlets such
as the French satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo, and
the kidnappings of journalists and media workers by
militant groups in eastern Ukraine, to cite just a few
examples from a long and inglorious list.
In this century alone, according to the Committee
to Protect Journalists, 795 journalists and media
workers have been killed. The number of journalists in
prison, kidnapped or taken hostage in the same period
exceeds 2,200. These are horrifying numbers. It is
equally troubling that those responsible for attacking
and killing journalists very rarely face justice. Against
this disturbing background, we highly value and fully
support the continuing efforts of the Human Rights
Council and the Security Council to provide journalists
with more effective protection and develop a single,
strategic and harmonized approach to the issue of the
safety of journalists and the impunity of perpetrators of
crimes against them.
The General Assembly and Human Rights
Council annual consensual resolutions on the safety of
journalists are valuable tools in encouraging concrete
initiatives aimed at combating impunity for attacks
against journalists and media workers. We need to
16/47

27/05/2015

ensure full cooperation between existing protection
mechanisms, in particular with Special Rapporteurs and
Representatives: those on the promotion and protection
of the right to freedom of opinion and expression;
extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary execution; violence
against women; torture; and forced disappearances and
arbitrary detentions, all of whom play a crucial role in
monitoring different aspects of the issue of the safety
of journalists.
Croatia supports the 2012 United Nations Plan of
Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of
Impunity. With these calls to action in mind, and in the
light of the distinctive threats faced by journalists, we
have to continue to recognize the particular vulnerability
of journalists in United Nations resolutions on crisis
situations. We also wish to underscore the specific
risks faced by women journalists, including sexual and
gender-based violence, and call for a gender-sensitive
approach when considering measures to address the
safety of journalists.
The Security Council, the General Assembly and
the Human Rights Council have called upon all States
to act on their legal obligations to promote a safe and
enabling environment for journalists, so that they can
perform their work independently and without undue
interference.
In our joint efforts to end the heinous practices
that threaten the safety of journalists worldwide, we
need to ensure better cooperation and coordination
among various international, regional and local actors,
including in establishing effective early-warning
mechanisms. We also need to call on all relevant actors
to comply with existing standards on the protection
of journalists; we need to be more systematic and
vigorous in condemning attacks against journalists and
violations of their rights; and we need to fight impunity
and hold the perpetrators accountable.
To conclude, let me say that as a former journalist
who reported from this very building 25 years ago, I
can testify to the fact that while the world of media
has changed profoundly through new technologies and
means of reporting, some things have remained the same
since the dawn of this profession. Good journalism can
change the world for the better. Journalism must never
be silent; by the same token, we must never cease our
efforts to provide it with the best protection possible.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.

15-15400

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Mr. Radomski (Poland): Poland aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union. I would like to add a few comments in my
national capacity.
Madam President, let me at the outset thank you for
convening this timely debate. It gives us the opportunity
to once again reflect on the key issue of the protection
of journalists in conflict situations. This question fully
deserves our attention, as the number of journalists
killed while doing their jobs continues to increase.
Having said that, I would like to highlight the often
heroic role of those committed professionals who lost
their lives while reporting from zones of conflict. I can
still vividly remember the excellent Polish journalist
and war correspondent Mr. Waldemar Milewicz, who
bravely reported from different parts of the world. He
brought into our homes tragic stories of war and death
and let us witness the suffering of innocent victims.
On 7 May 2004, Waldemar Milewicz was travelling
around Baghdad in a clearly marked press vehicle when
he was attacked by a group of armed men. Milewicz
was hit first and died instantly. Another member of his
crew, Mounir Bouamrane, an Algerian-Polish editor
and translator, was killed in a second volley of gunfire
when he left the vehicle.
There are so many similar tragic stories of the
devoted men and women prepared to risk their lives to
tell the truth about the horrors of war to the rest of the
world. Unfortunately, the dangers that journalists face
very often transcend the borders of conflict zones. For
example, the conflict in Syria has brought suffering
not only to the correspondents working on the spot but
also to those in neighbouring Lebanon. In 2014, two
journalists were kidnapped there on a smuggling route
for Syrian rebel forces. Ironically, they were preparing
a report on the kidnapping of journalists inside Syria.
Indeed, statistics on the safety of journalists are
frightening. In 2015 alone, 25 journalists have been
killed. Among them were Ali al-Ansari, killed in
January in Iraq, Qais Talal Agha, killed by Daesh in
February in Iraq, and Khalid Mohammed al-Washali,
killed in January in Yemen. We pay tribute to them and
to all those who died while exercising their jobs.
It would be impossible to overestimate the role
that journalists play in today’s world. Contemporary
societies depend on the exchange of the most current
news and access to honest, impartial information. We
should not forget that press and media coverage benefit

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

everyone and that they are crucial for the promotion
of democracy, human rights, the rule of law and good
governance. Journalists are the eyes and voice of civil
society. Brave, truthful reporting often inspires and
encourages people to defend freedom, demand justice
and construct democracy.
Let me mention just one example, from Tunisia.
It has already been demonstrated that the safety and
rights of journalists are often not ensured. In violation
of international obligations, standards and declarations,
journalists are kidnapped, imprisoned or forced into
exile. They face threats, harassment, fines and assaults.
As States Members of the United Nations, we have an
obligation to take active steps to prevent and respond to
violence and intimidation against journalists and other
media actors, in order to enable them to work in safety
and security.
We must continuously promote respect for
international standards, as set forth in the Geneva
Conventions and their Additional Protocols, as well as
in Security Council resolutions. There is an urgent need
to address the root causes of violence against journalists
and their sources. Preventive mechanisms must be
further developed. The sharing of best practices on the
safety of journalists, as well as training and awarenessraising for security services and journalists themselves,
can contribute to preventing future violations. In that
light, we welcome today’s adoption of resolution
2222 (2015), which was introduced at the initiative of
Lithuania. Poland proudly co-sponsored that important
document.
While working to increase the safety of journalists in
conflict, we should not forget to focus on accountability.
As stated in the concept note (S/2015/307, annex) for
today’s debate, accountability for the perpetrators of
attacks against journalists is virtually nonexistent.
Accountability is especially important for local media
workers, who constitute the largest percentage of
journalist victims. To address that issue, Poland has been
supporting the European Endowment for Democracy
since its establishment in 2013. The Endowment works
on the media environment and helps to keep it safe.
In that regard, we are pleased that the Endowment’s
participants include representatives of countries from
the Middle East such as Lebanon and Jordan and from
Eastern Europe, including Armenia and Ukraine.
As today’s debate proves, we should not hesitate
to ask questions on the most serious threats to the
safety of journalists, such as the existence of common

15-1540017/47

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

threat patterns or measures to enhance respect for
international obligations. We will do our utmost to find
the answers to those questions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece.
Mrs. Boura (Greece): I would like to thank the
Lithuanian presidency for taking the initiative to
organize this timely and important debate on the
protection of journalists in conflict situations. I
welcome the remarks made by the Deputy SecretaryGeneral and the Director-General of Reporters Without
Borders.
Greece aligns itself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union. I would like to add
a few words on this issue of major significance in my
national capacity.
As the Secretary-General confirmed in his
report on the safety of journalists and the issue of
impunity (A/69/268), there has been an upward trend
in the number of journalists killed in recent years and
increased targeting of journalists and media workers.
More than half of the 61 journalists killed in 2014 were
covering war regions; 17 of them were killed in Syria.
The numbers taken hostage, tortured or subjected to
forced disappearance draw an even more dismal and
alarming picture. Local journalists are the majority of
victims, while women journalists are regularly targeted.
Resolution 2222 (2015), adopted today, which Greece
co-sponsored, highlights the importance of the issue
and of the new challenges that should be addressed. It
is a positive development that we strongly welcome.
Over the past few years, the United Nations has
actively engaged the international community in
creating a safe and enabling environment for journalists
and media workers. The United Nations Plan of Action
on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity,
launched by UNESCO, is a comprehensive approach
for an inter-agency mechanism to create a free and safe
environment for journalists and media professionals in
both conflict and non-conflict situations.
In 2013, Greece, together with a cross-regional group
of States, introduced resolution 68/163 on the safety
of journalists and the issue of impunity, proclaiming
2 November as the International Day to End Impunity
for Crimes Against Journalists. That resolution, whose
text was adopted for a second consecutive year in 2014
as resolution 69/185, condemns all attacks and violence
against journalists and media workers.
18/47

27/05/2015

However, improved awareness and normative
progress are not enough to guarantee the safety of
journalists. The safety of journalists who work in
conflict areas is by no means assured and their working
conditions are increasingly deteriorating. The heinous
crimes committed since August 2014 by the so-called
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) constitute a
blatant example. Only a month ago, seven journalists
and media workers were found brutally assassinated
near Derna, the Libyan city controlled by ISIS. Such
barbaric crimes should strengthen the resolve of the
international community to take all necessary measures
to bring the perpetrators to justice. As the SecretaryGeneral stressed in his report, impunity remains the
biggest obstacle to effectively ensuring the safety of
journalists.
To achieve those goals, it will be necessary to
engage all stakeholders. Only through a comprehensive
approach involving United Nations agencies,
peacekeeping missions, civil society and States will we
be able to begin to reverse the vicious circle of impunity
and to protect journalists working in war-torn regions.
Training is vital to achieving results in promoting
the safety of journalists in conflict areas. Journalists
and other media workers reporting from war zones
should be physically fit, emotionally prepared,
appropriately equipped and adequately insured. Such
prerequisites are rarely fulfilled, especially in the case
of freelance journalists or independent media workers.
Media agencies should be encouraged to provide their
employees with adequate training before sending them
into conflict regions. Their goal should be to train
journalists to face combat risks and battlefield hazards,
as well as to provide them with emergency first-aid
skills.
In that regard, States could lend their expertise
through specialized agencies, military personnel and
infrastructure. Greece is prepared to engage in that
direction by offering its existing infrastructure to
provide relevant training. The Hellenic Multinational
Peace Support Operations Training Centre, located in
the region of Macedonia, in northern Greece, is already
scheduling the launch of relevant training courses.
Having developed expertise in providing essential
practical knowledge to military personnel, police and
civilians, the Hellenic Multinational Peace Support
Operations Training Centre is ready to offer training
for conflict situations to journalists and media workers.

15-15400

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

We must redouble our efforts to enhance the safety
of journalists and to put an end to impunity. It is often
said that truth is the first casualty of war. United Nations
Member States must remain strongly committed to
ensuring better protection for the courageous journalists
who strive to keep truth alive.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Roet (Israel): I would like to congratulate
Lithuania on its successful presidency of the Council
this month. We would also like to thank Mr. Linkevičius,
Lithuania’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, for personally
presiding over today’s meeting.
I would like to take a moment to recognize that
we had Mariane Pearl in the Security Council with
us today. The brutal murder of Mariane’s husband
Daniel in Pakistan in 2002 shocked the world, but her
tireless work ensures that his legacy lives on, and he is
remembered very fondly in Israel. May his memory be
blessed.
This discussion could not come at a more critical
time for journalists in conflict situations. Those brave
men and women serve as the eyes, ears and mouth
of the entire world in the very places where many
would prefer us to be blind, deaf and mute. Justice
Louis Brandeis famously said that sunlight is the best
disinfectant. Today, unfortunately, there are many
places that are under a total solar eclipse. Without the
work of courageous reporters, repressive regimes go
unchecked, atrocities go unrecorded and the public
remains unaware of the reality on the ground. Those
who work in places of conflict and strife ensure the free
flow of information from distant battlefields around the
globe to our iPads in the comfort of our homes.
There are places in the world where a camera is
considered a deadly weapon, a tweet is an act of treason
and a microphone is grounds for arrest. Extremist
groups target journalists not only to silence them but to
declare war on the most fundamental values of the free
world — freedom of opinion and expression, freedom
to speak our minds and freedom to receive and impart
information. They seek to force their barbaric ideology
on us by dictating at the point of a gun what we can
and cannot say. We should make no mistake — such
groups recognize no borders, and their violence and
intimidation are not restricted to any particular region
of the world. The shots at the offices of Charlie
Hebdo in Paris were meant to silence the community

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

of journalists worldwide. However, as hundreds of
thousands of the citizens of France proclaimed in the
streets, we will not allow the enemies of a free press to
silence our freedoms.
In these times of instability, journalists are
compelled to report from nations ruled by fear and
repression and from lawless lands ruled by warlords.
Those whose duty it is to report on the horrific events in
such areas are at unprecedented risk of being abducted,
tortured or brutally murdered. The most dangerous place
in the world for journalists is the Middle East. From
Saudi Arabia to Iraq, and from Gaza to Iran, freedom
of the press is under siege. Hope for new freedoms has
shriveled under the harsh reality of Middle Eastern
autocrats and theocrats,who are determined to use any
means at their disposal to silence those who would
question their legitimacy.
Ten months ago in Iran, a Washington Post reporter,
Jason Rezaian, was arrested along with his wife. He
has been detained without bail, denied access to an
attorney and accused of espionage and propaganda
against the establishment. Just yesterday, his shadowy
trial opened. Not surprisingly, the hearing to decide his
fate will be conducted behind closed doors. In other
parts of the Middle East, terrorists have seized control
and journalists face an even more barbaric fate. Those
fanatical zealots mock the very idea of human rights
and prefer rule by the sword to rule by law. Their idea
of due process is a masked man beheading a helpless
kneeling human and posting the execution on YouTube.
The iron-fisted rule that Hamas exercises over
the Gaza Strip provides a powerful example of what
happens when the press is not free to report what it sees
and hears. Israeli families spent last summer racing to
bomb shelters, knowing they had only seconds to take
cover from Hamas rockets. Thousands of those rockets
were fired in broad daylight from hospitals, schools
and children’s playgrounds. Yet those who turned on
their televisions or opened their newspapers did not see
reports of the obvious war crimes committed by Hamas.
When we ask why so few pictures of those rockets and
the Hamas terrorists who launched them ever saw the
light of day, the answer comes from the stories of the
journalists themselves. The Italian journalist Gabriele
Barbati did not dare to report that Hamas-launched
rockets killed Palestinian children in a refugee camp
until he was, in his own words, out of Gaza and far from
Hamas’s retaliation. An Indian film crew videotaped
a Hamas missile launch just metres from their hotel

15-1540019/47

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

room, but waited until they were beyond Hamas’s reach
to air the damning footage. Under such conditions,
missiles launches go unseen, the use of human shields
goes unreported and falsehoods are accepted as truths.
While Hamas routinely harasses and intimidates
journalists, the Palestinian Authority is no better.
According to a United States State Department humanrights report, Palestinian Authority security forces
harass, detain and prosecute journalists for trying to do
their jobs. Furthermore, the Authority abuses the idea
of a free press by using State-controlled media outlets to
broadcast hateful rhetoric and dangerous incitements.
There is only one exception to the rule in the
Middle East. According to Freedom House, an
organization that monitors the suppression of freedom
around the world, Israel is the only country in the
region with a free press. We in Israel understand that
a free press is the cornerstone of democracy. Those of
us fortunate enough to live in an open society know
that with a free press comes bad press, and in Israel we
know it all too well. The press is free to challenge the
strategic assessment of the head of our army, to debate
the reasoning of our Chief Justice and to give political
advice to the Prime Minister and his Cabinet. Israel is
a model for how a democratic nation, even while facing
immense challenges, can maintain a free and thriving
press.
Threats to journalists and a free press are threats
to our way of life. When a journalist cannot report
the truth and the public is left in the dark, tyranny,
dictatorship and the abuse of human rights will follow.
It is the responsibility of the international community
to work together to protect journalists across the
globe. The United Nations was founded on the basis
of allowing free and open debate in order to ensure a
peaceful world. Only a determined commitment on
the part of the Security Council to safeguarding a free
press can ensure the realization of the promise of that
vision for ourselves and for future generations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): I thank the
presidency of Lithuania for drawing renewed attention
to the horrific acts that have been committed against
journalists and for calling for more resolute action to
defend them.
Targeting journalists represents a direct attack
on freedom of expression and on democracy. Such
20/47

27/05/2015

attacks have a far-reaching impact, since they prevent
us from receiving first-hand information about
political developments, the extent of conflicts, human
rights violations and crimes against humanity. That
reduces the ability of the United Nations and regional
organizations to act promptly and appropriately.
In our joint actions, we have to take into
consideration the now radically changed character
of war, with its multiple perpetrators — the State,
opposition parties, radical religious extremists and
criminals. Today, journalists are deliberate targets
of public kidnappings and killings for ransom and
the release of detained terrorists. Yet countless more
unseen and unheard local journalists are silenced
through imprisonment and intimidation by their own
countries, with sexual violence inflicted on women
journalists. So far, regrettably, none of the perpetrators
of such acts have been brought to justice, and impunity
is increasing.
My delegation would like to propose that UNESCO,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe — through its Representative on Freedom of
the Media — the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, the United Nations and its country
teams, together with large media and aid agencies,
begin by ensuring that Governments and non-State
actors enforce the relevant existing instruments,
which include the Geneva Conventions and the Rome
Statutes, as well as the United Nations Plan of Action
on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity,
resolution 1738 (2006) and UNESCO’s Berlin and
Medellín Declarations. It is imperative that we improve
training related to working in hostile environments,
the rules of war, first aid, improved registration and
coordination and insurance coverage, along with the
provision of protective gear and better use of digital
security devices for journalists.
The United Nations system must therefore work
with its partners in the non-governmental media
organizations, such as the International Federation
of Journalists, Reporters Without Borders, the
International Press Institute, the Committee for the
Protection of Journalists, and others, to provide
better protection and safeguards. That would include
enhanced ratification of the Additional Protocols,
specific classifications of attacks on media personnel
as war crimes under international criminal law and,
finally, better mitigation, advocacy and education.
The Security Council needs to devote further regular

15-15400

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

attention to such attacks and call upon the SecretaryGeneral and Member States to provide increased robust
action.
The Government of Kazakhstan devotes great
attention towards implementing norms and standards
in its national media legislation, promoting public
participation in enacting new laws that minimize
administrative barriers in media reporting. It also
provides financial and legislative support towards
developing independent media. Recently, on 26 and
27 May, Astana hosted, together with the United Nations
Department of Public Information, a media seminar on
peace in the Middle East. It is one of a series of events
and programmes supporting journalists and media
representatives in areas of armed conflict. Kazakhstan
is considering cooperation with Middle East countries
to strengthen peace and stability within the larger
international agenda in accordance with relevant United
Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Another significant contribution of Kazakhstan
is the international Eurasian Media Forum. It is
held annually in Astana and serves as a platform to
discuss and exchange views on improving the use of
best practices in the protection of journalists through
United Nations peacekeeping missions, operations of
other international and subregional organizations and
the involvement of national Governments in peace
processes.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Kazakhstan’s
readiness to work further with the international
community in ensuring the greater protection of
journalists as conflicts become more complex,
protracted and hostile.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Zaayman (South Africa): At the outset, let
me congratulate you, Madam President, on convening
this important and timely debate. We also extend our
appreciation to the Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Jan
Eliasson; the Director-General of Reporters Without
Borders, Mr. Christophe Deloire; and Ms. Mariane
Pearl, for their insightful briefings.
This debate is particularly significant considering
the increasing risks and threats to both journalists and
media workers. In 2014 alone, reports indicate that
61 journalists were killed and 221 were imprisoned.
Those are concerning trends, considering the
obligations of all parties to an armed conflict to adhere

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

to international humanitarian and human rights law,
as provided in the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and
Additional Protocols of 1977 and other international
instruments.
South Africa calls on all parties to an armed conflict
to restrain from killing civilians, including journalists,
in conflict situations and to ensure full respect and
protection. We therefore would like to commend the
presidency’s initiative, as well as various efforts of the
Secretary-General, to raise particular attention to the
plight of journalists through underlining the importance
of putting in place mechanisms that will further ensure
their safety during periods of armed conflict.
My delegation would like to reiterate its view
that the protection of civilians, including journalists,
from the scourge of armed conflict is at the core of the
maintenance of international peace and security. South
Africa is fully committed to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict and continues to support a normative
and legal framework for enhancing such protection.
My delegation is also mindful that attacks against
journalists and the growing number of casualties
among journalists could deter them from accepting
assignments and exercising their right to seek and
disseminate information, to the detriment of citizens
to be informed of various conflict situations around
the world. The dissemination of information is also
critical to the work of important decision-making
bodies, such as the Security Council, that are tasked
with the primary responsibility of the maintenance of
international peace and security, as well as the wider
international community.
It is important to note that the Security Council has
called for the protection of civilians in armed conflicts
and specifically addressed the protection of journalists.
In resolution 1738 (2006), all attacks against journalists,
media professionals and associated personnel in armed
conflicts are condemned, and the resolution calls upon
all parties to put an end to such practices. In that regard,
we fully support the idea of reinforcing accountability
measures, such as the strengthening of national judicial
institutions, as well as ensuring that the Rome Statute
addresses the challenges of today.
As much as this issue has drawn international
attention, more remains to be done by the judicial
systems within States to combat the culture of impunity
and holding perpetrators of attacks against journalists
accountable for their actions. In South Africa,

15-1540021/47

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

freedom of expression is very important because
South Africans fought tirelessly and relentlessly to
obtain such freedoms. With the advent of democracy
in South Africa, we were able to develop a remarkable
constitution that enshrines the freedom of the media
and freedom of expression. The rights of journalists are
fully protected by the law and that is displayed by the
vibrancy of the media and the many media outlets that
disseminate information to the general public on a daily
basis without fear or favour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): We thank the Lithuanian
presidency for organizing this useful and timely debate
and Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for his
comprehensive and thoughtful briefing.
We hope that today’s debate will help the Council to
focus its attention on protecting journalists in situations
of armed conflict, as part of the broader debate on the
protection of civilians. Independent journalism is vital
for a free society, to hold the powerful to account, and
for citizens to be informed and actively engaged. As a
former journalist, myself, I know the risks journalists
take to unveil and uphold the truth.
Freedom of the media is widely regarded as an
enabling right, because it helps to secure a wide range
of other universal human rights. It is the unhindered
functioning of the media that promotes transparency
and accountability in the conduct of public affairs
and, of course, in governance. The information age in
which we live has made the role and contribution of
journalists even more crucial, more so in situations of
armed conflict. The media not only bears witness to
facts on the ground and provides authentic information;
it also shapes opinion and assists in presenting moral
and political choices in conflict situations.
There is an obvious relationship between the
crucial role journalists play on the front lines and the
growing threats to their safety and security. Violence
against journalists and their deliberate targeting should
be unacceptable. The culture of impunity that has
come to endanger their work and jeopardize their lives
in those situations should be brought to an end. My
country, Pakistan, unequivocally condemns all attacks
and violence against journalists in the performance of
their professional duties. We share the international
outrage on the recent beheading and summary
execution of journalists by terrorist organizations. That

22/47

27/05/2015

barbarism must come to an end and the safety of media
professionals should be fully assured.
Resolution 1738 (2006) adopted an action-oriented
approach to the safety of journalists in armed conflicts.
It sent a strong signal to parties in armed conflict to
comply with their obligations under international law.
Apart from condemning attacks against journalists, it
also called for ending impunity in that context. General
Assembly resolution 68/163 outlines a comprehensive
framework for the protection of journalists that
envisages legislative, awareness-raising and other
important measures. The Human Rights Council has
also taken a lead role in strengthening the normative
agenda in that regard. Such frameworks, norms and
enforcement mechanisms should be strengthened.
The most dangerous places for journalists remain
conflict zones, especially areas controlled by terrorist
groups and non-State actors. Achieving the delicate
balance between freedom of movement and reporting
and the safety of media workers is crucial. The challenge
is not only to strengthen the means to assure the safety
of journalists in conflict situations, but also to ensure
that they are not exposed to avoidable risks.
Today, as many regions of the world descend into
chaos and conflict, threats to journalists have become
ever more complex. Several new trends are now in
evidence: the increased use of terror tactics, rising
threats to journalists’ lives and kidnapping for ransom
in conflict zones, the danger posed to female and
freelance media workers in particular and the media’s
resort to private armed escorts for their protection.
The current international legal framework for
the protection of journalists is robust. Among other
provisions of international law and norms, article 79 of
Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Convention clearly
identifies journalists engaged in professional missions
in areas of armed conflict as civilians, provided, of
course, they take no action that prejudices their status
as a civilian. Despite those provisions, deliberate
violence against journalists is on the rise.
This alarming trend calls for innovative approaches
and responses. We would like to offer the following
suggestions: greater understanding and awareness
and full and effective implementation of existing
provisions of international law; and a well-coordinated
and comprehensive international awareness-raising
campaign that highlights the prevailing provisions in

15-15400

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

international law and underscores the consequences of
their violation.
As impunity remains a disturbing trend, efforts
should be intensified to ensure that perpetrators of
attacks against journalists are brought to justice.
Governments and local authorities must share all
available facts and relevant intelligence information for
a clearer understanding of the security situation, the
environment in conflict zones and tactics of warring
groups and non-State actors. For their part, journalists
should give due consideration to the briefings and
advice of official authorities. They should also respect
local laws, regulations and traditions. Practices like
embedded journalism need to be carefully reviewed
from the perspective of their impact on the safety of
journalists. This is also essential to ensuring their
impartiality.
Journalists covering conflict situations should be
given the requisite training and practical guidelines
to cope with the changing nature of conflict and the
tactics of terrorist groups. The role of peacekeeping
missions in the protection of journalists should be
strengthened by providing additional resources, and
media professionals may be identified as a special
category of persons to be protected.
Finally, we hope our deliberations today will guide
future strategies to ensure the protection of journalists
in a world that is transforming faster than our ability to
manage the full ramifications of that change.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): At the outset, allow me
to start by expressing appreciation for the Lithuanian
presidency of the Council for organizing this debate and
thanking Mr. Eliasson, the Deputy Secretary-General,
and other speakers for their statements.
In the context of continuing armed conflict,
journalism has earned itself a reputation as one of the
most dangerous professions. While civilians run away
from armed conflicts, journalists expose themselves
to potential hostilities to inform the international
community of the status of events, including
humanitarian issues and the suffering of civilian
populations.
It is obvious from the current world conflicts
that, despite all efforts exerted by the United Nations,
including the Security Council, media professionals

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

are more and more at risk of being directly targeted, in
violation of international humanitarian law. Despite the
existing obligations under the Geneva Conventions, their
Protocol I and the adoption of resolution 1738 (2006)
and the United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety
of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, challenges to
the implementation of those frameworks remain. Egypt
strongly condemns all acts of intimidation and violence
against journalists in armed conflicts and would like to
make the following observations in this regard.
First, in accordance with international law,
the primary responsibility for the protection of
civilians, including journalists, rests with States. That
responsibility also falls to non-State actors, such as
terrorist groups and criminal organizations. All parties
to the conflict have an international obligation under
the Geneva Conventions to protect journalists.
Secondly, commendable efforts have been already
undertaken by the Security Council, UNESCO, the
Human Rights Council, other agencies and regional
organizations to preserve the legitimate rights and
interests of journalists. We stress the importance of
their joint coordination and cooperation in achieving
positive synergy and avoiding duplication to overcome
challenges and ensure the full protection of journalists
in armed conflicts.
Thirdly, priority should be given to compliance with
the relevant standards of international humanitarian
law and to having States not yet party to existing
international legal instruments accede to them. Special
attention is also needed to raise international awareness
regarding the existing provisions of international
humanitarian law while highlighting the consequences
of their violation.
Fourthly, particular consideration is needed with
regard to the targeting of journalists by terrorist
groups, so as to devise measures to avert incidents of
kidnapping and hostage taking and to secure the safe
release of journalists held hostage.
Fifthly, where mandated and provided with the
necessary human, technical and legal capacities,
peacekeeping operations and special political missions
can positively contribute to the protection of journalists.
Let me conclude by reiterating Egypt’s firm belief
in the importance of the protection of all civilians in
conflict situations, including journalists, establishing
accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law and putting an end to impunity.

15-1540023/47

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

27/05/2015

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.

Member States to work together with the United Nations
to implement the provisions of the Plan of Action.

Ms. Bird (Australia): I thank you, Madam President,
for convening this important debate. I also thank
the Deputy Secretary-General, Mariane Pearl and
Christophe Deloire for starkly illustrating the dangers
that journalists face and the imperative that we do more
to protect them.

There is a role too for the Security Council, as
has been rightly recognized in today’s debate. The
Council should condemn attacks on journalists, and
provisions protecting civilians should be included in
relevant Council mandates. The United Nations should
also ensure that peacekeepers are trained to provide
protection, when appropriate. Australia is deeply
committed to the protection of journalists and fully
supports resolution 1738 (2006). We warmly welcome
the Council’s adoption today of resolution 2222 (2015).
We encourage that the issue of the protection of
journalists to be consistently addressed in the SecretaryGeneral’s reports on country-specific situations.

Risking their lives to shine a light on trouble
spots, journalists play an essential role in helping us
understand conflict and pre-empting it. Their reports
provide early warnings that can compel us to act.
History shows the targeting of journalists is often a
precursor to widespread crimes against civilians. Often,
victims are local reporters targeted for reporting local
stories. In recent weeks, we have been saddened by the
murders of radio producer Daud Ali Omar in Somalia
and correspondent Pow James Raeth in South Sudan.
In Daesh-occupied parts of Syria and Iraq, most
local television stations have stopped working, as
many of their employees have been detained, abducted
or threatened. Worse still, many reporters — local
and international — have been executed publicly for
exposing Daesh atrocities and laying bare the extent
of its inhumanity. For Daesh, targeting journalists is
not just about brutalizing those who bear witness to
their crimes. It is about manipulating the media in the
most obscene way to project to the world their perverse
brand of cruelty and religious zealotry. Journalists
contribute to our collective efforts to contest Daesh’s
hateful narrative and to deny oxygen to its cause.
The Syrian Government has also targeted and
imprisoned journalists.
Violence against journalists will persist unless
perpetrators know that their attacks will have
consequences. Yet impunity for crimes against
journalists is too commonplace. States must do more
to protect civilians and eliminate impunity for crimes
against civilians, including journalists. They must
systematically investigate, apprehend and try those
responsible. They must also recognize the particular
needs of female journalists.
Australia fully supports the United Nations Plan
of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of
Impunity. It is a practical tool to help States develop
legislation and other mechanisms to allow for freedom
of expression and to implement more international
humanitarian and human rights law. We encourage all
24/47

Today’s journalists are working in dangerous and
volatile conditions. Their ability to do their work safely
and freely helps us all to better understand our world.
We must persist in our efforts to protect journalists,
particularly in situations of conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Violence against journalists is unacceptable and should
be treated as an attack on society as a whole. The right
to the freedom of expression, and by extension freedom
of the media, plays a critical role in any democracy.
State authorities are therefore obliged to respect, and
to ensure respect for, those freedoms as an essential
component of effective governance. I should like briefly
to highlight four points.
First, the protection of journalists should not be
limited to armed conflict. According to Reporters
Without Borders, in 2014, one in three journalists was
killed outside of zones of armed conflict, and more
than 1,800 reporters were threatened or attacked.
The security of journalists must also be guaranteed
outside of armed conflict. Journalists continue to be
systematically targeted for their investigative work. We
need to remind ourselves that the right of journalists
to carry out their work under safe conditions without
fear of being harassed, threatened, attacked, beaten
or killed is of paramount importance to safeguard the
freedom of the media and of expression.
Secondly, Switzerland is convinced that cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
is essential to improve the implementation of
international norms and standards regarding human
15-15400

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

rights, democracy and the rule of law. An example of
successful cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations is the Joint Declaration
on Freedom of Expression and Responses to Conflict
Situations, issued earlier this month by the United
Nations Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Opinion and
Expression, the Organization of American States, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the African Union’s African Commission
on Human and Peoples’ Rights. The Declaration
recognizes that States have a direct responsibility under
international human rights law to respect the freedom
of expression, including ensuring accountability for
any attacks on those exercising their right to freedom
of expression.
Thirdly, journalists not only need protection but
the perpetrators of violations against journalists must
also be held accountable. Switzerland would like to
remind everyone that journalists are protected as
civilians under international humanitarian law. They
may not be attacked and they have to be protected by all
parties to an armed conflict, which have an obligation
to ensure their safety and security. In situations of
armed conflict, journalists play an important role
in monitoring and prevention. By uncovering and
informing about violations of human rights and of
international humanitarian law, they give voice to
victims of such abuses. Thus they play an important
part in ending impunity for such acts.
Moreover, media freedom is of paramount
importance during transition from violent conflict
to peace. It is for those reasons that, through its
development cooperation programmes, Switzerland
has been supporting the establishment of independent
media outlets in conflict-affected countries. Through
its partner organization, the Fondation Hirondelle, it
has contributed to the establishment of credible media
outlets that reach out to local communities in crises
situations, such as in the Democratic Republic of
Congo, the Republic of South Sudan and the Central
African Republic.
Finally, clear legislative and regulatory measures
need to be adopted to enable journalists to do their
work without interference or danger to their personal
safety and security. Switzerland has contributed to the
establishment of regulatory frameworks favourable
to the media and has helped journalists develop their
capacity to perform their vital role — for example, in the
Great Lakes region of Africa and Tunisia. Switzerland

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

is also helping to strengthen media associations that
advocate the freedom of the media and the safety of
journalists.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
should like to thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson
for his briefing this morning, as well as Mr. Deloire,
Director-General of Reporters Without Borders, and
Ms. Mariane Pearl, for having shared with us their
personal experiences. Those statements underscore the
gravity of the issue of impunity with respect to acts of
violence against journalists. In fact, since the adoption
of Security Council resolution 1738 (2006), progress
has been slow. We therefore commend the unanimous
adoption under the presidency of Lithuania of resolution
2222 (2015), which we co-sponsored.
Let me, at the outset, underscore the essential
contribution that journalists provide to maintaining
and promoting democratic values in our societies, as
well as their contribution to the exercise of the right to
information and freedom of expression, and also their
contribution to identifying responsibilities of States
and non-State players in situations of conflict.
The evolution of the nature of conflicts, which
involves not only State players but also a multitude of
non-State players, as well as terrorist threats, make the
task of journalists even more complex and dangerous,
not only in terms of the international press but also the
local press. As a result, protecting journalists working
in high-risk environments poses a major challenge.
Now one sees that, despite the heightened attention
given to the killing of reporters, little progress has been
made to protect them. There are many journalists who
have been imprisoned or killed. Their number is not on
the decline, and we are seeing no more perpetrators of
such crimes being prosecuted.
My delegation joins the statement made on behalf
of the European Union. I would therefore limit my
statement to three points that relate to the issue of
protecting journalists in situations of conflict. These
are, first, the role of States; secondly, the importance
of prevention; and, thirdly, new actors in the media
sphere.
First, the principles enshrined in resolution
1738 (2006) must be clearly reaffirmed. That is what
we did this morning. It is to be regretted that State
actors continue to be responsible for the bulk of the

15-1540025/47

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

acts of violence perpetrated against journalists. It
is unacceptable that in certain cases journalists are
identified with one of the parties to a conflict for
having voiced an opinion that is different from that of
the official version of events.
Under international law with respect to human
rights, States bear direct responsibility for respecting
and promoting the freedom of expression. On the one
hand, they must take effective measures to prevent
attacks against journalists and other individuals
exercising their right to this freedom of expression,
and, on the other hand, they must take every possible
measure to fight the impunity for perpetrators of crimes
committed against reporters.
Secondly, Belgium is convinced that we must
invest in prevention to fight all forms of violence
against reporters, and this in close cooperation with
non-governmental organizations and professional
associations. On 7 May, during World Press Freedom
Day, my delegation associated itself with the
International Federation of Reporters for the holding
of an event that was called “Finding security in unsafe
passages”. It is reporters themselves and media experts
who put forward their strategies for protection and the
resources that they need to implement those strategies.
A framework for support for reporters could be
created via non-governmental organizations that are
actively working in this area. This, in particular, would
have to be a matter of developing the preparation for a
mission, supporting reporters who are in captivity and
ensuring psychological follow-up for reporters who are
suffering from post-traumatic effects. In this digital
era, we also need to raise the awareness of reporters
and other media players with respect to protecting their
sources of information.
Thirdly, the media landscape has been changing.
Many reporters and bloggers are working independently
now and do not have the benefit of any of the protection
that traditionally would come from affiliation with
major media bodies or press agencies. They are
therefore in a more vulnerable situation. The same
holds for their colleagues in the local press, who are
also more exposed to violence or persecution for the
very same reasons. Protecting their rights and their
physical integrity becomes ever more urgent, as does
that of recognizing their activities.
The media and reporters contribute to the vision
of the world of citizens and political decision-makers.

26/47

27/05/2015

Without journalism there is no information, and
without information there is no possibility of forming
an opinion or, when necessary, of taking the required
decisions. In situations of conflict, reporters exercise
their responsibilities at a personal risk. It is therefore
essential to reaffirm our determination to have them
protected and to prosecute those who deliberately put
them in danger.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): The Kingdom
of the Netherlands would like to thank the Lithuanian
presidency of the Security Council for its initiative
in hosting this important debate today. In honour of
your presidency this month, allow me also to say in
Lithuanian: “Aciu ponia Presidentas”.
We welcome the adoption this morning of resolution
2222 (2015), which we co-sponsored.
I would, of course, like to align my intervention
with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union. I will read out a shortened version
of my statement; the full version will be available on
Twitter.
Freedom of expression is a top priority for my
country. It is crucial in achieving the three ambitions
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands here at the
United Nations: peace, justice and development.
Security Council resolution 1738 (2006) condemned
attacks against journalists in conflict situations.
Nevertheless — and other speakers have also said this
today — journalists, including bloggers, are still the
target of aggression, harassment, arbitrary detention.
even extra-judicial killings. In the Kingdom of the
Netherlands we remember in particular the seven
Dutch journalists who lost their lives in past decades in
various conflict areas, just doing their job.
Threats against journalists directly affect the role of
journalists before, during and after conflict. Journalists
play a critical role in reporting on conflicts, revealing
the horrors of war and prompting investigations of
abuse. Journalists help to create an atmosphere of
tolerance through the gathering and dissemination
of non-partisan information. The role of the media is
relevant for promoting human rights, peace and conflict
resolution.
Therefore, it is vital that journalists be able to work
freely without interference, without fear. Overall, the

15-15400

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

role of journalists in countries affected by conflict is
unique, involving great risks and personal sacrifice. In
this context, there is a specific role for United Nations
peacekeeping missions in the protection of civilians,
including journalists. An example of this is the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, in which the Netherlands is a partner
with around 500 men and women. Freedom of the
press is a critical element in the integrated approach
we pursue in Mali, combining diplomacy, defence and
development.
The protection of journalists in conflicts is closely
connected to the prevention and prosecution of violence.
Violent acts against journalists must be prosecuted.
Over the past decade around 700 journalists have been
killed worldwide for bringing news and information
to the public. Imagine — this means more than one
journalist killed every week for ten years. Nine out of
ten of these killings go unpunished.
We must fight this impunity of violence against
journalists. First, impunity perpetuates violence and
quite literally kills the story. Secondly, it leads to a
climate of self-censorship. Journalists fearing for their
own lives or for the lives of their loved ones refrain from
covering stories, often the ones that most need to be
told. That impunity needs to be addressed. Prosecution
is the best prevention.
Where a free press is threatened and investigative
and independent journalism is absent, corruption and
illegal activity are allowed to flourish. Journalists
deserve full protection — not only in words, but also
in deeds. In this regard I would like to point out the
importance of the report of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services produced last year that covered
the mandates for the protection of civilians in United
Nations peacekeeping operations (A/68/787). The report
highlighted the need for further interventions to ensure
adequate protection, a protection that is certainly also
needed for journalists. It is of course the responsibility
of States to maintain a safe environment for the media
and to investigate and prosecute those responsible for
committing violent acts against journalists.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands looks forward
to further cooperating with the United Nations and its
Member States to ensure better protection for journalists,
flag bearers of freedom of expression. Journalists are
crucial for peace, justice and development.

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I wish
to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania
for convening this meeting and participating in it this
morning. I congratulate Lithuania on its successful
presidency of the Council this month. I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for his participation
and Mr. Christophe Deloire, Director-General of
Reporters Without Borders for his statement. I also
thank Ms. Mariane Pearl, who enriched the debate
this morning with an account of her experience and
personal suffering.
On the third of this month, we commemorated
World Press Freedom Day. This reminds us that freedom
of the press is a basic human right, as stipulated in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It is also
a day to pay tribute to journalists who lost their lives
while abiding by the noble principles of this profession.
Protecting freedom of the press, freedom of expression
and access to information is not only crucial for the
protection and promotion of human rights, it is also a
basic element for maintaining peace and security and
for preventing and settling conflicts. Freedom to collect
and disseminate information is essential for enhancing
the rule of law, democracy, social justice, human rights,
economic development and social prosperity. Knowing
the background of issues is essential in order to deal
with and solve them. Providing a space for freedom of
opinion is basic in dealing with the roots of conflict.
The most recent report of the Secretary-General on
the protection of civilians, issued in 2013 (S/2013/689),
reflects the extent of attacks on journalists. Hundreds
have been killed. Journalists also face abductions,
harassment, intimidation, arbitrary detention, rape
and murder. It is unfortunate that there is almost no
accountability for the perpetrators of such actions.
Here, we would like to refer to examples of the
suffering of journalists in the Middle East. Regarding
Syria, the Secretary-General states in the report, basing
himself on the report of the commission of inquiry, that
84 journalists had been killed in Syria since March
2011. Journalists continue to face murder and forced
disappearance in Syria at the hands of the barbaric
regime and terrorist groups, which have a common
aim: to silence the voices that expose crimes against
the Syrian people.

15-1540027/47

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

I would like to mention the heroic work of
journalists, be they Syrians or non-Syrians, in showing
us the truth of what is happening in Syria. Here we speak
of those who gave their lives for this noble mission. We
also refer to media activists and journalists behind bars
in the Syrian regime or abducted by terrorist groups.
We take note of the Secretary-General’s report on
the protection of civilians and of the recommendations
it contains pertaining to the protection of journalists
in conflict situations. Furthermore, we emphasize the
need for accountability for crimes perpetrated against
journalists and the need to fight impunity. Accordingly,
we support the recommendations in the report with
regard to impunity and the safety of journalists.
We welcome the Security Council’s adoption this
morning of resolution 2222 (2015), which addresses
these issues and underscores the importance that the
Council attaches to the protection of journalists. Nine
years ago, the adoption of resolution 1738 (2006) was a
milestone that all the members of the Council supported,
including Qatar during its presidency in December of
2006. In the context of protecting journalists and the
media, the State of Qatar’s support of resolution 1738
(2006) has been reflected in several ways, including the
establishment of the Doha Centre for Media Freedom
in 2007. The Centre has undertaken a key role in
reinforcing freedom of the press and of expression over
the Internet.
To that end, Qatar has also hosted a number of
conferences, including the celebration of UNESCO
World Press Freedom Day in 2009, which resulted
in the Doha declaration that guarantees freedom of
expression and protection of journalists. In 2012,
Qatar hosted the International Conference to Protect
Journalists in Dangerous Situations, organized by the
Qatari National Committee for Human Rights. The
final recommendations called for the appointment of a
special rapporteur on the protection of journalists.
In conclusion, the obligation of States and parties
to conflicts to protect journalists must not be obviated.
They must abide by their commitments in accordance
with international instruments, and Qatar will continue
in its commitment to the provisions of such instruments.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Botswana joins others,
Madam President, in congratulating you on your
country’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
28/47

27/05/2015

Council for the month of May. We extend our support
and cooperation in your efforts.
We deeply appreciate Lithuania’s initiative to
convene this very important debate on the protection
of journalists in conflict situations. With the
unprecedented number of conflicts across the globe and
the frequent attacks against journalists, which threaten
media freedom, today’s debate could not be more timely.
In addition, as the Secretary-General notes in his
synthesis report on the post-2015 development agenda
(A/69/700), sustainable development can be achieved
only where freedom of press, access to information
and freedom of expression prevail. This is largely
because these elements provide for multifaceted and
multidimensional platforms for informed discussions
across a wide range of issues, which in turn contributes
to democratic and inclusive governance and sustainable
human development.
We are cognizant of, and deeply troubled by, the
increasing risks and dangers faced by journalists
working in conflict situations. The recent spate of
beheadings of journalists by terrorist organizations
is all too real a reminder of the brutality that media
professionals are often confronted with. It is also deeply
disturbing that they are being directly targeted simply
for doing their job, which not only keeps us informed
but invariably makes for a safer world.
The Security Council’s adoption of resolution 1738
(2006) reflected a recognition of the need for a more
concerted international effort to ensure the safety of
journalists and to fight impunity against the crimes
committed against them, some of which constituted
crimes against humanity. While it is well understood
that the very nature of their work predisposes them to
highly dangerous situations, it is the rising number of
deliberate acts of violence against them — including
kidnapping, arbitrary imprisonment and torture, that
are of particular concern, and which are in direct
contravention of international humanitarian law. The
Additional Protocol to the Geneva Conventions of 1949,
relating to the protection of victims of international
armed conflicts explicitly provides that journalists
are entitled to all the rights and protections granted to
civilians in international armed conflict. Resolution
1738 (2006) thus recognized the imperative for States
in conflict to bear the primary responsibility to protect
their civilians.
However, the implementation of the resolution has
been mediocre if not dismal. For example, we continue
15-15400

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

to see very low levels of accountability for attacks on
journalists. Perpetrators of crimes against journalists
are escaping justice, and States are obviously failing in
their responsibility to protect. It is therefore imperative
that the international community step up and build up
the required capacity to assist States in shielding their
populations from harm. Greater effort should be made
towards accountability and the prevention of impunity,
which — as we are all well aware — is the most
important deterrent.
The willingness on the part of States at a
national level in that regard is critical and cannot be
over-emphazised. The tough question before us is
this: Is this how it can be achieved? How can we as
responsible members of the international community
make this world a safer place for journalists to do their
work? We may not have a definitive answer, or cover
everything that could be said in today’s interventions,
but Botswana remains firm in its conviction that
freedom of expression and an independent media are
fundamental for sustainable development. Information
is power, and it is information that journalists risk their
lives to gather. It should urgently be translated into
national development policies and interventions for the
betterment of humankind.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Botswana’s
support for efforts by the international community
aimed at protecting the lives of innocent civilians,
including journalists, without whom the world may
well be less stable, less secure and much less equipped
to transition to the new development agenda that we
look forward to in 2015.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.
Mr. Petersen (Denmark): I would like to align
myself with the statement made earlier today on behalf
of the European Union, but I would like to add a few
additional remarks.
First of all, let me thank the Lithuanian presidency
of the Security Council for bringing this important
issue back to the Council. As others speakers have
done, I also wish to congratulate Lithuania on today’s
adoption of resolution 2222 (2015).
Denmark’s efforts to support media freedom,
including the protection of journalists, are an integral
part of our long-standing efforts to enhance civil
society and human rights. The rights of journalists
and the free media need to be protected all over the

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

world. Unfortunately, persecution of journalists is
not a phenomenon restricted to only a few countries.
Denmark believes that journalists must be protected
to be able to carry out their work without fear of
retribution, attack or worse.
In too many countries, the State uses media laws
to keep media from criticizing those in power. This is
deeply worrying, although it is not a new phenomenon.
But what is a new and equally deeply worrying trend
is the fact that journalists are now being deliberately
targeted, not only by oppressive regimes, but also by
terror organizations and militia groups such as the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. Not since the end
of the Second World War have we witnessed such a
distressingly large number of armed conflicts in and
between countries. Sadly, this is also reflected in the
number of journalists killed. Last year alone, as was
mentioned earlier today, 61 journalists were killed, and
this year the reported death toll has already reached 25.
The United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of
Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, adopted in 2012,
was an important step in addressing the individual
safety of journalists globally. However, the protection
of journalists and the free media is an ongoing effort
that cannot achieve success only through such topdown initiatives, which need to be combined with
actual action on the ground.
At the Global Media Freedom Conference 2015
held in Copenhagen last month, the Danish Minister
for Trade and Development launched two initiatives
aimed at strengthening free media in developing
countries and in fragile States, both of which include
strong components for the protection of journalists — a
programme worth approximately $2 million through the
World Association of Newspapers and News Publishers,
and an additional $750,000 through International
Media Support in cooperation with the International
Federation of Journalists.
I would like to conclude by echoing what other
colleagues have already underlined: Freedom of opinion
and expression are indeed fundamental rights of every
human being. Today’s debate and the adoption of
resolution 2222 (2015) mark an important contribution
to our common efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): I thank the Lithuanian
delegation for organizing today’s debate. We appreciate

15-1540029/47

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the concept note circulated by the presidency
(S/2015/307, annex) and thank the briefers for their
contributions.
At the outset, my delegation would like to express
our strong agreement with Lithuania’s assessment in
the concept paper that the issue is not so much the lack
of rules but the failure to implement existing norms
in terms of protecting journalists working in conflict
areas from harm. It is pertinent therefore to reiterate
that the protection of journalists in all situations is
the foremost responsibility of every State, and States
should do everything possible in their power to fulfil
this obligation, which is a view which my delegation
has consistently held.
It is also true that the threat faced by the
journalists, like all civilians in armed conflict
situations, has undergone a significant change in recent
years, especially due to the change in the nature and
rising number of the armed conflicts, which often put
journalists at specific risks. This calls for concerted
efforts by all States and parties to ensure the safety of
journalists in conflict situations.
At the national level, India’s Constitution and
relevant legislation safeguard freedom of expression
and the functioning of free media, online as well as
offline, in building inclusive and peaceful knowledge
societies and democracies. Since 1950, we have adhered
to and fully supported the Geneva Conventions. We
are committed to the protection of the rights of all
its citizens, including journalists, as stipulated in the
international instruments to which we are a party.
With regard to the specific questions the concept
paper has raised, we highlight the following three.
First, on the issue of accountability as well as on
safety while operating in non-State controlled areas,
we recall the Security Council’s demand in resolution
1738 (2006), as well as the call in relevant General
Assembly resolutions, most recently resolution 69/185,
that all parties to an armed conflict comply fully with
their obligations and for Member States to ensure
accountability. The accountability of Member States
faces a specific challenge with regard to non-State
actors, especially terrorist groups, that act beyond the
pale of law with impunity.
The international community has witnessed acts
committed by such non-State terrorist groups against
journalists in the recent and distant past. However, even
non-State terrorist groups cannot act in a vacuum. We
30/47

27/05/2015

believe that the Council, as the primary organ of the
United Nations for maintaining international peace and
security, needs to act robustly. It should do so using
the instruments of law and the information available
to it to make Member States act against such non-State
actors. The Council should assist those Member States
that may require assistance to strengthen their national
capacities to take such action.
Secondly, on the issue of best practices for
protecting journalists in conflict situations, we believe
that journalists should, first of all, function within
the relevant domestic laws of the countries they are
operating in; secondly, seek access in a legal manner;
and thirdly; maintain strict neutrality and impartiality
and not become a party to the conflict. By following
such precautions, it will become easier for Member
States to protect journalists, facilitate their professional
work and ensure that journalists become a catalyst for
conflict resolution and peacebuilding. For their part,
national Governments must put in place mechanisms
for protecting journalists and their equipment,
especially when they have provided information about
their whereabouts and coordinates in advance, and
resist imposing arbitrary restrictions unless there is a
dire need.
Thirdly, in the context of peacekeeping missions,
while we concur with the view that, in terms of
implementing the mandates, particular focus should
also be given to the protection of journalists as a distinct
category of civilians to be protected, we would like to
reiterate that this responsibility is vested in the Member
States hosting such peacekeeping operations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Bonser (Canada): The Government of Canada
is deeply concerned by the increasing number of acts
of violence committed against journalists and other
media professionals in situations of armed conflict. We
support the initiative brought forward by Lithuania to
bring attention to this issue.
It is increasingly clear that media professionals are
being deliberately targeted, in violation of international
humanitarian law. Canada would like to focus particular
attention on increasing accountability for perpetrators
of crimes against journalists in situations of armed
conflict and on ensuring the safety and protection of
journalists in conflict zones, including areas controlled
by terrorist groups.

15-15400

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Before speaking to that point, Canada would like
to stress how important it is that the Security Council
and all Member States continue to give sustained and
comprehensive attention to the harm done to civilian
populations writ large. We are very alarmed by the
extent of civilian suffering and displacement caused
by armed conflicts. This reflects a diminishing respect
for international humanitarian law, which is a situation
that must absolutely be remedied. We can do more,
starting by seizing these opportunities to address
serious concern about the protection of civilians,
and committing to reducing this growing problem of
unnecessary civilian suffering.
(spoke in French)
Accurate, impartial media reports conveyed
from conflict zones serve a fundamental public
interest. Images and news have an impact on
how we confront and respond to armed conflicts.
Journalists — and increasingly, citizen and
social-media-based journalists — who report from
conflict zones face many dangers. Most disturbingly,
the specific targeting of journalists by armed groups is
alarmingly frequent. The past three years have in fact
been the deadliest for journalists since the Committee
for the Protection of Journalists organization began
keeping track more than two decades ago.
Existing international humanitarian law provides
the appropriate protections. Pursuant to the provisions
of international humanitarian law, media professionals
who work in conflict zones are considered civilians and
are therefore to be protected so long as they retain their
civilian status. The most serious challenge is not a lack
of rules to protect journalists, but a failure to implement
existing rules and to systematically investigate,
prosecute and punish violations of international
humanitarian law.
(spoke in English)
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has been
connected to some of the more horrifying and high
profile killings of journalists, namely the abductions
and beheadings of American and Japanese freelancers
James Foley, Steven Sotloff and Kenji Goto. Most
often, though, local journalists and media workers
are the targets of threats and attacks, as we have seen
across conflict zones including Syria, Iraq, Ukraine
and Somalia. As tensions escalate in Burundi, Canada
is concerned by reports that media are being forced out
of the country.

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

All Member States need to ensure a safe and
enabling environment for journalists to perform their
work independently and without fear of violence or
arbitrary detention. For journalists, as for all civilians,
the harm and suffering deliberately inflicted upon them
must end, and perpetrators of such acts must be held
to account. The international community must not be
silent on this issue. We urge fellow Member States to
maintain our attention and resolve on the protection of
civilians agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Let
me thank the Lithuanian presidency for organizing
this public debate. The briefings made this morning
demonstrate how the protection of journalists in periods
of armed conflict is an important issue that deserves to
be on the agenda of the Security Council.
Luxembourg fully endorses the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union.
Since the last public debate on this subject (see
S/PV.7003), almost two years ago, we have witnessed
increasingly horrendous actions. We all remember
the brutal images of the decapitations of James Foley,
Steven Sotloff and Kenji Goto. Those journalists had
no other ambition but to inform the public about the
realities of war. They are among the 88 journalists
who, since January 2014, have paid with their lives for
exercising their profession, most of them in conflict
situations in Iraq, Somalia, Libya and Syria. And 2015
began in the most tragic manner with respect to the
freedom of the press when two armed men burst into the
premises of Charlie Hebdo and, in cold blood, executed
eight reporters as well as four other individuals. The
Security Council most strongly condemned all those
attacks, while highlighting the need to prosecute their
perpetrators.
Most often, however, these attacks go unnoticed
because most victims are local journalists, whose fates
are intertwined with those of hundreds of other killed
civilians. Hundreds of other journalists are forgotten
because they languish in prisons where they are
frequently tortured.
The vast majority these crimes go unpunished.
While 749 journalists have been assassinated since
1992, according to the Committee to Protect Journalists,
in almost 90 per cent of cases, impunity has been total.

15-1540031/47

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

These numbers are unacceptable. Resolution 1738
(2006) and resolution 2222 (2015), which the Council
has just adopted, rightfully highlight the fact that under
international humanitarian law, journalists in times of
armed conflict must be treated as civilians and must
be respected and protected as such. They reiterate the
responsibility of States to prosecute anyone who has
violated international humanitarian law. The struggle
against impunity must, in fact, lie at the very heart of
our efforts to protect journalists in periods of armed
conflict. Each unpunished crime is encouragement to
all those who want to silence the truth. And it is well
known that truth is the first victim of war.
In that context, we welcome General Assembly
resolution 68/163, adopted on 18 December 2013,
which proclaimes 2 November as the International
Day to End Impunity for Crimes against Journalists,
and calles upon Member States to undertake specific
measures to fight the culture of impunity. Luxembourg
co-sponsored the resolution because we are convinced
that the fight against impunity is a critical one in terms
of preserving freedom of expression. We also welcome
the consideration of the implementation of the United
Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and
the Issue of Impunity at the third meeting organized by
UNESCO, on 3 November 2014, in collaboration with
the Council of the Europe, and the debates convened by
the Human Rights Council.
It is clear that cooperation among all stakeholders
is necessary if we truly want to change things on the
ground and guarantee freedom of expression. We
encourage enhanced cooperation among Governments,
international and regional organizations, the various
United Nations entities at Headquarters and in the
field, civil society and representatives of the media in
order to enhance the protection of journalists in times
of conflict.
By way of this public debate and the resolution
adopted today, the Council has clearly shown that
it is willing to take action to ensure respect for and
the protection of journalists in periods of armed
conflict — journalists who, through their work, and
sometimes at the risk of their lives, help to uphold the
values and freedoms on which the United Nations bases
its actions. It has, moreover, acknowledged the specific
risks faced by women journalists. We hope that, on this
basis and on the basis of the forthcoming reports of the
Secretary-General, the Security Council will ensure

32/47

27/05/2015

the necessary follow-up with respect to this important
issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Logar (Slovenia): I would first like to thank
the Lithuania presidency for its initiative to convene
this important high-level open debate, as well as the
Deputy Secretary-General and the two panellists for
their briefings.
Slovenia also aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
Journalism is one of the most influential, but also
under-respected and dangerous professions in the world
today. Events in recent months, like hostage taking
and beheadings of journalists by non-State actors,
such as the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS), have
shown that, in contemporary conflicts, attacks against
journalists are not a side effect, but rather a front-line
consideration.
It is important to stress that, under international
humanitarian law, journalists in armed conflict
are classified as civilians and entitled to the same
protection as the civilian population. Their work often
puts them at particular risk of intimidation, harassment
and violence in situations of armed conflict. States bear
the primary responsibility for ensuring the protection
of journalists on the territory under their jurisdiction,
including by investigating any attacks against them.
Yet, in most cases, the perpetrators of crimes against
journalists, media workers and associated personnel
escape justice and no one is held accountable. Such
realities are worrisome and must be addressed.
When States are unwilling or unable to ensure
justice themselves, victims rely on the possibility of
seeking justice outside national forums. We therefore
welcome the ongoing efforts to document evidence of
atrocities committed by members of ISIS, as well as
efforts made by the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) to investigate the possibility
of exercising personal jurisdiction over atrocities
committed by ISIS. The fight against impunity cannot
be won by a single stakeholder. We need greater
partnerships and cooperation to achieve the desired
end, including by the Security Council — the only body
vested with the authority to refer atrocities to the ICC
even when a State is not a party to the Rome Statute.

15-15400

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

We should do our utmost to close the impunity gap,
as lack of accountability only leads to further violence
against journalists, creates a culture of fear and
conditions conducive to other systemic abnormalities,
and hinders post-conflict rebuilding, the rule of law
and long-term peace and stability.
We cannot afford to let terrorist- and non-State actorcontrolled zones become blackholes of information.
We have to acknowledge the courageous choices of
journalists, media workers and associated personnel
in going to war zones to report on atrocities and the
suffering of innocent civilians, even at the risk of their
own lives. When addressing the safety of journalists a
gender-based approach is necessary in order to address
the situation of women journalists, who are at greater
risk of becoming victims of sexual violence, which is
often used as a weapon of war in conflict zones.
Let me reiterate that the Security Council is not
alone in dealing with these issues, as various United
Nations bodies have adopted resolutions on the safety
of journalists. The General Assembly also affirmed the
need to end impunity for crimes against journalists, by
declaring 2 November as the International Day to End
Impunity for Crimes against Journalists.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that we
condemn the violence against journalists and media
workers, whether or not they are in conflict situations,
since it has serious repercussions on the freedom
of expression and on human rights in general. There
should be zero tolerance for any form of violence against
journalists. Worrisome trends call for the continued
attention of the Security Council. The adoption of
resolution 2222 (2015) today is an important step in that
direction, and it is also for that reason that Slovenia
co-sponsored the resolution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Schieb (Germany): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this important debate.
Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier today on behalf of the European Union.
Since our last discussion of this issue in July 2013
(see S/PV.7003), the number of violent or even deadly
attacks on journalists has continued to grow. According
to the International Federation of Journalists, 118
journalists and media staff members were deliberately
killed and 17 suffered fatal accidents in 2014. We
mourn the death of the German war correspondent

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

Anja Niedringhaus, who was brutally murdered in
Afghanistan in April 2014. With her death, both
Germany and Afghanistan lost a tireless builder of
bridges, who was driven by a deep sense of humanism
and respect for other cultures.
Independent journalists are our eyes and ears in this
world of growing complexity. Our insight into current
wars and crises would be severely limited without their
courageous contributions. It is therefore our duty to
protect journalists in the best possible way. To do so, we
first need to understand the challenges they are facing.
In the past few years, the media industry has undergone
vast changes. More and more citizen reporters and
independent bloggers are joining the more traditional
media corps. News corporations and agencies today
prefer to hire freelance staff. As a result, it is more
difficult to provide protection for an increased number
of freelance journalists who are often lacking the
logistical support of an employer organization.
In many of today’s conflicts, non-State armed
groups, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, Al-Qaida and Al-Shabaab, have become main
actors. Journalists are usually in the greatest danger
in areas controlled by such non-State armed groups,
who flagrantly and deliberately ignore international
law. At the same time, these journalists are often
the only independent source of information left in
an environment marked by anarchy. In other words,
journalists are often at their most vulnerable exactly
where they are needed most. It is time to redouble our
efforts to improve the protection of journalists. Let me
point to four areas where more needs to be done.
First, on effective warning, we appeal to all
States to actively provide safety for journalists within
their territory. That also means that in so much as it
is possible, States should warn journalists and media
workers in conflict areas of imminent dangers and
risks in order to enable them to take the necessary
precautions.
Secondly, on accountability, all States have to
do their utmost to bring the perpetrators of crimes
against journalists to justice. It is simply unacceptable
that accountability for the perpetrators is virtually
non-existent at the moment. If accountability cannot
be achieved on the national level, the International
Criminal Court should be charged with the responsibility
of trying cases that amount to war crimes or crimes
against humanity. We encourage the Secretary-General
to include regular information on the safety of and

15-1540033/47

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

attacks against journalists in his reports. We agree with
the concept note (S/2015/307, annex) that this could help
to combat the culture of impunity for crimes committed
against journalists.
Thirdly, on training, journalists should be sent to
conflict zones only after having undergone professional
security training. News agencies should ensure that
their freelance staff is also well-prepared in that
respect. Germany is strongly committed to equipping
journalists with the proper skills for dealing with
conflict situations. The State-funded Deutsche Welle
Academy is supporting a wide range of locally based
projects on conflict-sensitive journalism, journalists’
security and psychological help. The Academy also
offers an online course for international journalists
to educate them about digital safety and to ensure
their protection against online attacks and targeted
surveillance.
Fourthly, we strongly encourage the Security
Council to continue the discussion on the protection
of journalists. We welcome the adoption of today’s
resolution 2222 (2015), which Germany supports
as a co-sponsor. This substantial resolution sends
an important message. It also means that we need to
redouble our efforts to better implement existing rules.
The horrific attack on the French news magazine
Charlie Hebdo reminded us of the bitter reality
that journalists and the freedom of the press are not
only threatened in conflict zones, but potentially
everywhere. Even in otherwise peaceful societies, we
cannot take the freedom of the press for granted. We
have to stand up for it and defend it everywhere and
all the time. In this constant endeavour, an active and
vibrant civil society is indispensable. We therefore
appeal to all countries and regional organizations to
create an environment where civil society can operate
freely and to value the important role of the freedom of
the press. Attacks against journalists are thus not only
attacks against individuals, but they are also an attack
against a linchpin of free and democratic societies.
The Council may rest assured that the protection and
promotion of the freedom of the press and the freedom
of speech is and will always remain a top priority of
Germany.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.

34/47

27/05/2015

Mr. Kolga (Estonia): I would like to sincerely
thank you, Madam President, for convening this open
debate on the protection of journalists in conflicts.
Unfortunately, we have in the recent years witnessed
many barbaric attacks against journalists and that
number has not been decreasing. Therefore, we find it
extremely important to give regular and more frequent
attention to the issue at the Security Council. Estonia
welcomes the adoption earlier today of resolution 2222
(2015) on the protection of journalists. We have proudly
co-sponsored it and would like to thank the Lithuanian
presidency for all their hard work.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union.
Estonia is a firm believer in the value of the
freedom of expression and the freedom of speech. It
is often through the tireless work of journalists on
the frontline of the most dangerous conflicts that
light is shed on the issues of most serious concern to
the international community. On many occasions, the
credible information provided by journalists, sometimes
working under extreme duress and sacrificing their
own well-being, can help save lives.
It has been said, at the outbreak of an armed
conflict, that the first casualty is often the truth. Since
nowadays information moves at the speed of light, it is
of utmost importance to convey accurate and impartial
media reports from conflict zones and to bring them
to public attention as quickly as possible. But that
often comes at a cost. Unfortunately, journalists,
correspondents and media workers, especially those
working in conflict zones, have become deliberate
targets of brutal attacks — attacks that have exceeded
any level of humanity. Journalists are humiliated,
imprisoned, tortured, executed and murdered by their
own Governments, parties to the conflict or terrorist
organisations, whether through beheadings carried
out by Daesh or executions organized by Al-Qaida.
It can also happen in the peaceful office of a cartoon
magazine as in the case of Charlie Hebdo.
Despite increased attention by the international
community, there has been very little progress in
limiting the number of journalists killed — 370 in the
past 10 years — and in bringing the perpetrators to
justice. Besides the threat to their lives, journalists also
face other obstructions in their job at the conflict areas,
such as denial to access, censorship and harassment,
arbitrary detention and direct attacks.

15-15400

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

International organizations, Governments, the
media and other actors must work together to strengthen
the safety of journalists and hold accountable those
responsible for attacks. Given the existing international
instruments, which include the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, the Third Geneva Convention and its
Additional Protocol, resolution 1738 (2006) and many
others, that necessary judicial framework should be
sufficient to protect journalists even when they report
from conflict zones. Yet, sadly, in almost all cases
the perpetrators of crimes against journalists escape
justice.
It is important to promote human rights,
fundamental freedoms and the rule of law and to
continue to recall that an attack against a journalist is
an attack against a civilian and, regardless of whether
it occurs in an international or non-international armed
conflict, also amounts to a war crime under the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court.
In our view, tackling impunity and sentencing
the perpetrators of such horrendous crimes against
journalists should be the best possible deterrent for
any future offenders. While we agree that the national
Governments of countries in conflict should be the
first in line to prosecute the perpetrators, we strongly
encourage the Council to consider referring such cases
to the International Criminal Court.
In conclusion, Estonia, as a member of the UNESCO
Executive Board, calls upon all relevant actors to
support the United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety
of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity and urges the
sharing of good practices on the safety of journalists.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Pyvovarov (Ukraine): I should like at the outset
to express our gratitude to the Lithuanian presidency
for holding this debate on the protection of journalists.
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement made by
the delegation of the European Union on this matter.
My delegation welcomes draft resolution 2222
(2015), adopted today, and we are glad to have been one
of the sponsors of this important document.
Today’s subject is particularly sensitive for my
country, which is now continuing to struggle against
Russian hybrid aggression, and we are grateful for
this opportunity to make some remarks that we deem
important.

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

There is no doubt that today information has a direct
impact on the principal global political processes. In the
past two years, the world has witnessed a steady increase
in the number of journalists killed or injured while
performing their professional duties. Unfortunately,
one of the main reasons for this unacceptable situation
is the increase in the number of areas of instability,
the imperfect nature of the existing international legal
mechanisms to protect journalists, and the impunity of
those who commit crimes and who hinder journalists’
professional activities.
Ukraine believes that free, independent, responsible
and professional journalism is the basis of modern
civil democratic societies. My country supports all
international mechanisms aimed at strengthening
the protection of journalists throughout the world,
particularly those promoted by the Human Rights
Council. Ukraine is also actively engaged in UNESCO’s
work to strengthen the intergovernmental response
to acts of violence and aggression against journalists
working in areas of high risk and danger.
My country is a strong supporter of the
comprehensive and practical implementation of the
principles laid down in the United Nations Plan of Action
on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.
We consider it to be a significant document for global
counteraction against the impunity of persons and
criminal entities who threaten media representatives
directly in hot spots.
The strengthening of the professional activities of
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) worldwide
could also become an important element of the efforts
aimed at a general improvement in the security of
journalists. These NGOs should continue to draw
Governments’ attention to the shortcomings in existing
practices of the physical and legal protection of media
representatives. We believe that close cooperation
among various governmental entities and NGOs
could give a positive impetus, including with respect
to a revision of the list of new areas of informational
activity, where journalists should have the same rights
as if they worked in zones of instability, for example in
the blogosphere and for social media networks.
Ukraine strongly believes in the need to enhance
international experts’ efforts to upgrade the process
of investigation and of holding accountable those who
affect the legitimate rights of journalists who work in
zones of instability.

15-1540035/47

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

We also pay tribute to those journalists who
have died or been injured in the performance of their
professional duties. Our country will remain an active
supporter of free and secure journalism, and we
consider the United Nations and its Security Council as
the foremost actors in strengthening their basic rights
and freedoms at the global level.
I am proud to say that in Ukraine, despite all of
the internal difficulties we are being made to go
through, an independent journalism that represents
all existing opinions has become a reality. It now
serves as a powerful tool for continuing democratic
transformations in our society and reflects our people’s
current need to live in an atmosphere of freedom of
speech and expression, to live in a country where one
feels no threat of being imprisoned for one’s position if
it does not coincide with the official one.
Our independent national journalism has been one
of the major factors that inspired a revolution of dignity
more than one year ago. Because of the many impartial
investigations carried out by Ukrainian media and
courageous journalists, our society discovered all of
the terrifying aspects of life under and the corruption
of the previous pro-Russian regime. Ukrainian
journalists became a real fourth branch of power and
formed a strong public mechanism of control over our
Government officials and politicians, leading to a more
transparent and democratic public sector.
The Government of Ukraine and its competent
agencies are doing their utmost to protect journalists. On
14 May, our Parliament adopted a law on amendments
to certain legislative acts of Ukraine concerning the
strengthening of guarantees for the lawful professional
activities of journalists in Ukraine. This law envisages
additional security guarantees for the lawful
professional activities of journalists, including changes
in Ukraine’s criminal code. The law also provides for
additional social guarantees for journalists and their
families.

27/05/2015

it has ever been throughout the entire history of our
independent country. Our own example has clearly
shown to the entire world that information can be used
not to promote democratic values and principles but as a
method to inspire, fuel and maintain exported conflicts,
to brainwash citizens on both sides of the border and
to lie about the real reasons and consequences of this
brazen military aggression at the very centre of Europe.
Since the beginning of the crisis, Ukrainians and
the rest of the world have felt and seen the obvious
distinction
between
independent
international
journalism and Russian propaganda-style production,
with ridiculous theatrical television scenes made
mostly for internal consumption. Such activities on the
part of the Kremlin-controlled media directly violate
the European Convention on Transfrontier Television,
which was signed by Russia in 2006. That Convention
is, unfortunately, yet another international document
that that country simply ignores as if it did not exist.
The reports of all international monitoring missions
convincingly and factually demonstrate that numerous
cases of violence against members of the media continue
to be committed by Russia-backed illegal armed groups
in Donbas as well as by quasi-authorities exercising de
facto control in the occupied Crimean peninsula.
Murder, physical assault, kidnapping, intimidation
and threats against journalists are among the most grave
human rights violations there. Moreover, the ongoing
hostilities and violations of the ceasefire regime by
militants in eastern Ukraine continue to jeopardize
the safety of journalists in Donbas, where Ukrainian
television channels were long ago illegally cut off and
replaced by State propaganda television channels from
the Russian Federation.

For more than a year, Ukraine has been suffering
from the aggression of the Russian Federation, which
has occupied part of our sovereign territory, the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea, and continues its
hostile military actions against my country in the
Donetsk and Luhansk regions.

Against that backdrop, we continue to witness a
real information war by the Russian State-controlled
media aimed at destroying peace and stability in
Ukraine. Anti-Ukrainian falsifications by the Russian
media defy the norms of journalistic ethics and human
morality, and crudely incite inter-ethnic hatred. The
Russian State media are being widely utilized by the
Russian Government to disseminate propaganda and
violence and to promote aggressive nationalism and
chauvinism, which runs counter to a number of United
Nations Charter principles and commitments.

All of those factors have had a grave impact on
journalists working in Ukraine, having increased the
number of crimes against them to a level higher than

We emphasize that the overall media freedom
situation in the affected regions of eastern Ukraine and
the steps undertaken by the Ukrainian Government to

36/47

15-15400

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms
should be perceived against the backdrop of the
security challenges stemming from the aggressive and
subversive activities pursued by the Russian Federation
towards Ukraine, including through support to illegal
armed groups in eastern Ukraine. We strongly condemn
all attacks against journalists in eastern Ukraine and
worldwide and fully share the view that journalists’
safety must be guaranteed at all times.

to be addressed. In that regard, we welcome the efforts
of the United Nations, including the United Nations
Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue
of Impunity, led by UNESCO. The General Assembly
and the Human Rights Council have also focused on
that issue through the adoption of annual resolutions on
the safety of journalists and impunity. The initiatives
of the Council of Europe are also noteworthy in that
regard.

Finally, let me conclude by reiterating the Ukrainian
Government’s commitment to further safeguard and
promote media freedom and the protection of journalists
in the country, in full accordance with our international
commitments and standards.

Peacekeeping operations and special political
missions, as appropriate and relevant, could also play
an important role in international efforts to promote
and protect journalists and media professionals in
conflict situations. In that framework, monitoring and
reporting violations and abuses against journalists
could contribute to international endeavours to end
impunity.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): Allow me, at the outset, to
thank the Lithuanian presidency for convening this
timely debate.
Turkey aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier today by the observer of the European Union.
I will now make some further remarks in my national
capacity.
Freedom of expression and of the media constitute
vital foundations for democracy, the rule of law and
respect for human rights. We must all ensure that that
freedom is upheld. Journalists and media professionals
carry out a particularly significant task in promptly
delivering accurate and credible information, often
from increasingly dangerous environments. In doing
so, they increasingly face risks of intimidation and
violence, especially in situations of armed conflict.
Regrettably, the growing threat to the safety of
journalists in conflict situations has manifested itself
in the form of killing, kidnapping and hostage-taking
by various actors. The abhorrent acts perpetrated
against journalists by terrorist organizations such as
Daesh portray the gravity of the challenge at hand.
Such acts systematically targeting journalists not only
deserve every condemnation, but must also lead us all
to take vigorous steps to prevent violence and promote
a safe environment for journalists and other media
professionals.
We believe that particular attention needs to be
paid to ensuring accountability for crimes committed
against journalists in armed conflicts. Impunity for
such crimes remains a paramount challenge that needs

Creating the necessary working environment for
journalists and ensuring their access and freedom of
movement are essential components for safeguarding
the delivery of credible information to local populations
as well as to the wider international community.
Turkey hosts a significant number of international
journalists covering conflict situations in our region.
We facilitate their activities by providing a safe
and secure environment in which to carry out their
work. As a matter of fact, media centres established
by Turkey close to some of its borders have enabled
international journalists and media professionals to
access information and to report without interruption
in a safe setting in close proximity to conflict zones.
Let me conclude by underscoring that the
international community should spare no effort to
address the disturbing trend of intimidation and
violence against journalists in conflict situations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Czech Republic.
Mrs. Hrdá (Czech Republic): The Czech Republic
aligns itself with the statement made on behalf of the
European Union and would like to thank the Lithuanian
presidency for bringing up this very important topic.
We echo the widely shared regret over the
unacceptable and rising number of journalists who have
been harassed, threatened, attacked and killed, whether
by State or non-State actors. And we deplore the
impunity that prevails for crimes against journalists,
which engenders further violations. Working journalists

15-1540037/47

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

today represent part of everyone’s freedom of opinion
and expression. They are the catalysts of the free flow
of information and ideas — we all use the results of
journalists’ work. Far too often, those brave individuals
continue to pay the highest price for making sure that
human suffering in conflicts does not go unseen and
unheard.
Journalists have the strength to bring perpetrators
of human rights violations and abuses in remote areas of
the world into broad daylight — suddenly, in the blink
of an eye — through print, television or the Internet.
Thanks to modern communication technologies,
anyone who is brave enough can now become a citizen
journalist, documenting human rights violations and
abuses. And anyone can be targeted as such. The
systematic and comprehensive work at the global and
regional levels to raise awareness, set standards and
share best practices must be met by the same resolve
and commitment at the national level to reverse the
entrenched impunity.
The Czech Republic supports, through concrete
projects, the strengthening of democratic media and
open, independent and professional journalism. In the
course of the Universal Periodic Review we regularly
raise the issue of the free and unhindered work of
journalists, along with the rule of law, of which the
safety of journalists must be an inherent part.
We welcome the shared examples of best practices
for the prevention, investigation and prosecution of
crimes against journalists. We hope that the concerted
efforts rallying behind the United Nations Plan of
Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of
Impunity will bear fruit, whether through UNESCO,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the Council of Europe or other regional
organizations. We owe it to the survivors of attacks and
threats, the families of those killed and to journalists
whose work will always remain the ultimate mirror of
our democracies.

27/05/2015

Civilians continue to suffer deeply the
consequences of armed conflicts, in alarming figures,
and the increasing attacks on journalists are grounds
for clear concern. Allow me, therefore, to thank
the Lithuanian presidency for bringing the issue of
protecting journalists before the Council for the third
time since 2006, when my country was also a member
and when resolution 1738 (2006) was adopted. I would
also like to express our gratitude for the concept note
prepared by the presidency (S/2015/307, annex) and for
the briefings by the journalists who are here with us
today, who described how they conduct their work in
situations of great danger.
Journalism is a fundamental tool for the exercise of
freedom of the press and of information that becomes
more critical in conflict and post-conflict situations,
in which it helps to effectively expose grave violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law.
In situations of armed conflict or their aftermath, the
lives of journalists and other media workers may be
in danger due to multiple factors, from attacks that
target them deliberately because of their profession,
to situations in which they are caught in crossfire.
Journalists, like other civilians, are exposed to such
dangers. But recently a new kind of violation of their
physical integrity has made its appearance: deliberate
attacks committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.

Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions
of 1949, relating to the protection of victims of
international armed conflicts — to which Argentina
is a party — provides that journalists engaged in
dangerous professional missions in areas of armed
conflict shall be considered as civilians. That provision
merely affirms the rule in customary international law
whereby journalists have civilian status for the purposes
of international humanitarian law. For the purposes of
the protection provided by humanitarian law, including
article 3 of the Geneva Conventions, relating to
non-international armed conflicts, journalists and their
assistants are therefore non-combatants and they and
their equipment must be protected as such.

Mr. De Antueno (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
As my delegation expressed when it was a member
of the Security Council, the protection of civilians
in situations of armed conflict is an issue to which
the international community accords considerable
importance. It is therefore appropriate for the Council
to keep it under continual review.

However, it is also important to combat impunity
for attacks. In 2010, at its twenty-seventh session,
UNESCO’s Intergovernmental Council of the
International Programme for the Development of
Communication asked UNESCO’s Director General
for an analytical report on the safety of journalists
and impunity. That report, presented in March 2012,

38/47

15-15400

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

proposed a plan of action for the United Nations. We
hope that the Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists
and the Issue of Impunity will help to strengthen
measures designed to protect journalists in conflict and
post-conflict situations, and to reinforce the view that
accountability is essential.
Those two concerns — about impunity and respect
for international humanitarian law — are also reflected
in the Human Rights Council’s resolution 21/12,
adopted in November 2012. The resolution, sponsored
by more than 50 countries, including Argentina,
firmly condemned all attacks and violence against
journalists and expressed concern about the fact that
such attacks too often go unpunished. Similarly, the
General Assembly, in its resolution 68/163, proclaimed
2 November as the International Day to End Impunity
for Crimes against Journalists, commemorated for the
first time in 2014 and sponsored by Argentina, Austria,
Costa Rica, France, Greece, Tunisia and UNESCO.
The presidency’s concept note (S/2015/307,
annex) outlines an undeniable aspect of contemporary
reality — that in some conflict situations there arise other
acts of extreme violence, radicalized fundamentalism
and a cruel and total disregard for human dignity
of which journalists are often victims. And they
make use of the advantages of our modern world to
spread such horror virtually. While the international
community has not yet arrived at a universally agreedon definition of terrorism, we can still identify the acts
that the international community should condemn. We
therefore support the condemnation of terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations as one of the most serious
threats there is to international peace and security,
human dignity, peaceful coexistence, the building of
democracy and the economic and social development
of nations.
It is precisely that reality that makes the challenge we
face more serious, in part because the legal frameworks
that apply to combatants in situations of armed conflict
and in the fight against terrorism are different. It also
makes it all the more critical from the perspective of
effective protection, an issue raised in the presidency’s
concept note. The fact is that peacekeeping operations
have specific mandates, and even when those mandates
include the protection of civilians, giving priority
to this particular category of civilians would require
careful review by Member States. It would also mean
incorporating the particular characteristics involved in
combating terrorism into special political missions.

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

It is essential that the Security Council remain
committed to protecting civilians in armed conflict,
which should include the consideration of specific
situations, such as that of journalists today, and to
promoting respect for international humanitarian
and human-rights law, as well as ending impunity for
serious violations against civilians.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Madam President, as you approach the end of
your presidency of the Council for this month, I would
like to congratulate you on the success of your efforts.
We would like to highlight the various informal and
formal meetings that have been held to bring about the
adoption today of resolution 2222 (2015), which affirms
the importance of protecting journalists in times of
armed conflict. It is a positive step that should contribute
to achieving such protection. The Council has held
many meetings and issued numerous resolutions and
presidential statements on the subject of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict since the topic was first
introduced in the Council, in 1999. However, they have
not been implemented. The conflicts on the ground are
still going on, and the numbers of victims, particularly
women and children, continue to rise in places such
as Syria, South Sudan, the Central African Republic
and the occupied Palestinian territories. Disagreements
between the Council’s permanent members and their
exercise of the right to the veto have continued to help
worsen their plight and contribute to the incidence
of serious violations of humanitarian law and human
rights. That in turn has resulted in a huge humanitarian
crisis in terms of internally displaced persons and
refugees, now amounting to 50 million people, the
highest number since the Second World War.
The issue of the protection of civilians is closely
tied to the provision of humanitarian assistance, and
United Nations agencies are therefore having to respond
to calls for help in humanitarian crises all over the
world. The international community in general, and the
Security Council in particular, has failed to provide the
necessary protection in these armed conflicts, helping
to worsen the problems of civilians at a time when the
parties to those conflicts are ignoring all their appeals
and committing endless violations of international
humanitarian law and so forth. That said, the current
situation demands that we raise the awareness of all

15-1540039/47

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the parties to the various conflicts concerning humanrights violations and ensure accountability for such
acts through international commissions of inquiry and
special tribunals.
I would like to mention the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, where Israel persists
in its colonization policies and where human-rights
violations continue. At the same time, since the conflict
in Syria began, the people of Syria have been facing a
humanitarian disaster that has claimed the lives of more
than 200,000 people, including thousands of children,
and has resulted in the displacement of 12 million as
the crisis continues to worsen. Kuwait has held several
international donor conferences at which a total of
$6.6 billion has been pledged to help ease the Syrian
people’s suffering. In that regard, we reaffirm our
support for the efforts of Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, and the importance of
finding a political solution to the crisis in Syria, based
on the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and
aimed at fulfilling the Syrian people’s aspirations.
The events in Yemen threaten the security of
the countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council in the
wake of the acts perpetrated by the partisan forces
of the country’s former President Abdullah Saleh.
Those groups want to take power and are completely
ignoring resolution 2216 (2015). They have violated
the humanitarian ceasefire, thereby furthering the
deteriorating humanitarian situation. The unilateral
measures taken by militias and forces loyal to Ali
Abdullah Saleh that control parts of Yemen are
hampering the political transition. In that regard, we
reiterate our support for restoring peace and stability
in Yemen.
In conclusion, my delegation emphasizes that the
protection of civilians must not serve as a political tool.
Impunity must not become a choice in the context of
armed conflict. We therefore reiterate our support for
United Nations efforts to protect civilians in situations
of armed conflict, particularly through peacekeeping
missions, whose mandates and tasks must be clearly
defined to ensure strengthened respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights law. I also reiterate
my country’s support for international efforts aimed at
strengthening the protection of civilians in situations of
armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.

40/47

27/05/2015

Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): Мy
delegation welcomes the convening of this Security
Council debate on the protection of journalists in conflict
situations. We also commend the Council presidency
for choosing this relevant topic, which requires further
commitment on the part of the international community.
The choice of theme is especially timely owing to the
numerous armed conflicts that erupted during the
past 10 years, where journalists have been victims of
violence and unparalleled brutality.
In a report, the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights points out that countries experiencing
or having experienced armed conflict are among the
most dangerous in the world for journalists. The report
indicated that, since 1992, at least 185 journalists
have been killed while working in situations of armed
conflict. That number rises to 1,000 dead since 1992 if
we include the deaths that occurred outside of conflict
zones.
Journalists have also suffered numerous violations
of their rights as a result of their activities. They have
often been kidnapped, tortured, imprisoned without
trial and their equipment confiscated and destroyed, in
addition to restrictions on their freedom of movement
and opinion.
Journalists face extremely vulnerable situations
in conflict zones; the recent barbaric execution of
journalists by Daesh terrorists is the most blatant
expression of such vulnerability. The targeting and
execution of journalists and untoward media coverage
carried out by the executioners notably demonstrate
their goal of finding an audience to their atrocities
and subjugating a frightened population through their
commands. That bears witness to the important role of
journalists in the worldwide exposure of the atrocities
and violations of international law perpetrated in
conflict zones.
While cases of foreign journalists killed or injured
in conflict zones often capture the attention of the
international community, most of the victims of threats
and attacks are local journalists covering local issues.
That is why we must redouble our efforts to protect
journalists in conflict situations.
We all know that under international humanitarian
law journalists should benefit from all of the protections
afforded to civilians in times of conflict. However
special attention and protection should be provided to

15-15400

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

journalists because of the nature of their work and their
vulnerability.
Training should be made available to members of
the armed forces and to organizations of journalists
and media personnel on international law obligations
applicable to armed conflict situations, journalists’
legal right to be present in such situations and policies
and procedures aimed at limiting risks for journalists.
Cooperation among international and regional
organizations and civil society aimed at providing such
training could significantly improve that endeavour.
While the digital age has created unlimited
opportunities for disseminating information, new
forms of journalism have appeared that deserve the
same protections as those accorded to journalists.
The issue of impunity for attacks against journalists
also requires our further attention. Several reports on
the subject indicate near total impunity in cases of
violations of the right to life of journalists: in 9 out of
10 cases, the perpetrators go unpunished. Any violence
committed against a journalist that goes unpunished
opens the door to further violence. It is a serious and
pervasive problem, as well as a major obstacle in the
effort to protect journalists.
Morocco is seriously concerned about the recent
attacks and violence committed against journalists and
media professionals, particularly in situations of armed
conflict. My country remains deeply concerned about
all violations of human rights and abuses committed
against journalists and affecting their security, in any
manner, and vigorously condemns them.
Convinced that the freedom of expression is the
primary and essential factor in the development of
a democratic society and in guaranteeing greater
protection, Morocco has committed to promoting the
rights and protection of journalists. At the national
level, Morocco is preparing to adopt a new generation
of reforms of the press and media sector. That reform
was developed in coordination with experts with
a view to implementing the provisions of the new
Moroccan Constitution, which guarantees the freedom
of thought, opinion and expression in all its forms. It
also guarantees the right of access to information and
provides that freedom of the press cannot be limited by
any form of prior censorship.
Internationally, Morocco has joined, since
its launch in Geneva in September 2012, the core
group established by Austria to address the safety of

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

journalists. The group has carried out several initiatives
in the Human Rights Council, including two resolutions
and one decision, and the panel discussion held by the
Council in September 2013, for the first time on that
issue, and the reports by the High Commissioner for
Human Rights on the subject.
We hope that today’s discussion will complement
initiatives undertaken in other United Nations bodies
and contribute to strengthening the protection of
journalists, wherever they are, especially in conflict
zones.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Mr. Mawe (Ireland): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for organizing today’s debate
on this important subject. I would also like to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for his briefing
and to record our appreciation to Christophe Deloire
and Mariane Pearl, who today have provided important
personal insights into this issue.
Ireland aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
Journalists are key cogs in the civil society machine,
and a free media has been a powerful force for positive
change and democratic transformation everywhere.
However, at present we are witnessing unprecedented
infringements on journalists’ freedom to do their jobs.
Being a journalist, particularly in conflict situations,
has rarely been more dangerous.
Too many Governments continue to use repressive
and out-dated laws to target individual journalists and
activists. Intimidation and violence, assaults, arbitrary
detention and even death are just some of the dangers
faced by journalists. Where that occurs, basic freedoms,
such as freedom of expression, freedom of association
and freedom of peaceful assembly, have been violated.
We need to take such violations very seriously, as
they reflect and frequently foretell greater violations
of human rights, ultimately leading, if unchecked, to
outbreaks of conflict.
All States have a duty to respect, protect and
promote human rights. It is crucial that journalists
and other media actors, as part of civil society, have
the space in which to do their jobs free from violence
and intimidation. A free and independent media is
indispensable for democracy.

15-1540041/47

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Supporting civil society space has been one of
Ireland’s key commitments for our membership of the
Human Rights Council. In the light of that, Ireland
supported resolution 27/5, on the safety of journalists,
adopted at the twenty-seventh session of the Council,
last September. The resolution urges States to promote
a safe and enabling environment for journalists to
perform their work independently. Earlier, at the
Council’s twenty-fourth session, Ireland took the lead
in presenting and negotiating resolution 24/21 — along
with Chile, Japan, Sierra Leone and Tunisia — entitled
“Civil society space: creating and maintaining, in law
and in practice, a safe and enabling environment”.
In those resolutions we remind States of their
obligation to respect and fully protect the civil, political,
economic, social and cultural rights of all individuals,
including the rights to the freedom of expression and
opinion and to assemble peacefully and to associate
freely, both online and offline. If those basic freedoms
are respected, citizens can exercise their democratic
rights, including that of dissent, and meaningfully
contribute to the governance of their State.
Ireland’s policy for international development,
entitled One World, One Future, recognizes the
powerful role that a diverse, pluralistic and professional
media environment can have in providing access to
information and debate and in ensuring the enjoyment
of the right to freedom of expression as recognized in
international human rights law. The policy highlights
the important contribution media can make in holding
Governments and others to account and includes a
commitment to support initiatives that can strengthen
their role in key partner countries.
In Tanzania, for example, support is provided
to the Tanzania Media Fund, which provides grants
to media professionals and institutions in order to
improve journalism standards, including investigative
journalism. In Zambia, support is provided to the Media
Institute of Southern Africa to support community
radio stations, a source of over 80 per cent of Zambians’
current affairs information and an important tool for
enhancing domestic accountability.
The World Press Freedom Index reports that no
journalists were killed in these countries in 2014. Other
countries were not so safe, however, with 99 media
personnel killed worldwide in 2014. If the general
trend continues, all but nine of these crimes will go
unpunished. This is not good enough, and Ireland
underlines the need to end the widespread impunity
42/47

27/05/2015

associated with attacks on journalists. The investigation,
prosecution, conviction and punishment of such attacks
make an essential contribution to prevention by
deterring would-be attackers. Unfortunately, attacks
on journalists are often committed at the State’s behest
or with its tacit consent, exacerbating the problem of
impunity.
Ireland is appalled by the terrorist attacks on
freedom of speech, including the murder of journalists
by groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and Sham.
There needs to be accountability for all such actions,
including where necessary and appropriate through
referral to the International Criminal Court. In Ireland’s
case, we are working closely with our partners in the
EU and through the United Nations to coordinate our
efforts and to strengthen the tools at our disposal.
In conclusion, Ireland joins with our EU colleagues
in encouraging the Secretary-General to continue to
include the issue of protection of journalists in armed
conflicts in his reports on the protection of civilians.
We also encourage the Security Council to address
the protection of journalists, including through public
statements, reporting requirements for peacekeeping
missions and the strengthening of mandates.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Ms. Stener (Norway): Norway wants to thank
the Lithuanian presidency for bringing this important
issue back to the Council. Let me also thank Deputy
Secretary-General Eliasson for his briefing, and
Mr. Deloire and Ms. Pearl for their testimonies this
morning.
Freedom of expression is one of the most
fundamental and important human rights. Regrettably,
it is also one of the most threatened human rights.
Safeguarding freedom of expression and freedom of the
press is at the heart of Norway’s human rights policy.
Because of the increased pressure to these freedoms
worldwide, we are currently working on a strategy to
intensify our work in this field. A main priority for us
is the safety and protection of journalists, with a special
focus on women journalists and media workers. They
are particularly vulnerable to harassment and violence,
and it is important to address the gender dimension of
measures to ensure their safety.
Journalists go where most of us are unable or
unwilling to go. They place themselves in dangerous
situations in order to report independently, shed light
15-15400

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

on atrocities and expose violations of human rights.
It is precisely because of this important eyewitness
role that journalists and media workers are targeted in
conflict situations. Although journalists operating in
areas of armed conflict are protected as civilians under
international humanitarian law, they are attacked for
what they have written, silenced for what they have
witnessed or kidnapped for the leverage and global
attention their capture may provide.
The vast majority of attacks against journalists,
however, occur outside situations of armed conflict. It
is therefore vital that we protect journalists both in and
outside of conflict. In the past 10 years, more than 700
journalists have been killed for simply doing their job.
Nine out of ten cases go unpunished. Impunity is the
greatest obstacle to ensuring the safety of journalists.
Every act of violence that goes uninvestigated and
unpunished is an open invitation for further violence.
Norway will continue to support the safety of
journalists online and offline and work against impunity
for perpetrators in accordance with the United Nations
Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the
Issue of Impunity. Through the Norwegian Union of
Journalists, the International Federation of Journalists
and International Media Support, Norway supports the
safety training of journalists and other media workers.
We must provide protection for journalists, and
we must fight impunity for crimes committed against
them. The international legal framework is in place,
but the gap between the commitments States have made
and the respect shown for human rights in practice
is far too big. What we need is political will and
implementation at the national level. States must ensure
the safety of journalists also in conflict situations. They
must investigate threats and attacks against journalists
effectively and impartially.
No journalist anywhere should have to risk his
or her life to report facts and news. We are therefore
pleased to have co-sponsored resolution 2222 (2015),
adopted this morning.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Montenegro.
Mr. Perović (Montenegro): We thank you, Madam
President, for holding this important and timely debate
today on the protection of journalist in conflict situations
and commend Lithuania’s strong commitment to this
issue. We also thank today’s briefers for their valuable
statements.

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

Montenegro aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I would like, however, to highlight some points of
particular importance to my country.
When something such as the death of a journalist
happens, people always ask what motivates journalists
to risk their lives to tell the story. Journalists are in a
position to experience world events first-hand and to
make a difference. They help us understand what is
happening around us.
Restrictions on media freedom deprive us of the
information we need to engage in informed debates,
assess our Governments’ policies and practices, and
hold them to account. That is particularly important
in conflict areas, where access to information is
challenging and often inconsistent. The protection
of journalists is a building block of an open society
and effective democracy. Journalists should have the
freedom to report the news without fear of reprisal or
being targeted as criminals. However, much remains to
be done in this regard, and unfortunately journalists,
human rights defenders and non-governmental
organizations promoting freedom of expression
continue to face significant danger in conflict zones
and around the world.
Journalists and media workers are subjected
to physical violence and assault, abduction and
disappearances, threats, intimidation and harassment.
For many countries around the world, murder is the
most brutal form of censorship. We express concern
regarding and condemn the killings of journalists in
the line of duty. We also welcome the press statements
issued by the Security Council in response to such
killings.
Montenegro is deeply committed to the protection of
civilians in conflict situations, including the protection
of journalists, and fully supports resolution 1738 (2006)
and presidential statement S/PRST/2013/2, adopted in
February 2013. During armed conflict, journalists,
media professionals and associated personnel should be
considered as civilians and respected and protected as
such under relevant international law.
Today, we are all witnessing rising number of
killings and increasing risks and threats to journalists
and media workers. At the same time, there is a
significant increase in the international awareness of
this issue. Parties to an armed conflict bear the primary
responsibility to take all feasible steps to ensure the

15-1540043/47

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

protection of affected civilians. They should prevent
abuses against journalists and respect their professional
independence and rights, as they are risking their lives
to bring the public an independent and professional
view of what is really happening in the area of conflict.
The culture of impunity surrounding violence
against journalists must end. We should keep in
mind that every act of violence that goes unpunished
or uninvestigated is an open invitation for further
violence. Therefore, States should ensure that there are
adequate and effective mechanisms to bring to justice
those responsible for crimes against journalists, which
are violations of international law.
The efforts of the international community to
prevent and reduce risks and threats to journalists
and media workers must be strengthened. We strongly
support the United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety
of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, which helps
States to develop legislation and mechanisms to create
a free and safe environment for journalists and media
workers in both conflict and non-conflict situations.
We encourage all Member States to work together with
the United Nations to implement its provisions. Also,
we encourage greater consistency at the country-level
in implementing safety measures and emphasize the
importance in achieving awareness of the Plan of Action
among United Nations entities and Member States.
Given the critical importance of the freedom of
the press, we must continue to take steps to protect
journalists and enable them to report. We should not
allow the further erosion of freedom of expression,
as it constitutes one of the essential foundations of
a democratic society and one of the basic conditions
for its progress and the development of every man.
Protecting journalists is a vital part of the Security
Council’s work, and the adoption of today’s resolution
is an important step in that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cyprus.
Mr. Emiliou (Cyprus): As one of the last speakers
of the day, Madam President, allow me to commend you
on your exceptional stamina and patience. We also wish
to thank the Lithuanian presidency for convening this
important and timely debate, as well as to congratulate
it on the unanimous adoption of today’s resolution
2222 (2015), which condemns all violations and abuses
committed against journalists and strongly deplores
impunity for such acts. I would also like to welcome

44/47

27/05/2015

and thank the journalists who came here today to share
with us their own personal experiences.
Cyprus aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union and wishes to
make the following remarks in its national capacity.
We recall that the call for freedom of information
came in one of the very first resolutions of the General
Assembly. Freedom of information is a fundamental
human right, a cornerstone of all the freedoms and
values promoted and defended by the United Nations. It
is guaranteed by article 19 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and constitutes an essential pillar of
any healthy society. The freedom of the press is also
enshrined in the European Convention on Human
Rights, in which article 10 provides that
“Everyone has the right to freedom of
expression. This right shall include freedom to hold
opinions and to receive and impart information and
ideas without interference by public authority and
regardless of frontiers.”
It is therefore incumbent upon all Governments to
respect the right of individuals to hold opinions without
interference, and the freedom of the press to collect,
distribute, analyze and disseminate information
without any kind of interference or fear of violence
or persecution. It is impossible to have a genuinely
democratic society without freedom of the media.
As journalists continue to be imprisoned and killed
in the four corners of the globe, it is important to
recommit ourselves to this very basic freedom and to
foster an independent and pluralistic media, which is
prerequisite to democracy, peace and development. As
the Secretary-General states in his synthesis report on
the post-2015 development agenda,
“Press freedom and access to information, freedom
of expression, assembly and association are enablers
of sustainable development.” (A/69/700, para. 79)
The year 2014 was yet another deadly one for
journalists around the world. As reported by the
Committee to Protect Journalists, a total of 60 journalists
were killed globally in relation to their work, with an
unusual proportion of those killed being members of
the international press who had crossed borders to
cover conflicts and dangerous situations all over the
world. It is indicated that, reflecting the increasingly
volatile nature of conflict zones in which journalists
are often deliberately targeted, nearly one quarter of
those killed that year were members of the international
15-15400

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

press, which is double the proportion reported in recent
years. The majority of the victims, however, still remain
local press covering local stories. About 68 per cent of
the journalists killed in 2014 covered politics, with the
next deadliest beat for reporters being war, at 60 per
cent, followed by human rights, at 55 per cent.
The horrific terrorist attacks in Paris and
Copenhagen, the barbaric beheadings of journalists
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, and the
journalists killed while trying to cover a story in a
conflict zones show that the threat to journalists and free
expression is not an isolated phenomenon but a global
one and that, indeed, no place is really safe. It is for this
reason that Governments should redouble their efforts
and take measures that aim at preventing violence and
promoting a safe environment for journalists, in order
that they can perform their duties freely and without
fear. Attacks against the press should be met with zero
tolerance. All acts against the freedom of the media
must be investigated swiftly, and the perpetrators
must be held accountable and brought to justice. It is
unacceptable that the majority of assassinations of
journalists have yet to be properly investigated and
punished.
The United Nations, as the embodiment of our
fundamental freedoms, values and principles, can
also play its part in the global efforts to promote the
protection of journalists, freedom of the press and
putting an end to the regime of quasi-impunity for the
perpetrators of acts of violence against journalists. In
that regard, the important role of the Security Council is
especially important in engaging actively and standing
up against the suppression of the freedom of the media
wherever and whenever it occurs.
In conclusion, allow me to say that my country
joins with all those who fight for the prevalence of the
freedom of the press, for pluralism and unhindered
access to information and for protecting journalists
and their work globally. It is high time to move away
from theoretical declarations and to engage in concrete
actions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Gharibi (Islamic Republic of Iran): It is
regrettable that the representative of the Israeli regime
misused the Council’s time to raise issues irrelevant
to the important theme of today’s debate, just for the
political purpose of defamation of other countries.

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

However, it is a thread-bare tactic, practiced by an
apartheid occupier who has no respect for international
humanitarian law. It accuses others to clearly divert
attention. The international community well remembers
how its reckless military machine massacred innocent
civilians, including a huge number of women and
children in Gaza less than a year ago — and not for the
first time.
Aware of the influence of media and to cover up
the atrocities, the aggressors concluded that journalists
and media workers should not be allowed any access to
conflict zones. But they went far beyond that. According
to available statistics, more than a dozen Palestinian
journalists were deliberately targeted and killed. That
is in addition of the high number of journalists who
were injured or arrested illegally and kept under cruel
conditions. In the digital age, however, it is hard to hide
bloody hands. It is time to demand accountability and
end impunity.
The President: I understand that several delegations
have requested the floor to make additional statements.
It is my intention to accede to those requests. However, I
kindly ask all delegations concerned to limit themselves
to one additional statement, given the lateness of the
hour.
Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Madam, for giving me the floor. We entirely reject
the false allegations and fallacious references made by
today by the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic
about my country. He failed in his attempt to distract
the attention of the international community from the
practices of the Syrian regime against its own people
in all sectors of society. The regime is seeking to
shirk its own ethical and legal responsibilities under
international humanitarian law to protect Syrian
civilians and journalists and to prevent journalists from
being attacked and targeted.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I must agree that the situation with regard
to the protection of journalists in Ukraine has become
especially harsh due to the military operation launched
over a year ago by the Kyiv authorities against regions
that refute their policies. This has led to casualties
among journalists, as a result of which Ukraine is one
of the leaders in the sad index of journalists’ death,
with six journalists killed there in 2014.
The majority of those killed were Russian
media personnel, including Anton Valoshin and Igor

15-1540045/47

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Kornelyuk, reporters of the All-Russia State Television
and Radio Broadcasting Company; Anatoli Klyan, a
cameraman from Channel One; and Andrey Stenin,
a photojournalist from the international information
agency Russia Today. Already this year, several Russian
journalists working in Ukraine have been cruelly
attacked. Correspondents, including women — whose
special protection is addressed in resolution 2222
(2015), adopted today — have been subject to assault
and insult, and their lives and well-being have been
threatened.
In recent months, the Ukrainian authorities have
set up significant obstacles to the professional activities
of a number of Russian journalists, including Zhanna
Karpenko, Alexandra Ulyanova, Elizaveta Khramtsova,
Natalya Kalisheva, Yelena Makarova, Sergey Korenev
and Andrei Grigoryev. Oleg Sidyakin and Marat
Saichenko from LifeNews, Andrei Suchenkov, Anton
Malyshev, Yevgeny Davydov and Nikita Konashenkov,
all working for the Zvezda television channel, have
been seized by the Ukrainian military.
Since the launch of the campaign against the Russian
media, some 50 Russian reporters have been deported
from Ukraine under political pretexts. A decision was
taken recently to deny media accreditation of Russian
media personnel to governmental bodies. The so-called
black list compiled by the Ukrainian security service
permits the denial of accreditation and repressive
measures to be taken against the representatives of any
Russian mass medium.

27/05/2015

The President: I call on the representative of Israel.
Ms. Shilo (Israel): It is truly absurd to hear a
representative of one of the world’s most oppressive
tyrannies lecture the Middle East’s only true
democracy about the freedom of the press and the
protection of journalists. It is really absurd. Instead of
tackling the profound issue at hand — the protection
of journalists — they have chosen to make baseless
accusations against Israel and have politicized this
debate.
It would be more productive to focus on the reasons
and roots of the repression, torture and murder of
journalists. Everybody knows that many people have
suffered under repressive regimes like Iran’s, which
have abolished the freedom of speech and the freedom
of the press, which are pillars of every democracy, like
Israel’s, as Council members know. In Iran, dozens of
journalists and bloggers have been arrested. According
to recent reports, at least 30 journalists are under arrest
simply for telling the truth about the regime.
It is absurd that such a repressive regime has the
audacity to attack Israel. Let us instead explore ways
to create the tools and mechanisms needed to stop that
horrendous repression and secure a free press. This
Chamber, we believe, provides the appropriate forum to
determine tangible and practical means to change that
disturbing reality.
The President: I call on the representative of
Ukraine.

The aforementioned facts — and the list could
easily be extended — attest to Ukraine’s violation of its
international obligation not only to protect journalists
but also to uphold freedom of speech. We urge the
prompt adoption of measures to remedy the situation
and to hold to account those responsible for the
information war and the dissemination of propaganda.
This includes any and all information on the conflict
that does not jibe with the official line.

Mr. Pyvovarov (Ukraine): With over 300 deaths
and disappearances of journalists since 1993 in Russia,
where in most cases the perpetrators have not been
brought to justice, the Russian Federation remains
one of the most dangerous places for journalists in the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and European region, with the highest number
of journalists brutally attacked and killed in the past
15 years.

The very first initiative of the Ministry of
Information Policy established this year in Ukraine was
to create so-called information troops. The Ministry’s
website has posted a call for enlistment in those troops,
whose task is to ensure the optimum dissemination
on the Internet and social media of information and
assessments that suit the Kyiv authorities. I urge
members to judge for themselves whether this is about
independent journalism, as claimed by the Ukrainian
representative, or an organized information war.

The few Russian journalists and media outlets
that attempt to object to the reporting on events in
eastern Ukraine are attacked, harassed and threatened.
Moreover, the Russian authorities continue to
impose severe legislative restrictions that negatively
affect media plurality and threaten the free flow of
information, despite numerous warnings of the OSCE
Representative on Freedom of the Media. Among
those are amendments to Russia’s criminal code that
further increase Government control of the Internet,

46/47

15-15400

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

amendments to the law on advertising that lead to undue
media concentration in the hands of a few monopolies,
and amendments to the law on mass media, lowering
foreign ownership shares in media outlets to 20 per cent.
We invite the Security Council to pay due attention to
those issues threatening the freedom of the media in
Russia and beyond.
This Chamber, in which more than 30 meetings
have been dedicated to the situation in eastern Ukraine,
has heard a lot of Soviet-style propaganda clichés from
Russian representatives. Some have been pure lies;
some have even been funny. But all of them have been
unreal and taken, as we see it, from a parallel reality. I
should simply like to ask my Russian colleague whether
he himself believes in what he says. For all the civilized
world, Russia’s direct participation in fuelling and
creating the Ukrainian crisis is a fact — a proven, pure
and obvious fact.

S/PV.7450 (Resumption 1)

I will not comment on all that we have heard from
our Russian colleague, because we hear the same thing
at every single meeting on Ukraine. We are of the
impression that the Russian delegation thinks that the
more it repeats its lies about the crisis in Donbas that
Russia has created, the greater will be its opportunities
to convince the world that all Russian tanks, weapons,
and militants, as well as the hundreds of dead and living,
captured soldiers from the Russian army, are nothing
more than the kind of fiction produced by Russia-24 or
Russia Today.
In this case, I would tell the Russian representative,
“Do not waste your time. You should direct your
massive, vibrant energy into resolving the huge
number of problems in your own country. Simply
get out of my land and let us and all of Europe live
in peace.”
The meeting rose at 7.30 p.m.

15-1540047/47
