S/2018/154

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 February 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2363
(2017), by which the Council extended the mandate of the African Union -United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) until 30 June 2018 and requested me
to report, every 60 days, on its implementation. The report provides an update on and
analysis of the conflict, the political situation and the operational environment in
Darfur and the main challenges to the effective i mplementation of the mandate,
including violations of the status of forces agreement, for the period from
16 December 2017 until 15 February 2018. It also presents the steps taken by
UNAMID towards achieving its benchmarks and provides an update on progres s in
the implementation of the recommendations contained in the special report of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the Secretary-General of the
United Nations on the strategic review of UNAMID (S/2017/437).

II. Conflict analysis
2.
The overall security situation has remained stable. While the dry season is
coming to mid-point, no major clashes have taken place between the forces of the
Government of the Sudan and the Darfur armed groups; the weapons collection
campaign proceeded in the Jebel Marra area, while encountering resistance from the
Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid (SLA/AW) elements; tensions increased in
some internally displaced persons camps in Central Darfur. The period also witnessed
fewer incidents of intercommunal conflicts, banditry and criminality, human rights
abuses and cases of harassment, in particular of internally displaced person s and other
vulnerable groups. The overall humanitarian situation remained largely unchanged,
despite the new displacement of several hundred persons from eastern Jebel Marra,
as a result of fighting between two SLA/AW factions. The African Union High -level
Implementation Panel-led peace process in Darfur remained stalled, and the
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur has been constrained by
the lack of capacity and resources, for which the Government is seeking external
assistance.
Fighting between the Government of the Sudan forces and armed groups
3.
The armed groups of the Sudan Liberation Army/Minni Minawi (SLA/MM) and
Justice and the Gibril Ibrahim faction of the Justice and Equality Movement

18-02546 (E)

270218

*1802546*

S/2018/154

(JEM/Gibril) continued to remain largely inactive in Darfur, while the area of
operations of SLA/AW continued to be limited to pockets of the Jebel Marra. On
18 January, UNAMID reported clashes between the Rapid Support Force (RSF) and
SLA/AW in Kurmul village, north-east of Golo and near Kati village, 15 km southeast of Golo, in the Jebel Marra, during a weapons collection ca mpaign in the area.
Reportedly, one RSF officer was reported killed and another injured. On 24 January,
RSF clashed in the border village of Kalabah, some 250 km south of Ed Daein, with
a group believed to be JEM/Gibril, which entered from South Sudan. RSF reportedly
incurred three fatalities. Nonetheless, the rebel movements JEM, SLA/MM and the
Sudan Liberation Movement/Transitional Council (SLM/TC) issued a joint statement
on 3 February extending their unilateral cessation of hostilities until 30 April,
following a presidential decree on 4 January extending the Government ’s own
unilateral ceasefire for three months until the end of March.
Weapons collection campaign and impact on security
4.
The Government of the Sudan continued its implementation of th e compulsory
phase of the weapons collection campaign, including in internally displaced persons
camps, and recently moved into the Jebel Marra areas under the control of SLA/AW.
Some progress has been registered by Darfur state officials since the beginni ng of the
campaign in August last year. The Wali of North Darfur reported that, out of an
estimated 700,000 weapons believed to be in illegal circulation across Darfur, only
30,000 (including 9,000 in North Darfur) had been collected. On 20 December, the
South Darfur joint weapons collection committee reported that the total number of
weapons collected voluntarily in the state was 8,000, including 1,373 collected from
the Popular Defence Forces. The committee further reported that, consequently, the
crime rate in South Darfur decreased by 24 per cent, while the incidence of major
crimes such as murder, armed robbery and rape decreased by 35 per cent over the
period of the collection campaign.
5.
According to the mission’s assessment, the campaign appears to have
constrained various armed militia and criminals from freely using their weapons, thus
contributing to an improved overall security situation, especially in North and South
Darfur. The leaders of Abu Shouk camp in El Fasher stated that, following the
weapons collection campaign in parts of North Darfur, the security situation had
improved and some internally displaced persons returned seasonally to their places of
origin in Jebel Si in Kabkabiyah locality, in Tila, Hillet Fuocca, Lumbati, Jabalen and
Tangarara villages in Korma locality, and Kofod village in El Fasher rural area. Sudan
Police sources reported that, in Otash internally displaced persons camp, Nyala, South
Darfur, internally displaced persons’ leaders handed over 821 weapons during the
voluntary phase of the campaign. In the Kalma internally displaced persons camp in
South Darfur, the agreement reached between the Government of the Sudan and the
leadership of the camp, facilitated by UNAMID, continued to hold. The Government
has committed not to forcefully collect weapons without consultation with UNAMID
or the leadership of the internally displaced persons. Massalit leaders have also
reported returns in the areas around Graida, South Darfur, following the weapons
collection campaign in the locality, but they complained about the lack of basic
services and infrastructure, and requested decisive measures on land dispute issues.
6.
As the campaign moved into internally displaced persons camps, internally
displaced persons were reported to have been either physically assaulted or harassed
on a number of occasions by RSF during the weapons collection. On 10 January, at
the Thur internally displaced persons camp, Central Darfur, RSF reportedly arrested
four internally displaced persons. On 11 January, during the weapons collection in
North and Straha internally displaced persons camps, Central Darfur, RSF reportedly
arrested 8 Fur and 20 Arab sheikhs in order to gather information about persons in
2/14

18-02546

S/2018/154

possession of weapons and the hiding places for weapons and motorcycles. While
local leaders in Nertiti locality, Central Darfur, expressed support for the weapons
collections campaign, they stressed that it should be inclusive in order to also ensure
the disarmament of nomadic communities.
Intercommunal conflicts
7.
During the reporting period, the number of intercommunal conflicts over land,
livestock thefts and farm destructions decreased, and fatalities also decreased to 11
from 45 during the previous reporting period. Several tribal reconciliation initiatives
also took place. Most local communities, including internally displaced persons,
attributed this trend to the ongoing weapons collection campaign and more resolute
intervention from the Government to prevent an escalation of tensions among
communities.
8.
In South Darfur, clashes took place between the Mahadi and the Birgid in Hash
area, 50 km north-east of Graida, on 17 December, which resulted in one fatality on
each side. During 2017, the two communities had disputes over land ownership on
the border between Graida and Yasin localities. On 18 December, Government forces
were deployed to contain the situation and RSF was mandated to disarm the feuding
parties. On 21 December, the Sudan Police Force arrested four umdas (local tribal
leaders) and seven youths from the Mahadi community for their involvement in the
incident, and the community leaders are working with the local government towards
resolving the dispute.
9.
In East Darfur, to replace the buffer zone committee between the Ma ‘aliva and
the Rizeigat that was dissolved in November 2017, the Wali established a joint
mechanism on 7 January to regulate agricultural activities and tackle cattle rustling.
The mechanism is composed of 14 members with equal representation from both
tribes. On 23 January, the Birgid and the Zaghawa, in a ceremony attended by Vice President Hassabo Mohamed Abdul Rahman, signed a peace agreement in Shearia
town, recommending the restitution of Zaghawa properties in Shearia, including
shops and houses, allocation of farm lands to Zaghawa returnees and the formation
of a mechanism to sustain the return process and the implementation of development
programmes, in coordination with the United Nations. On 27 and 28 January, the
Vice-President visited Adilla and Abu Karinka, for a reconciliatory meeting between
the Ma‘aliva and the Rizeigat, and made a commitment to implement several
development projects related to health, education and infrastructure in the area.
Violence against civilians and human rights violations
10. The overall human rights situation in Darfur remained volatile. UNAMID
documented cases of violations of the right to life, arbitrary arrests and detention and
sexual and gender-based violence and conflict-related sexual violence. Internally
displaced and other vulnerable persons continued to face harassment while
conducting their daily livelihood activities. UNAMID documented 84 new cases of
human rights violations and abuses involving 192 victims, including 27 children,
during the reporting period, compared with 58 cases of human rights violations and
abuses, involving 123 victims, including 18 children, during the previous reporting
period. Violations of the right to life accounted for 12 cases, involving 18 victims,
and violations of the right to physical integrity for 27 cases, involving 60 victims.
There were 35 cases of sexual and gender-based violence, including conflict-related
sexual violence, in the form of rape and attempted rape, involving 43 victims,
including 22 children (with one male minor), and 9 cases of arbitrary arrest and illegal
detention, involving 70 victims.

18-02546

3/14

S/2018/154

11. The mission confirmed 64 cases of human rights violations and abuses,
involving 171 victims, but the remaining 20 cases, involving 21 victims, could not be
verified. Of the 84 reported cases, 19 cases, involving 58 victims, were reportedly
perpetrated by government security forces and auxiliary groups, and 39 cases,
involving 87 victims, were allegedly perpetrated by unidentified armed men.
Investigations were reportedly initiated in 32 documented cases, resulting in 12
arrests, highlighting concerns over the lack of efficiency of law enforcement and
prosecutorial services in some areas.
12. The mission continued to document incidents of sexual violence and grave
violations against children. On 19 December, UNAMID was informed of the alleged
gang rape of a female internally displaced person by three Sudan Police personnel
while she was in detention at a police cell in Nyala, South Darfur. The response of
law enforcement institutions remains deficient, and psychosocial support for
survivors was inadequate. The Women’s Protection Network reported that two girls
aged 12 and 13, and a 22-year-old woman were allegedly gang raped on 16 December
2017 by eight armed men at Kargo, 10 km east of Nertiti. The incident was reported
to Sudan Police and one suspect was apprehended and is awaiting prosecution. On
25 December, four armed men in civilian clothes attempted to rape three internally
displaced women in Balda area, approximately 7 km north-east of Hamidiya camp for
internally displaced persons in Zalingei. On 26 December, four women were severely
beaten by three armed militiamen at Dankoj, 40 km north-east of Zalingei.
13. The reporting period witnessed an overall decline in criminal activities.
However, with the ongoing harvest season, incidents of crop destruction and related
violence persisted in some areas. Internally displaced persons were targeted in 68
criminal incidents, which led to five fatalities. Other civilians were a ffected by 92
crime-related incidents resulting in 17 fatalities, including cases of murder (14),
armed robbery (9), attempted robbery (2), assault/harassment (26), burglary/break -in
(4), looting (2), abduction (3), shooting (15), attack/ambush (1), arson (1), livestock
theft (13) and others (2). In the previous reporting period, internally displaced persons
and other civilians were affected by 123 and 208 criminal incidents, respectively,
resulting in the deaths of 8 internally displaced persons and 42 oth er civilians.
14. Tensions increased in two camps for internally displaced persons in Central
Darfur, notably Hasahisa and the Hamidiya camps, near Zalingei. Following a quarrel
between members of the Fur internally displaced persons and of the Beni Halba host
community in December 2017, the internally displaced persons prevented all Beni
Halba from entering the Hasahisa market. On 20 January the two groups engaged in
a violent confrontation, which resulted in four internally displaced persons and one
Beni Halba being killed and 38 persons being injured. In a separate incident, on
22 January, two internally displaced persons from Hamidiya camp were assaulted by
a group of men while conducting livelihood activities outside the camp, and on
31 January there were clashes between internally displaced persons from Hamidiya
camp and the Beni Halba, who prevented them from collecting woo d in Boronka area
(10 km from the camp). Sudan Police created a buffer zone in Hasahisa camp, arrested
three suspects, and are working with the community leaders towards a reconciliation
initiative.
15. Criminal elements associated with the Sudan Liberation Army/Peace and
Development (SLA/PD) continued to harass the internally displaced persons
community in Sortony, while provoking clashes with the nomadic tribes in the area.
Following the theft, on 6 January, of 14 cattle by SLA/PD from the nomads in the
area tensions rose between the nomads and internally displaced persons in Sortony
gathering site, where SLA/PD took shelter. Government security personnel intervened
on 23 January to arrest those responsible and to collect weapons in the camp, which
proceeded without incident. On 30 January, government representatives of Kass
4/14

18-02546

S/2018/154

locality, South Darfur, informed the inhabitants of Singita village (19 km south of the
UNAMID team site) of the Government’s decision to divide farming land between
villagers and new settlers, nomads living around the village. The villagers were
reportedly requested to vacate their fields or to face forceful vac ation by 6 February.
The villagers resolved not to move out and nominated a committee to discuss the issue
with the Commissioner of Kass locality.

III. Political situation
16. On 31 December, the Sudan National Assembly passed the 2018 budget, which
was criticized by many members of the general public, financial experts and
opposition leaders. Some Assembly Members voted against the budget proposal or
boycotted the voting session, as the budget purportedly neglects the productive
sectors and basic services such as agriculture, education and health, allocating a mere
3.65 per cent to education and 2.7 per cent to the health sector, while the defence and
security apparatus received a total of 16.37 per cent of the overall budget.
17. The depreciation of the Sudanese pound against the United States dollar, and
corresponding increases in the prices of basic commodities, began to negatively affect
the lives of the Sudanese population, leading to demonstrations in several states
across the country. On 7 January, students took to the streets in El Geneina, West
Darfur, damaging some facilities, including the headquarters of the ruling National
Congress Party. They were subsequently forcefully dispersed by the Sudan Police and
RSF, resulting in the killing of a high school student and five other casualties,
including a police officer. On 16 and 17 January, additional protests were organized
in Khartoum and, on 31 January, similar demonstrations took place in Khartoum and
other cities, including Zalingei, Central Darfur.
18. In Khartoum and Gezira states, in central Sudan, on 5 January, following
protests against the recent increases in the prices of basic commodities, the Sudanese
authorities launched a campaign of arrests and publication bans. Some opposition
political parties supported the protests, calling on the people to take to the streets. On
7 January, the National Intelligence and Security Services ceased publication of six
newspapers, most likely in reaction to news reports on price increases and the hig h
cost of living. The Reform Now Movement, led by Ghazi Salah al -Din, criticized the
National Intelligence and Security Services for restricting fundamental and press
freedoms.
19. On 24 January, the President of the Sudan, Omar Hassan al -Bashir formed five
presidential councils, namely, the Council of Presidency Affairs, the National Council
for Macroeconomics, the National Information Council, the National Council for
Foreign Policy and the Unity and Peace Council, to oversee the implementation of
the national dialogue recommendations. On 28 January, Reform Now issued a
statement denouncing this decision, arguing that it was contrary to the spirit of the
National Dialogue, and that it had the potential to weaken the cabinet and undermine
the Constitution. The Popular Congress Party expressed similar views. Other
opposition parties are concerned that this decision will give excessive executive and
legislative powers to the President.
20. At the regional level, improved relations of the Sudan with its neigh bours
continue to be manifested in decreasing support for the Darfur armed movements. On
5 January, however, on grounds of security concerns over human trafficking, illegal
drugs and weapons collection, the Government of the Sudan closed its border with
Eritrea and, on the same day, the Sudan recalled its Ambassador to Egypt for
consultations. On 28 January, meeting on the sidelines of the African Union Summit,
the presidents of Egypt and the Sudan agreed to form a ministerial committee to deal
18-02546

5/14

S/2018/154

with all bilateral issues and overcome all obstacles, following recent tensions between
the two countries. In a related development, the leaders of Egypt, Ethiopia and the
Sudan met on 29 January in a bid to break a deadlock in negotiations over the building
of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance dam across the River Nile by Ethiopia. The Joint
Political and Security Mechanism of the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan
was convened in extraordinary session on 4 February to adopt measures related to the
redeployment of forces outside the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone, the beginning of
phase one of the border crossing corridors and the activation of the Technical Ad -Hoc
Border Committee of the 14-Mile Area.

IV. Humanitarian situation
21. The reporting period witnessed new displacement of families from eastern Jebel
Marra, and a number of refugees returning from the Central African Republic. On
2 January, some 129 families from East Jebel Marra locality arrived in Otash
internally displaced persons camp near Nyala, South Darfur, fleeing infighting
between Gadora and Zanoon SLA/AW factions. The infighting reportedly started in
November over control of checkpoints and tax collection from farmers selling their
products in Deribat, Kidingeer and Kara. As at the end of De cember 2017, nearly
1,500 people returned after 10 years from the Central African Republic to Dafag,
Radom Locality, South Darfur, with the assistance of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees. Basic services in health, water sanit ation and
hygiene and education, together with the clearance of unexploded ordnance, are
among their most immediate needs.
22. The population in Jebel Marra region remained the most vulnerable in terms of
food security and livelihoods, followed by returnees in Um Dukhun, Central Darfur.
However, improved access within Jebel Marra in recent months has enabled
humanitarian partners to identify critical needs, including access to safe drinking
water and sanitation facilities, as well as major gaps in educatio n and protection.
Regarding the outbreak of acute watery diarrhoea, the Federal Ministry of Health
reported that, as at 30 December, all five Darfur states were declared free of the
disease. There were no reported cases and deaths from acute watery diarrho ea in
Darfur during the reporting period, compared with 79 cases and two deaths in the
previous reporting period.
23. With regard to food security, the Famine Early Warning Systems Network
reported very poor seasonal activities in pastoral and agricultura l areas of North
Darfur, which could result in increased need for food assistance, agriculture and
livestock-based livelihoods support until mid-2018. Land access restrictions, limited
agricultural labour opportunities and low asset holdings resulting from the impact of
the prevailing insecurity conditions in parts of Jebel Marra continue to limit
household productive capacity. Recent increases in commodity prices, such as that of
wheat, have negatively affected food security, in particular among vulnerable
populations.

V. Operating environment
Attacks and threats of attack targeting African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, United Nations and humanitarian personnel
24. A total of 26 criminal incidents targeting United Nations and humanitarian
personnel were reported, compared with 25 in the previous reporting period. The
incidents included a gunshot fired by an unidentified person at an observation tower
at Nyala “super camp”, South Darfur, on 27 December, in which no injury was
6/14

18-02546

S/2018/154

reported. Other incidents included a case of robbery and 15 cases of premises
intrusion/theft/break-in/attempted theft, mostly in Nyala.
Detention of staff
25. On 21 December, the National Intelligence and Security Services arrested and
detained a UNAMID national staff member at the airport in El Geneina, West Darfur.
The staff member was released the same day without any charges, and the National
Intelligence and Security Services gave no reason for the arrest. On 2 January, at
Zalingei market, Central Darfur, Sudan Police personnel assaulted and arrested a
UNAMID national staff member over an alleged traffic violation by a member of his
family. He was released the same day after a brief hospit alization. On 8 January, in
El Geneina, West Darfur, a UNAMID national staff member was arrested and detained
by National Intelligence and Security Services personnel over allegations of
involvement in a violent anti-government demonstration. The staff member was
released on the same day without charges.
Access restrictions
26. Humanitarian access continued to improve across Darfur. There were, however,
two incidents of access restriction during the reporting period, in North and South
Darfur respectively. In West Darfur, reports indicate increased disruptions by the
National Intelligence and Security Services to the activities of humanitarian
non-governmental organizations. These include delays in the issuance of permission
to carry out assessments, the processing of travel notifications, the purchase of fuel
and interference in bidding processes. The humanitarian community continued to
advocate for access to locations in the Jebel Marra, such as Boldong, Kutrum and
Kwila, which remain inaccessible to the United Nations and partners, while United
Nations Humanitarian Air Service flights to Golo and Rockero continue.
27. The mission did not record any flight clearance denials. However, the
Government delayed approval of the mission’s operation of its four Mi-17 military
utility helicopters within Darfur until the tactical forward -looking infrared cameras
and machine guns were removed from the helicopters. The helicopters are partially
operational and can undertake routine logistical tasks.
Visas and customs clearance
28. The Government granted 390 visas for UNAMID staff, representing 68 per cent
of visa requests for the period, including 12 for civilian staff, 53 for military
personnel, 120 for police personnel, 100 for official visitors, 98 for cont ractors, 1 for
a consultant, and 6 for dependents. A total of 73 visa requests are being processed,
while a total of 188 visa requests are pending beyond the normal approval period of
15 days, some since April 2016. These include 95 for contractors, 24 for police, 28
for civilian staff, 27 for military personnel, 11 for United Nations Volunteers, two for
official visitors and one for a consultant. For the Human Rights Section, 17 visa
applications remain pending, resulting in a vacancy rate of 32 per cent, while the
overall vacancy rate for the mission’s international civilian staff decreased from
17 per cent to 6 per cent, of which 3 per cent is due to pending visas. The decrease in
the vacancy rate is due to the abolishment of posts in accordance with the 2017/18
budget, approved on 23 December 2017.
29. The Government of the Sudan has gradually released food ration containers
from Port Sudan. While progress has been recorded in clearing other shipments,
currently 36 shipments (compared with 55 shipments during the previous reporting
period) of contingent- and United Nations-owned equipment are still pending, two
since 2015. UNAMID continued to hold monthly technical-level meetings with
18-02546

7/14

S/2018/154

government officials in an effort to resolve various pending issues, inc luding visas
and customs clearances. The Government informed the mission that it would receive
a communication by February 2018 outlining new procedures that will replace the tax
exemption certificate.

VI. Progress towards achievement of the strategic objectives of
the mission
Protection of civilians
30. The mission integrated field protection teams conducted a total of 89 missions
in North, West, South and Central Darfur from 16 December 2017 to 31 January 2018.
In North Darfur, these teams conducted 65 visits to various locations in Korma, Umm
Barru, Saraf Omra and Kabkabiyah, where the security situation was generally
assessed to be calm, partly owing to the Government disarmament campaign. In
Korma and Umm Barru, internally displaced persons complained of being prevented
from collecting grass and firewood by nomads, who had also occupied some of their
villages. Residents in the villages of Abu Leha, Musbat, Shegue -Karo, Furawiya and
Jurajeem, situated 35–68 km from Um Baru, criticized the use of force during the
ongoing weapons collection campaign. In West Darfur, the teams visited 15 locations,
which consisted of the internally displaced persons camps of Ardamata, Dorti and
Hujaj and the villages of Adar, Anjimi, Atiyya, Kuraynik, Abu Suruj, Kurt i,
Conjoltory, Nurei, Khor Sayal, Hilat Ardeib, Jokhana and Faganta. The security risk
level was found to be low.
31. Following reports of livestock rustling and harassment of internally displaced
persons at Sortony gathering site by SLA/PD elements, UNAMI D held a meeting on
11 January with the national armed forces, internally displaced persons, nomadic
community leaders and a SLA/PD representative. The parties concluded that SLA/PD
was responsible for the theft. The following day SLA/PD handed over 11 of the 14
missing cattle. The national armed forces officer assured that SLA/PD personnel
would soon be moved out of Sortony to prevent tensions between nomadic
communities and the internally displaced persons.
32. UNAMID military conducted a total of 12,387 patrols, of which 5,505 were for
the protection of civilians (3,760 short range patrols, 323 long range patrols and 1,422
night patrols) and 6,764 for protection of UNAMID personnel and equipment (5,914
routine patrols and 850 logistics and administrative escorts). In total, 2,539 visits to
villages and 2,255 visits to internally displaced persons camps were conducted and
428 patrols were conducted in support of firewood collection and farming activities.
UNAMID police conducted 1,832 patrols, including 779 confidence-building patrols
to internally displaced persons camps, 230 firewood/grass patrols, 73 market patrols,
416 villages patrols, 273 town patrols, 20 area of returns patrols and 41 commercial
route patrols to respond to the security needs of the internally displaced persons, in
particular women and children engaged in livelihood activities outside their camps.
In addition, 308 joint patrols, involving 958 community policing volunteers, were
conducted as part of crime prevention initiatives. These patrols helped to monitor
security and provided a safe and protective environment in internally displaced
persons camps. UNAMID uniformed personnel (military and police) provided 223
escorts to humanitarian partners
33. The mission continued to work with justice and human rights institutions to
strengthen their capacities, including on the resolution of community conflict. The
mission, in collaboration with the Sudan Judiciary, developed a handbook on relevant
civil and criminal procedures and dispute mediation, providing legal guidance to rural
court judges for the management of disputes, including over land and other conflict
8/14

18-02546

S/2018/154

drivers. The handbook was launched on 17 January, concluding two years of
engagement with the judiciary on strengthening the capacity of rural courts. On
24 December, UNAMID, in collaboration with the Public Prosecution Office and the
Wali’s office in North Darfur successfully intervened to secure the release of 18
juveniles who were being detained under the emergency law. UNAMID furthe r
consulted with relevant child welfare agencies regarding psychosocial support for and
welfare of the children. Three juveniles who had been sentenced to death and detained
with other prisoners in Nyala Central Prison were transferred to Shallah Juvenile
Facility in North Darfur upon the mission’s intervention.
34. The Special Criminal Court on the Events in Darfur in El Fasher sentenced two
Rizeigat tribe members to 13 years’ imprisonment, accusing them of killing eight
internally displaced persons and injuring seven others in an attack near the Sortony
internally displaced persons gathering site in May 2016. The case, considered to be a
precedent, was successfully prosecuted by the Office of the Special Prosecutor for
Crimes in Darfur, despite pressure from tribal militia. UNAMID monitored the trial
throughout. In another development, on 18 December, a 27 -year-old suspect accused
of raping a 13-year-old girl was sentenced to death in Nyala. UNAMID is also
monitoring the trial in the child court in El Fasher in the case of a national staff
member who is accused of raping a 13-year-old girl.
35. To improve security conditions, eight security coordination meetings were held
with the participation of the Sudan Police Force, UNAMID police, non -governmental
organizations and international non-governmental organizations, representatives of
internally displaced persons and community leaders in all five states of Darfur. Five
community safety committees were established at Sharib, Adda and Majmere villages
in El Geneina, West Darfur, Kalma in Nyala, South Darfur, and Tabaldi village in East
Darfur. These meetings have encouraged the community to support the
implementation of community policing initiatives and have enhanced safety and
security in the internally displaced persons camps. Seven training courses, including
on first aid, community policing and criminal investigation, were conducted for 165
male Sudan Police Force officers from 26 December to 1 January at Nyala Sudan
Police Force Training Centre, South Darfur, the team site at Kutum, North Darfur and
SPF headquarters in El Geneina, West Darfur. A total of 10 training courses on
community policing, human rights, sexual and gender-based violence and computer
skills were conducted for 179 (92 male and 87 female) internally displaced persons
in El Sherif and Otash, South Darfur, Umm Barru, North Darfur and the team site at
Masteri, West Darfur. The training courses raised the awareness of the participants on
reporting cases to the Sudan Police Force. UNAMID police, at the request of the
Sudan Police Force, started an initiative to support the Sudan Police Force in the
development of police-related standard operating procedures.
36. UNAMID visited Hamidiya camp for internally displaced persons in Central
Darfur to monitor gender and women’s protection issues on 19 and 26 December
2017. UNAMID advocated for policy reforms and laws promoting women ’s rights,
during a Darfur-wide advocacy and awareness campaign to end gender-based
violence and other violence against women. The mission, in coordination with the
United Nations Population Fund and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality
and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), supported the State Ministries of
Social Affairs in conducting campaigns during the 16 days o f activism to end genderbased violence that brought together over 5,000 people in the five Darfur states.
UNAMID organized training sessions for 146 peacekeepers, including 31 women, to
strengthen their capacities on gender equality in peacekeeping.
37. UNAMID continued to provide capacity-building support to law enforcement,
human rights and transitional justice institutions in order to strengthen their capacity
to promote and protect human rights in Darfur. In collaboration with the National
18-02546

9/14

S/2018/154

Human Rights Commission, UNAMID conducted two workshops to review the
Commission’s five-year action plan in Nyala, South Darfur, on 18 December 2017,
and in Ed Daein, East Darfur, on 27 December 2017. The workshops focused on key
elements of the action plan and the resources required to ensure its successful
implementation across Darfur, underscoring the need to provide strategic direction
for the National Human Rights Commission. Representatives of the legislative
councils, members of the South Darfur Bar Association, judicial officials, civil
society groups and native administration officials, participated in both workshops.
38. Explosive ordnance continued to pose a threat, with four incidents reported, in
which a total of nine people were injured. UNAMID deployed clearance teams in
North, South, West and Central Darfur, which conducted general explosive hazard
assessment and disposal operations in 64 villages, addressing 55 hazardous areas and
destroying 2,558 items of unexploded ordnance and 44,468 rounds of expire d
ammunition. UNAMID conducted risk-awareness training that benefited 49,733
individuals: 10,756 men, 5,676 women, 18,995 boys and 14,303 girls. Such activities
contributed to a more secure environment for livelihood activities and the safe
conduct of mission patrols and humanitarian assistance.
39. UNAMID completed explosive remnants of war clearance and risk education at
the site of a government ammunition depot, in Al Matara, Nyala, at which an
explosion occurred. Additionally, UNAMID provided technical and logistical support
in the form of advice to the Sudan Police Force for the destruction of weapons
collected during the ongoing campaign, as well as 50 containers for safe storage.
40. UNAMID, in collaboration with the Sudan Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration Commission and the United Nations country team, provided logistical
support for the setting up of the demobilization camp at the RSF base in Dar al Argam,
El Fasher. Between 26 December and 10 January, a total of 494 ex-combatants,
including members of breakaway factions during 2017, (85 women and 409 men) out
of the planned total of 500 from signatories of the Doha Document, were demobilized.
They were all profiled and registered for the reintegration programme and each
received a reinsertion package of 1,500 Sudanese pounds from UNAMID and three
bags of sorghum from the World Food Programme.
41. During the reporting period, UNAMID trained 611 (544 male and 67 female)
personnel, comprising 388 military personnel, 4 civilians and 219 civi lian police, on
Security Council resolutions on children and armed conflict, as well as on relevant
national and international instruments for protecting children; on the impact of armed
conflict on children; on child labour and child trafficking; and on g uiding principles
and categories of child rights under the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
UNAMID also delivered 10 training and sensitization activities for 1,122
beneficiaries (544 female and 578 male), including 1,048 internally displaced
persons, community leaders, 6 members of the Sudanese Armed Forces, 28 Sudan
Police Force members and 40 prison officers, on the impact of armed conflict on
children and on juvenile justice.
Support for the Darfur peace process and the implementation of the
Doha Document
42. The Darfur peace process remains stalled and no progress has been noted during
the reporting period. In the meantime, the mission is engaging the state authorities on
the implementation of the outstanding provisions of the Doha Document. On
19 December 2017 and 18 January 2018, UNAMID met the East Darfur High Court
Judge to follow up on the concerns of internally displaced persons in El Neem camp
about the illegal occupation and misappropriation of their lands. The mission was
informed that the “Right to land restitution policy”, enacted by the state legislative
10/14

18-02546

S/2018/154

council in June 2017, will be implemented in 2018. The policy is aimed at addressing
land issues and providing legal assistance to the original landowners, including the
opportunity to reclaim and formalize their land ownership rights through formal
courts. A successful implementation of this policy would address one of the root
causes of the conflict in Darfur. UNAMID was requested to assist with the
dissemination of the provisions of the policy among the internally displaced
communities.
43. The mission was also informed that the Voluntary Return and Resettlement
Commission of West Darfur is mapping areas for the permanent return of internally
displaced persons, and in this context 20 development projects are planned for eight
localities in the state, including the construction of health centres, schools and police
stations.
Mediation of intercommunal violence
44. UNAMID pursued mediation initiatives at the community level. On
19 December 2017, UNAMID conducted a sensitization campaign in Abu Karinka,
East Darfur, to reinforce the implementation of an agreement signed between the Berti
and the Ma‘aliva in April 2017, following violent conflict triggered by the destruction
of a farm in Nair area (41 km east of Abu Karinka). No violent incidents have occurred
between the two communities since the agreement was signed and displaced families
from Nair area have returned to their villages. Leaders of the Ma ‘aliva and Berti
youths appealed to the mission to drill boreholes and rehabilitate existing ones, as
well as build health and cultural centres.
45. In support of efforts to mitigate and prevent violence between farmers and
nomadic herders during the harvest season, UNAMID conducted dialogue and
consultation forums in East, Central, West and North Darfur. Forums were conducted
in West Darfur on 18 December in Megmary return area (46 km west of Mornie) and
Anjimi return village (29 km north-east of Masteri, in East Darfur on 19 and
20 December, in Yassin (75 km west of Ed Daein) and Muhajeria (84 km north-west
of Ed Daein) and in Deleliba village (19 km north-east of El Geneina) in Central
Darfur on 19 December. The forums were attended by 243 participants, including 75
women, representing farmers, herders, native administration, returnees, youth,
women and internally displaced persons. Their recommendations included the
continuation of the weapons collection campaign, the demarcation of migratory
routes, capacity-building for the native administration to resolve disputes and
enforcement of the rules governing migration and farming, as well as the provision
of basic services. Community leaders reported that the dialogue forum for farmers
and nomadic herders conducted by the mission in Nurei, West Darfur, i n December
2017, resulted in 140 families returning to their village. UNAMID conducted a
peaceful coexistence dialogue forum in West Darfur on 31 January in Fufu return area
(15 km south of Mornie) and a peace forum in North Darfur on 1 February in Birka
village (40 km west of El Fasher town), both events attended by some 1,100
representatives.

VII. Progress in the implementation of the recommendations of
the strategic review (S/2017/437)
Implementation of phase one and preparations for phase two
46. In accordance with Security Council resolution 2363 (2017), the first phase of
the reconfiguration of UNAMID is now complete. The mission adopted the Jebel
Mara Task Force concept of operations on 7 December 2017, its civilian head was
appointed on 13 December and its military began operations on 31 January. The
18-02546

11/14

S/2018/154

mission has completed the process of identifying civilian staff to be deployed to the
Task Force and the deployment is ongoing. The military component is already
undertaking the tasks within Task Force areas in Central Darfur. Furthermore, on
21 January, an advance reconnaissance team of the Chinese engineering company
arrived in Zalingei to provide support in executing Task Force -related infrastructure
work, including the upgrading of the Nertiti-Golo road. On 29 January, UNAMID
signed a memorandum of understanding with the Government of the Sudan regarding
the opening of a temporary operating base in Golo, Central Darfur State, and the land
was formally handed over to the mission.
47. On 31 January, phase two of the reconfiguration was initiated. During t his phase,
a further three infantry battalions will be repatriated from the mission as they hand
over the team sites to formed police units. In this context, two infantry battalions
(Senegal and Rwanda) are planned to be repatriated in February 2018, while the
departure of the third battalion (Ethiopia) has been delayed until the end of June 2018,
owing to security concerns in Kalma internally displaced persons camp in South
Darfur State. In accordance with the joint assessment by the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission and the Secretary-General of phase one of the
reconfiguration of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(S/2018/12) and the statement by the President of the Security Council of 31 January
2018 (S/PRST/2018/4), the third battalion will cease operations on 1 June for
repatriation by 30 June. The second phase also includes the closure of three military
sector headquarters (Sectors East, North and West), leaving the Force with two
sectors, the Jebel Marra Task Force, with its headquarters at Zalingei, and the State
Security Assistance Force, with its headquarters at Nyala. This is also accompanied
by the repatriation of around 100 staff officers and military observers. The police
component will operate from three sectors (Sectors Central, North and South)
following the merger of Sector East with Sector South and Sector West with Sector
Central) by mid-February, and will deploy 22 police officers to Golo in support of
operational activities of the newly established temporary operating base.
Civilian staffing review
48. The staffing review, in addition to budgetary decisions by legislative bodies,
resulted in a two-phased net reduction of 563 positions, comprising 584 posts
abolished, 21 posts established and the nationalization of 26 posts that were approved
by the legislative bodies as part of the revised 2017/18 budget. The two-phased
reduction led to the abolishment of 405 posts by 31 December 2017 and an additional
158 posts planned by 30 June 2018. The civilian staffing review team proposed a
further reduction of 302 posts during 2018–2019, which was subsequently reduced to
293 further to consultation with the mission.
Joint African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur-United Nations
country team fundraising strategy for sustaining peace in Darfur
49. The mission and the United Nations country team are in the process of finalizing
a joint financing approach for sustaining peace in Darfur. The approach is focusing
on the political engagement of the United Nations system, including aid agencies —
multilateral, regional and bilateral — and Member States in order to support a
successful transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and reduce the likelihood
of relapse into conflict. Discussions are based on lessons learned from past
experiences and are considering both the issue of programmatic funding in
peacekeeping budgets as a transitional measure during the drawdown, as well as
voluntary contributions.

12/14

18-02546

S/2018/154

VIII. Observations
50. I am encouraged by the positive developments in the security environment and
the impact of the weapons collection campaign in creating security for all Darfuris
and an enabling environment for addressing the concerns of internally displaced
persons and finding durable solutions for them. I call upon the Government, similarly,
to ensure that the campaign is inclusive and conducted with full respect for the human
and legal rights of all citizens.
51. It is regrettable, however, that no tangible progress has been made in finding a
comprehensive political solution to the conflict in Darfur. The Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur constitutes a viable framework for the peace process in Darfur and I
call upon the rebel groups to demonstrate leadership and courage by engaging
positively in its implementation for the benefit of the Darfuris. In this regard, I
commend the continued efforts made by the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel, supported by the African Union-United Nations Joint Special
Representative, to bring the parties to the negotiation table.
52. While I applaud the improvements in the security situation, I am concerned that
the root causes of the conflict and their attendant consequences remain largely
unaddressed. The civilian population, including internally displaced persons in
Darfur, are yet to benefit from the political realities and the legislative space of the
Doha Document and its provisions on the management of la nd and other resources.
Their engagement in implementing these provisions is key to a lasting peace in
Darfur.
53. I commend UNAMID for the timely conclusion of phase one of its
reconfiguration. The mission has begun the implementation of phase two, and I thank
the Government of the Sudan for its cooperation and support in this complex process,
and remain confident of its continued support in the implementation of the mission ’s
mandate.
54. In conclusion, I would like to thank the Joint Special Representat ive, Jeremiah
Nyamane Kingsley Mamabolo, and all the personnel of UNAMID, the United Nations
country team and the humanitarian community, who continue to work tirelessly to
improve the lives of the people of Darfur. I commend my Special Envoy for the Sudan
and South Sudan, Nicholas Haysom, and the former President of South Africa, Thabo
Mvuyelwa Mbeki, as well as the former President of Nigeria, Abdulsalami Abubakar
of the African Union High-level Implementation Panel, for their steadfast
commitment to sustainable peace and stability in the Sudan.

18-02546

13/14

S/2018/154

14/14

18-02546
