TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR

th
MEETING: 29 MAY 1968
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1428) . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . ,

Page

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia: letters dated 2 and 30
August 1963 addressed to the President of the Security Council on behalf of the
representatives of thirty-two Member States (S/5382 and S/5409):
Letter dated 12 March 1968 addressed to the President of the Security Council
by the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo (Democratic Republic
of), Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda,
United Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Zambia
(S/8454)
..,,..,,.............,,..........,.,.........

1

S/PV. 1428

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Securily Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appearsor in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUN RED AND TWENTY-EIGHTH MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 29 May 1968, at 4 p.m.
President: Lord CARADON
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

have a later opportunity to speak on the substance of this
important matter. At this stage I wish to confine myself
solely to a question of procedure.

Later: Mr. Arthur J. Goldberg (United States of America).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1428)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

/ 2. I have considered the possible application of rule 20 of
the provisional rules of procedure of-the Security Council.
This rule provides that:
“Whenever the President of the Security Council deems
that for the prqper fulfilment of the responsibilities of
the Presidency he should not pre;de over the Council
during the consideration of a particular question with
which the Member he representsis directly connected, he
shall indicate his decision to the Council.”

2. Question concerning the situation in Southern / 3. The Council will note that this provision places the
Rhodesia: letters dated 2 and 30 August 1963 admatter entirely within the discretion of the President. After
dressed to the President of the Security Council on
fully considering the exceptional circumstances of this case,
behalf of the representatives of thirty-two Member
I have come to the conclusion that I should act within the
States (S/5382 and S/5409):
discretion which the rule provides, and accordingly I report
Letter dated 12 March 1968 addressed to the Presimy decision to the Council not to preside over the Council
dent of the Security Council by the representatives of
while the present discussion of the question of Southern
Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African
Rhodesia is undertaken.
Republic, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo (Democratic Republic of), Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana,
4. Consequently, in accordance with rule 20, I invite the
Guinea, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
representative of the United States to take the presidential
Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria,
Chair for the purpose of the consideration of the question
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Togo,
on our agenda for today.
Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Zambia (S/8454).
Mr. Goldberg (United States of America) took the Chair.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
letters dated 2 and 30 August 1983 addressed to the
President of the Security Council on behalf of the
representatives of thirty-two Member States (S/5382 and
S/5409):
Letter dated 12 March 1968 addressed to the President of
the Security Council by the representatives of Algeria,
Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African RepubRc, Chad, Congo (Bratzaville), Congo (Democratic
Republic of), Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana,
Guinea, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Togo,
Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Zambia (S/8454)

5. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with decisions taken
by the Council during its previous consideration of the item
on the agenda, I propose now, with the consent of the
Council, to invite the representatives of Jamaica and
Zambia to take places at the Council table in order to
participate, without the right to vote, in the discussion.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. H. N. Bonnick
(Jamaica) and Mr. V. J. Mwaanga (Zambia) took places at
the Council table.

6. The PRESIDENT: Before the Council proceeds to
consider the item on its agenda, I should like to make a
brief comment about the circumstances which place me, as
the representative of the United States, temporarily in the
President’s Chair.

7. As my friend, the representative of the United King
dom, has just reminded us, under rule 20 of the Security
Council’s provisional rules of procedure the President of the
1. The PRESIDENT: The Council is about to embark on a
Security Council has in his sole discretion the matter
_ of
discussion of the question of Southern Rhodesia. I shall / when to apply that rule by yielding his place as President.

[232 (1966)j on the question of Southern Rhodesia, events
have finally dispelled any illusions, if anyone ever had any,
that the Security Council’s decision on so-called partial
economic sanctions would suffice to weaken and overthrow
the illegal racist regime in Southern Rhodesia. Events have
justified the views of those States, including the Soviet
Union, which, from the time that these sanctions were
introduced, have maintained for all to hear that it was
impossible to take seriously the assurancesof the United
Kingdom Government-which bears the fundamental re.
sponsibility for the situation in Southern Rhodesia-to the
effect that such half measures would make possible a
radical change of the situation in that country.

In deciding to exercise that discretion Lord Caradon has
again displayed the devotion to impartial procedure for
which he is well known. I myself have no doubt whatsoever
that this same quality would have enabled him, had he SO
decided, to continue to preside impartially during the
discussion of the present item, But I have respected his
decision and am glad to accept this temporary responsibility. At the conclusion of the consideration of the
question before us, the Chair and the responsibility which I
am temporarily filling will revert to Lord Caradon as this
month’s President of the Security Council.
8. I need not remind the members of the Council that the
Security Council last discussed the question of Southern
Rhodesia at its 1415th meeting on 23 April. At that time it
was agreed that this Council should adjourn for further
consultations and meet again on the matter .as soon as
possible. It may be recalled that when the Council last
considered this question it had two draft resolutions before
it. The first was subnntted on 16 April 1968 by Algeria,
n and Senegal and is contained in
e second was submitted on 22 April
gdom and is contained in document
third draft resolution has been submitted and
today and is before the Council in document
his text has been arrived at after extensive

12. The pattern of events since those decisions were taken
by the Security Council has shown that the chief reason for
their ineffectiveness is the active support accorded to the
racist white minority regime in Southern Rhodesia by the
most powerful capitalist monopolies of such countries as
the United Kingdom, the United States of America, the
Federal Republic of Germany and Japan. In those countries
big business is openly flouting Security Council decisions
by maintaining extensive economic and commercial ties
with Southern Rhodesian racists, strengthening these ties
both directly through the racist regime of the South
African Republic and Portuguese colonialists.
13. It is common knowledge that, by a previous decision
of the Security Council, a ban was placed on the supply of
oil to Southern Rhodesia, but that the Smith r&me is
receiving this most important strategic material in more
than sufficient quantities. From whom? From United
States, United Kingdom and other Western oil monopolies
who use Mozambique and the Republic of South Africa as
intermediaries. We learn from the press that oil is being
supplied at such a rate that the Salisbury regime has been
able to amass reservesof petroleum products for more than
fourteen months ahead, thus ensuring more than a year’s
SUPPlY*

9. The Council will now resume its consideration of the
question on our agenda. The first speaker on my list:is the
representative of the Soviet Union, Ambassador Mahk, on
whom I now call.
10. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian): More than two months have

now passed since the Security Council, at the request of a
large group .of African States, renewed discussion on the
question of Southern Rhodesia. This matter was brought
before the Council because the attitude of Southern
Rhodesia gives causefor alarm to the peoples of Africa, and
all peace-loving nations. Information reaching us showsthat
Southern Rhodesian racists are attempting, by means of
terror and repression, to maintain in that territory a system
of racial oppression and exploitation of the country’s
indigenous population and to strengthen the white population’s political and economic domination over the African
people of Zimbabwe. The racists, having committed brutal
acts against so many African patriots, are still detaining in
prisons and concentration camps thousands of fighters for
freedom and independence, many of whom are under the
imminent threat of death. They have brought their entire
military and police system to bear against the African
patriots and are using the most up-to-date types of
weapons, including aircraft. To repressthe growing national
liberation movement of the Zimbabwe people, the Smith
regime is being helped with military aid by the South
African racists and the Portuguese colonialists, These
partners in the unholy alliance, as the Africans rightly call
it, are also carrying out hostile acts against neighbouring
independent African States, particularly against the Republic of Zambia. A threat to peace is thereby created in
Africa, thereby affecting the whole world.

14. The Security Council’s decision banned the export of
tobacco, the country’s staple agricultural export, from
Southern Rhodesia. Nevertheless, the annual Southern
Rhodesian tobacco sales have once again opened in Salisbury this Year as if nothing had happened. This is also
widely reported in the Western press.
1.5. The same is true for export products of the SOUthem
Rliodesian mining industry, which were also supposed to
come under economic sanctions.
16. Now we see the result: not only does the racist rigima
of Southern Rhodesia have no serious economic problerm
but it is actually in a position to develop its economy
intensively and to amass reservesof imported goods.
17. An important role in the support of the racist regime ‘
of Salisbury is played by British and United States capitalist
monopolies, which have invested thousands of millions of
dollars in Southern Rhodesian and South African economies. The activities of these monopolies are directly aimed .
at preventing the fulfilment of United Nations resolutions
on Southern Rhodesia and making them worthless. The
American magazine U.S. News and World Report, which
can hardly be suspected of sympathy for the African

11. In the year and a half that has elapsed since the
Security Council adopted the previous resolution
2

peoples’ national liberation struggle, recently reported that
the joint efforts of United States and South African
companies were not only aimed at’strengthening the South
African economy, but were enabling South Africa, and
consequently Southern Rhodesia, to withstand “any sanctions stemming from the United Nations”.

the matter now before it. Such a decision is expected by
the people of Zimbabwe, all the African nations and the
peoples of the whole world.
21. The Security Council has before it a draft resolution
[S/8601] prepared in the course of prolonged consultations. The Soviet delegation would like to expressits views
on this draft. These views stem from the appraisal I have
just made of the situation which has arisen in regard to the
Southern Rhodesia question. These views are dictated by
the Soviet Union’s policy and unswerving principles and
position, namely, that we render all possible aid and
support to peoples struggling for their national liberation
against colonialism and neo-colonialism.

18. What must one conclude? That the representatives of
those States to whom the monopolies belong and who
continue to be allies of the racist, regime in Southem
Rhodesia cannot pretend that it is impossible to control the
activities of private capital. Nor can they absolve their
Governments from responsibility for not carrying out
Security Council decisions for economic sanctions, The
responsibility for all this rests first and foremost with the
Governments of the United Kingdom, the United States of
America and Japan, as well as the Federal Republic of
Germany and several other States Members of the United
Nations, which have not carried out the Security Council’s
decisions nor heeded its appeal to States to do everything in
their power to sever economic relations with the racist
regime of Southern Rhodesia. This matter cannot be passed
over in silence during the consideration of the current item
on the Security Council’s agenda.

22. It should be noted that this draft resolution constitutes a certain step forward by comparison with the
previous Security Council decision. It contains a number of
provisions which meet the needs of the situation and
provides for measures which, if effectively implemented,
would make a specific contribution towards attainment of
the United Nations aims in Southern Rhodesia.
23. For example, the draft resolution reaffirms, with every
justification, that the primary responsibility for settling the
situation created in Southern Rhodesia and giving the
Zimbabwe people the possibility of achieving self-determination and independence rests with the United Kingdom
Government. This is an extremely serious responsibility
which the United Nations charges the United Kingdom
Government to fulfil, emphasising once again that the
United Kingdom, as the administering Power, has at its
disposal all the necessarymeans to prevent the Southern
Rhodesian racists from seizing power, but has neither done
so nor halted the further illegal acts of the Smith regime in
turning Southern Rhodesia into a racist State.

19. Nor can the Security Council fail to take note, during
discussion of this question, of the special responsibility
borne by the United Kingdom Government. The latter, as
the administering Power, is still obliged to take all possible
measures, including the use of force, in order to overthrow
the illegal racist r&ime in Southern Rhodesia. The United
Kingdom representative himself agrees that that regime is
illegal; so much is implicit in the fact that he assisted in
drafting the resolution on Southern Rhodesia submitted to
the Security Council. However, it is not enough to
acknowledge that the racist regime of Southern Rhodesia is
illegal; it is necessary to take effective measures against it.
The United Kingdom Government has every possibility of
so doing. It has nevertheless rejected and continues to’reject
in General Assembly resolutions the appeal made to it by
an overwhelming majority of United Nations Member
States to use force against the illegal regime of the Southern
Rhodesian racists. Instead, the United Kingdom Government periodically establishes contacts with the Smith
regime with the evident intention of sounding the possibility of concluding some kind of further neocolonialist
arrangement. There is no need to prove that such a policy
merely encourages the criminal racist clique in Salisbury to
continue ignoring the decisions and demands of the
Security Council and keeps the people of Zimbabwe under
a reign of terror and oppression.

24. In accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the
United Kingdom is obliged to create the necessary conditions for the attainment of self-determination and independence by the people of Zimbabwe and to establish them in
power in Southern Rhodesia, and no longer under the
domination of white racists, No one has removed or can
remove .that primary responsibility from the shoulders of
the United Kingdom Government.
25. A further important feature of this draft resolution is
that it includes a provision to the effect that all States are
obliged to take measures for the immediate cessation of
commercial, economic and other relations with the racist
regime of Southern Rhodesia. By comparison with the
previous Security Council resolution of 16 December 1966
[232 (1966)], the economic sanctions and other forms of
boycott provided for in the present draft resolution are of a
broader nature, and this is a positive feature.

20. All these facts lead inescapably to one definite
conclusion: namely, that in order to eliminate the threat to
peace created in Africa as a result of the military and police
.tctions of the illegal white minority racist regime against
the people of Zimbabwe and of neighbouring African
States, and to bring to this region implementation in that
part of the world of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples? and to
prevent the conclusion ‘of a neocolonialist accord at the
expense of the Zimbabwe people, the Security Council
must decide to take more effective measures with regard to

26. It should be noted, however, that these measures are
still not fully comprehensive and, because of this, attempts
may be made to sidestep the relevant provisions in order to
reduce the effectivenessof the measures. In this connexion
we cannot but note that the draft resolution does not
envisage the complete. severanceof all relations with the
Southern Rhodesian racists at State level, nor does it call
for postal, telegraphic, telephonic, and other comtnunica-

1 SeeGeneralAssemblyresolution 1514 (XV).
3

tions to be severed. As far as regards the banning of
emigration to Southern Rhodesia it allows a number of
unjustifiable exceptions to the breaking of trade relations
with that country.
27.. Nor, of course, can the failure of the draft resolution
to name any of the major accomplices of the Salisbury
regime be counted to its credit although it does express
censure of them in general terms. Yet their identities are
well known asthey have been mentioned on more than one
occasion in the Security Council. If these states werenamed
in the resolution itself, it would unquestionably be more
difficult for them to maintain their policy of collaboration
and complicity with the Southern Rhodesian racists.
28. The draft resolution also draws attention to the fact
that non-compliance by any State Member of the United
Nations with the Security Council decision on the adoption
of economic sanctions against the racist regime would be a
violation of Article 25 of the Charter. This is a pertinent
point, and in that connexion my delegation would like to
reiterate that the Soviet Union has never had any economic
or other ties with the racist regime in Southern Rhodesia.

33. In this connexion, however, we think it necessaryfor
us to comment on one particular paragraph of the draft,
paragraph 15, which requests States Members of the United
Nations and international organizations to extend assistance
to Zambia with a view to helping it solve such special
economic problems as it may be confronted with arising
from the carrying out of this resolution. This formulation
seems to me a somewhat over-simplified and inaccurate
generalization of the essence of the Southern Rhodesian
question as a whole. Naturally, the Soviet Union appre.
ciates the situation in which Zambia may find itself, as a
neighbour State of Southern Rhodesia’s and the problems
which may arise in Zambia as a result of the implementa.
tion of the Security Council’s decisions in regard to
economic sanctions against the Southern Rhodesian regime.
34. Zambia may indeed require certain economic assistance and support. However, the obligation to compensate
that country for any losses it may suffer must be imputed,
not to all States indiscriminately, but specifically to those
States which bear the political, and, I would say, economic
responsibility for the seizure of power and the retention of
power for so long by the racist minority regime in Southern
Rhodesia, a regime which is creating problems fraught with.
serious consequences for the whole of that part of Africa,
Which are these States? From the course of the discussion
of this matter in the Security Council it is quite obvious
that the political responsibility for the continuance in
power of the Southern Rhodesian racist regime lies with
those States which are aiding and abetting that r@me, and
with those which continue to maintain trade, economic and
other relations with it, that is to say, first and foremost
with such States as the United Kingdom, the Republic of
South Africa, Portugal, and also with the United States of
America and the Federal Republic of Germany. This
contention is supported by the facts. Consequently, the
Security Council should oblige these States to make good
any loss which Zambia may suffer as a result of the
implementation of the Security Council’s decision, if it is
adopted today, to apply economic sanctions against Southem Rhodesia. On the basis of the foregoing considerations,
the Soviet delegation, on the instructions of the Soviet
Government, submits the following amendment to the draft
resolution now before the Security Council for consideration. This would replace paragraph 15 of the draft
resolution with the following text:

29. One positive feature of the draft resolution, in our
view, is that it also recognizesthe legitimacy of the struggle
being waged by the Zimbabwe people for their rights and
urges all States to render moral and material support to
their national liberation movement. This is a particularly
important point because of the conditions of terror and
military repression under which the Zimbabwe patriots are
waging their noble and heroic fight for the liberation of
their people. This point is consistent with numerous
previous resolutions of the General Assembly on the
abolition of colonialism. The Soviet Union, as is well
known, has invariably given and continues to give moral
and material aid and support to peoples struggling for their
freedom and national independence.
30. The draft resolution also calls upon the United
Kingdom, as the administering Power, to take into account
the views of the Southern Rhodesian people and its
political parties. This also is an important and positive
feature of the resolution. Unfortunately, however, it does
not contain any provision for a ban on negotiations with
the Smith racist regime and this is a serious deficiency.
31. If now, in the light of the foregoing remarks, we try to
appraise the draft resolution as a whole it seemsjust to us
to say that its content represents the strict minimum of
those measures which the Security Council must necessarily
take in order to put an end to the situation in Southern
Rhodesia, which threatens peace and security, It does not,
however, say everything, nor does it expresseverything with
sufficient clarity and consistency. There is therefore no
guarantee or assurancethat a decision taken by the Security
Council on the basis of this draft will suffice to solve the
question of Southern Rhodesia in a manner consonant with
the interests of the Zimbabwe people and the other peoples
of Africa, or in the interests of world peace.

‘Decides that the material losses that may be inflicted
on Zambia in connexion with the implementation of this
decision of the Security Council shall be compensated by
those States which, having failed to take the necessary
measures to put an end to the illegal racist r&me in
Southern Rhodesia and, in particular, the measures
provided for in the above-mentioned resolutions of the
Security Council and of the General Assembly, bear
political responsibility for the continued existence of this
regime in Southern Rhodesia.” [S/8603.]

35. The Soviet delegation appeals to the members of the
Security Council to consider carefully then and adopt this
amendment.

32. In view of the position of the African and Asian
countries which consider it possible, in the present circumstances, for the Security Council to adopt this draft
resolution despite all its shortcomings, the Soviet delegation
has no intention of objecting to its adoption.

36. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the Soviet
Union, Ambassador Malik, has submitted an amendment to
the draft resolution in document S/8601. As I understand it
4

from the Secretariat, the text of this amendment has been
circulated and is now before the members of the Council.
After I say a few words about the situation in regard to
voting, I shall put this amendment to the vote first, as
required under rule 33 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Against: None.
Abstaining: Hungary, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Paragraph 15 of the draft resolution was adopted by 13
votes to none, with 2 abstentions.

37. I have no further speakers on my list who have
indicated a desire to speak before the vote. I should,
however, point out that several members of the Council
have indicated their desire to speak after the vote. I
therefore take it that the Council is now ready to proceed
to the vote. As a result of prior consultation, I understand
that the sponsors of the draft resolutions previously before
the Council, namely those contained in documents S/8545
and S/8554, do not intend to press for a vote on their
proposals at this stage.

42. The PRESIDENT: I shall now put to the vote the
draft resolution [S/8601] asa whole.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay,
Senegal, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America.

38. .If there is no objection, I propose to put to the vote
the draft resolution contained in document S/8601 and the
amendment submitted by the Soviet Union and contained
in document S/8603. As I have indicated, under the rules it
will be necessary to vote first on the amendment submitted
by the Soviet Union. If there is no objection, I shall
therefore first put that amendment to the vote and shall
then put the draft resolution to the vote. Since there is no
objection, we shall proceed as I have outlined.

The draft resolution was adopted unanimous1y.z

43. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call on those representatives who have indicated a desire to speak following the
vote.
44. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): When I first
spoke in this debate I asked that we should undertake a full
and careful review of past action and future opportunities. I
did not deny the practical difficulties or the real limitations. I restated them. But I greatly hoped that there would
be a readiness to consult confidently together on the basis
of the hard facts and the practical possibilities.

39. I now put to the vote the amendment submitted by
the Soviet Union.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

45. When I spoke again last month I wasable to report to
the full Council that the recommendation I had made for
consultation had been readily taken up and thoroughly
followed up.

In favour: Algeria, Ethiopia, Hungary, India, Pakistan,
Senegal, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Against: None.

46. I acknowledged with respectful gratitude the
thoroughness and thoughtfulness which members had
brought to this consultation. No one could have asked for
or found more constructive or more candid co-operation.
Since then consultations have proceeded with the same
frankness, the same courtesy and the same determination to
reach agreement. I speak with great respect when I say that
it has been a most productive exercise in practical cooperation, and I pay my warm and grateful tribute to all
those who joined in this sustained and successfulendeavour
and joined in the understanding we reached together.

Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, France,
Paraguay, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:

The result of the vote was 7 in favour, none against, with
8 abstentions.
The amendment was not adopted, having failed to obtain
the affirmative vote of nine members.

40.

Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
I request a separate vote on
paragraph 15 of the draft resolution now being put to the
vote.
(translated

from

47. The result of our efforts is set out in the resolution for
which we have just voted, a result achieved in spite of the
last-minute intervention of the Soviet Union, an intervention, and I speak with great restraint, which I can only
describe as misinformed, misleading and mischievous, not
to say malicious. By voting for the resolution not one of us
has departed from the convictions which he holds, nor have
we varied or detracted from the policies our different
Governments pursue. No one has been expected or asked to
abandon w&known national positions. Each one of us, no
doubt, has reservations on some of the provisions included
in the resolution. But what ,we have sought to do and what
we have succeeded in doing is to find common ground.
That is our a&ievement.
’

Russian):

41. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the Soviet
Union has requested that a separate vote be taken on
paragraph 15 of the draft resolution. Since there is no
objection, the Council will now take a separate vote on
paragraph 15,
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America.

2 See resolution 2.53 (1968).

5

48. We, on our side, have from the beginning clearly
restated the basic position of the United Kingdom on the
use of force and on our aim to secure a just settlement by
peaceful means. Wehave moreover restated the reasonswhy
we cannot contemplate an economic confrontation with
South Africa. It is best that these things should be openly
stated and honestly faced.

sound principle. We have to convince those in the illegal
regime that the course on which they embarked on Ii
November 1965 is hopeless. We have to convince themthat
their rebellion can lead nowhere but to economic stagnation and political isolation. We have to convince them and
every one else that the only way out of the deadend is a
return to the high road of legality and democratic advance,

49. What then is our purpose? We advocated in respect of
Rhodesia the imposition of comprehensive mandatory
economic sanctions. Previously we had faithfully taken
action in accordancewith the past decisions of the Council.
We had done so at economic sacrifice. No country has done
more than mine to put the past decisions of the Council
into practical effect. We have in fact gone well beyond the
requirements of the Council’s past resolutions.

57. Some people have advocated an attempt to impose a
military solution. They say that force should have been
used and that the dangers of starting a conflict in southem
Africa can be brushed aside. They have said that the
endeavours to use peaceful means were misconceived from
the start, and that, even if that wasnot so, the methods we
have employed under the authority of this Council have no
further part to play; that failing force we cannot succeed,
They are impatient with practical progress, with new
measures, new pressures,stopping of loopholes, prevention
of evasions, reinforcement of our resolutions, and all the
hard work which sanctions require.

50. Now, we have ourselves put forward new proposals.
They were set out in the draft resolution I presentedto the
Council on 22 April [S/85.54/. They are incorporated in
the resolution which we have now adopted.
We shall faithfully and fully carry out the mandatory
requirements of that resolution, and we call on every one
else to do the same.

58. I am convinced that such talk is unjustified. It is
worse: it is defeatist. It is what the illegal regime wishesto
hear. I am sure that we should not be so easily discouraged,
so lacking in determination, so prone to surrender. This is
not the time to give up: it is the time to presson.

51. Where the resolution includes non-mandatory requests-for instance in operative paragraphs 9 and lo-we
shall carefully consider what action we can take on the
basis of the two tests; the test of effectivenessand the test
of the effect on the illegal regime of which I spoke last
month. We have to bear in mind the special responsibility
of the United Kingdom as Administering Authority. That
responsibility has been recognized and emphasized in the
resolution itself. It has been accepted in our consultations
that we will retain ,our own Mission and communications
with Rhodesia.

59. On the other hand, there are those who say that we
should abandon our principles-principles which we believe
are fundamental~principles of democratic government and
majority rule and self-determination and racial equality. To
those who ask us to abandon those principles the answer
is no.
60. It is in accordance with those principles that a quarter
of the population of the world, previously under British
administration, has advanced to independence. We have no
intention of abandoning those principles now. Nor have we
any intention of betraying the principle of the Charter
which states that the interests of the inhabitants shall be
paramount.

52. With regard to paragraph 17 of the resolution, I wish
to confirm that the principle that any settlement must be
acceptable to the people of Rhodesia as a whole has
throughout been declared and maintained by my Government.
53. For weeks past we have been dealing with close and
anxious consultations, often on questions of wording and
detail. Each paragraph and each sentence of the resolution
has been under minute scrutiny and thorough discussion.
That task is now completed.

61. We all have worked well together. We have done so in
the best traditions of the Council. We are glad that in
consequence we can advance together on common ground,
None of us would seek to make any exaggerated claim
about the outcome of our efforts, but let no one underrate
the result.

54. Now for a few minutes I should like to stand back to
look at what we have achieved as a whole, and to reflect on
the political importance of what we have done together
today.

62. Today the Council has declared that there are principles which we will not abandon, that there are purposes
which we are determined to pursue, that there are pledges
which we will not break. that there are obligations which
we will not betray. Those are not light decisions. It is we11
that we take them together.

55. I do not doubt that we have taken a decision of
far-reaching consequence. Some may say that what we have
done is limited and restricted. They may say that what we
have done is mainly to confirm past purposesand reinforce
past decisions and policies. That is true. Nor can we expect
that what we have done will produce immediate results. As
I have often said, this is a job not for the cavalry but for the
sappers. We can hope for no speedy and spectacular
victories.

63. Perhaps I may be allowed to finish what I have to say
today by a well-known quotation. These are the words of a
famous Englishman, Sir Francis Drake, when he said of any
great endeavour: “Grant us to know that it is not the
beginning but the continuing of the same unto the end until
it is thoroughly finished which yieldeth the true glory.”

56. What we have to do is to show a steady determination
to succeed in the end. We have to show perseveranceon

64. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): The views of the Pakistan
delegation on the question of ending the threat to
6

international peace and security resulting from the failure
to bring to an end the rebellion in Southern Rhodesia were
set forth in my statement at the 1408th meeting of the
Security Council, on 26 March,

advance in enlarging the scope of mandatory sanctions
against the usurper r&me and in tightening the measures of
implementation.
73. In the view of my delegation, its provisions go a long
way towards the goal of comprehensive mandatory sanctions against the illegal r@me.

65. We called for the adoption of drastic measures by the
Security Council against the illegal racist r&me, and the
implementation of those measures under the direct and
concurrent supervision of the Council in order to reinforce
the supervision of the administering Power to prevent the
history of voluntary and selective mandatory sanctions
adopted in resolutions 217 (1965) and 232 (1966) from
repeating itself.

74.. Paragraphs 8, 9 and 10 of the resolution relate to
emigration to Southern Rhodesia, further measures under
Article 4 1 of the Charter and the withdrawal of all consular
and trade representation in the Territory. My delegation
would have preferred more categorical or mandatory
provisions.

66. In particular, we expressed our firm conviction that
the United Kingdom should no longer rule out recourse, if
necessary,to the use of force to end the rebellion.

75. Also, we regret the failure to mention South Africa
and Portugal by name in paragraph 12, which censures
States that have persisted in trading with the illegal rigime
in defiance of the resolutions of the Security Council and
have given assistanceto it. On the other hand, we consider
important the inclusion of paragraph 11 which invokes
Article 25 of the Charter, and paragraph 16, which
particularly calls for ‘thg effective assist%nCeof the permanent members of the Security Council in the implementation of the resolution. Paragraph 13, urging all Member
States to render moral and material assistance to the people
of Southern Rhodesia is, in our view, a recognition of their
legitimate right to struggle for their freedom and independence.

67. On 16 April last, Pakistan joined with the delegations
of Algeria, Ethiopia, India and Senegal in submitting the
draft resolution contained in document S/8545. That draft
resolution envisaged total and mandatory economic sanctions, under Chapter VII of the Charter against the usurper
authority, as well as urgent, necessary measures by the
United Kingdom as the administering Power, including the
use of force, to end the rebellion in Southern Rhodesia and
to enable the people of Zimbabwe to exercise their right to
self-determination and independence in accordance with
resolution 1514 (XV) of the General Assembly.
68. My delegation profoundly regrets that the administering Power did not find the African-Asian draft resolution
acceptable as a basis for negotiations with a view to its
unanimous adoption.

76. The provision in paragraph 15 for assistance to Zambia
is particularly welcome to us in view of the serious impact
which comprehensive mandatory sanctions are bound to
have on the struggling economy of Zambia, and to which
Foreign Minister Kamanga so forcefully drew our attention
in his statement to the Security Council at its 1408th
meeting on 26 March.

69. The African and Asian members of the Council were
faced with a choice of proceeding to formulate a revised
text with the co-operation and assistance of their Latin
American colleagues which, though commanding a majority
of votes, would not be implemented by the administering
Power, or to work out a compromise text acceptable to the
United Kingdom which could be adopted unanimously.

77. We consider the provisions of paragraph 17 to be
specially significant. We earnestly hope that the administering Power will refrain from granting independence to
Southern Rhodesia until majority rule is established in the
Territory.

70. We had, perforce, to opt for the latter. We were also
impelled to do so by the spirit of solidarity which animates
consultations among the Asian, African and Latin American
members of the Council. All of us shared the firm
conviction that the administering Power must continue to
bear the primary responsibility for taking the measures
decided upon by the Council, to end the white rebellion in
Southern Rhodesia and to enable its people to achieve
independence. It is for this overriding reason that Pakistan
has supported the compromise draft resolution in document S/8601,

78. In my statement at the 1408th meeting of the
Security Council I invited the attention of the Council to
the imperative need to reinforce the Secretary-General’s
supervision of implementation of comprehensive mandatory sanctions with supervision by the Council itself.
Therefore, my delegation, welcomes paragraphs 20 to 22
which provide for the establishment of the Security
Council’s own machinery without derogating in the least
degree from the responsibility of the administering Power
and the supervision of the Secretary-General.

71. This resolution, to our regret and disappointment, falls
short ‘bf what, in our honest belief and judgement, is
required to end immediately the agony of the Zimbabwe
people-namely the suppression of the white rebellion by
force. The United Kingdom Government has not only the
right but the duty to use force against the illegal r&me and
its supporters and indeed to bring them to trial and
punishment.

79. The illegal regime has pitted itself against the entire
world. Today, we have given our answer to that challenge.
That is not all. The resolution that we have adopted is not
the end of the road that we are prepared to travel. We are
determined that further measures must and will follow,
until the rebellion in Southern Rhodesia is ended and the
people of Zimbabwe attain their legitimate aspirations.

72. Nevertheless, the resolution, as compared to the
provisions of resolution 232 (1966), reflects a considerable

80. Finally, I should like to pay a sincere tribute to Lord
Caradon and his delegation for the great efforts and the
7

‘I

-r
perpetuation of the unlawful and unjust regime in which a
minority has established its rule over 4 million Africans.
Like them, we are anxious that a state of affairs of which
the international community disapproves, and the continuation of which warrants the most serious concern, should be
brought to an end as soon aspossible.

contribution made by them to bring our prolonged consultations to a fruitful end. If today we have been able to act
with unanimity, it is in no small measure due to their
readiness to move forward from their initial position, even
though they have not been able fully to accommodate
certain basic views that the African, Asian and Latin
American members of the Security Council urged on them.
The felicitous gesture of Lord Caradon in yielding the
Presidency to you, Mr. President, on this occasion reestablishes a tradition of the Security Council and reflects
the high-mindedness for which he is so well known.

89. It is clear, however, that such a draft resolution could
not be effective unless the administering Power wasable to
support it. Consequently, only a text which could meet
both the concern of the free African countries and the real
possibilities of action on the part of both the United
Kingdom and of the United Nations would seem to be
capable of promoting a settlement of the Rhodesian crisis.

81. Mr. President, it is indeed a happy coincidence that
you, who will shortly be bidding us farewell, should be
called upon to preside over this meeting of the Security
Council at which we have once again been able to act
unanimously. Unanimity is what you have always counselled. Unanimity is what you have always tried your best
to promote.

90. In fact, it is the United Kingdom, as administering
Power, which bears the chief responsibility for settling the
conflict which sets it at odds with a part of the population
of a territory over which it still exercises sovereignty.
91. Confident that the United Kingdom Government
would face the situation with determination, I stated on 20
March that, if it considered it necessary, the United
Kingdom Government could count upon the aid of friendly
countries which, like my own, had scrupulously applied the
sanctions for which the United Kingdom had asked, at the
cost of real sacrifices and despite some scepticism about
their effectiveness.

82. Nothing could, therefore, be more appropriate than
that the note of unanimity should be the finale to our
debate under your distinguished presidency on the situation
in Rhodesia, in tribute to your tireless efforts in this world
forum to harmonize the actions of nations.
83. You have sought to temper the power and influence of
the great country that you represent by bringing to bear on
situations which threaten world peace and security the
restraints enjoined upon Member States by the high
principles of our Charter and the salutary proceduresof our
Organization.

92. In associating itself with the vast co-operative effort
which London considered essential, France did, however,
bear in mind that the aim was to solve a problem which
came within the competence of the United Kingdom and
that at the same time it was important that this course of
action did not result in granting an illegal rt5gime the
international recognition to which it aspires.

84. There have been situations confronting the world and
the Security Council when war and peacehave trembled in
the balance. Your insight, wisdom and experience of human
affairs have been brought to bear against recourseto force
in International relations and on the side of peaceful
settlement. Your role has frequently been decisive in the
deliberations of the Security Council and the General
Assembly.

93. This concern was clearly voiced by the French
delegation when the selective sanctions were adopted and
was the basis for its abstention in previous votes. It is still
our concern now that, embarking on a new stage, the
United Kingdom is considering the application of a total
embargo on Southern Rhodesia.

85. The Pakistan delegation sincerely wishes you many
years of dedicated service to the causeof peaceand service
to your fellow men to which you have, for so long, given so
much of your devotion and strength.

94. The French delegation feels, however, that it must
take seriously into account the great depth of emotion
which the continuation of the Rhodesian crisishas aroused
throughout the world, and particularly in Africa. Every
month and every year that passes increasesthe legitimate
impatience of the African countries, which are even more
sensitive than others to the racial discrimination upon
which the de facto Salisbury r6gime is based. Moreover, the
entire world is aroused by our failure to find a remedy for
this inadmissible situation. In short, the Rhodesian affair is
increasingly taking on the aspect of a general crisis which
affects the whole world.

86. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Pakistan, our friend and colleague Ambassador Shahi, for
his comments, and particularly for what he had to say
about me. It is a mark of the friendship which Ambassador
Shahi has displayed for me throughout our common service
together. I can only appropriately say at this time that I
reciprocate that friendship in full measure.
87. Mr. RERARD (France) (translated from French): The
French delegation has followed the debates in the Council
on the subject of Southern Rhodesia most attentively and
has carefully studied the draft resolutions which havebeen
submitted.

95. The desire to meet that situation with realism and
determination by decisions likely to obtain the unanimous
support of the Council has led the delegations most directly
concerned to join together in preparing the draft resolution
on which we have been asked to vote today.

88. We share to a considerable extent the feelings which
prompted the sponsors of the draft resolution submitted to
US, on behalf of five African and Asian delegations, by the
Ethiopian representative. Like them, we cannot agreeto the

96. It is true that the practice of allowing twenty-four
hours to elapse, in the case of important questions, between
8

-‘-

..,

the submission of a draft resolution and its adoption
has
not been adhered to. The vote which has just been taken
washeld in somewhat! hasty circumstances and this should
not constitute a precedent.

paragraph 2 of our own draft, which called upon all States
“to sever immediately all economic and other relations with
the illegal racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia”,
and further, in its paragraph 3, called upon all States “to
carry out this decision of the Security Council in accordance with their obligations under the Charter of the United
Nations”.

97. It is also true that the fact I have just mentioned does
not in any way alter the nature of the question submitted
to our Council or France’s position regarding the competence of the United Nations in respect of the internal affairs
of Member States. But in the face of so serious a situation,
my Government has decided to express its views as plainly
as possible. That is why, although we entirely abide by our
position from the legal point of view, the French delegation
voted in favour of the text submitted to us.

105. We continue to believe that the United Kingdom as
the administering Power should urgently take all necessary
measures, including the use of force, to bring to sn end the
rebellion in Southern Rhodesia and enable the people to
exercise their right to self-determination and independence
in accordance with General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV). We do not regard the resolution adopted today
as a substitute for all effective action that the United
Kingdom is required to take as the Power primarily
responsible for Southern Rhodesia. We regard the decision
of today as constituting measures intended to strengthen
and supplement the steps that the administering Power is
required to take by over-all action undertaken by the
United Nations on behalf of the international community
and in accordance with the Charter. We believe, furthermore, that the Council should condemn Governments like
those of South Africa and Portugal for their co-operation
with and assistance to the illegal racist minority regime in
defiance of the resolutions of the Security Council, and
that in the event that these Governments persist in defying
these Council decisions the Council should decide to take
resolute and effective action against the said Governments
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the United
Nations Charter.

98. Although the text is the result of lengthy and
painstaking negotiations, which were charactenzed by a
praiseworthy spirit of compromise, it is not without
defects. In particular, the provision in paragraph 5 (b),
which would require States Members of our Organization to
forbid their own nationals residing in Southem Rhodesia to
enter their country scarcely seems compatible with the
legislation of a number of countries, particularly that of
France.
99. Despite these reservat$ons, the French delegation
supported the draft resolution which the Council has
unanimously adopted. I hope that this unanimity, which
reflects the will of the United Nations, will help to induce
those in Salisbury who have set out on this blind path to
ponder the matter and finally to give way.
100. The PRESIDENT: I should like to say a few words
about the fact that we proceeded to the vote today.

106. Thus, we have lent our support to the resolution just
adopted without in any way departing from our basic
position as set, forth in the aforementioned draft proposals
which remain on the table of the Council and, likewise,
without prejudice to the introductory statement of policy
which I had the honour to make before the Council on 18
April I968 [1413th meeting].

101. The draft resolution contained in document S/8601,
which was circulated officially this afternoon for the first
time, was the result of broad, intensive and lengthy
consultations stretching over a period of weeks. It was
against that background of widespread consultations, combined with a sense of urgency to move forward as rapidly as
possible, that there developed a general desire among the
members of the Council to act upon this draft resolution at
the earliest possible moment.

107. Mr. BOYE (Senegal) (translated fvom French): My
delegation has already given its views on the question of
Southern Rhodesia and I shall therefore not repeat them
today. However, although we have just voted in favour of
the draft resolution, my delegation is not completely
satisfied, for we should have liked the sanctions to be more
complete. The illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia and
those who assist it, particularly the Government of South
Africa, persist in defying the international community, and
in particular Her Britanic Majesty’s Government, which in
our opinion did not from the outset take all the effective
steps which were called for.

102. I believe that the point made by the representative of
France about adequate time for the consideration of draft
resolutions after their submission is widely shared as being
the normal and proper practice of the Council. It is
apparent from the vote as well as from the remarks of the
representative of France that his delegation fully respected
the desire to proceed urgently in this special case, and I
appreciate his co-operation in that regard.
103. Lij Endalkachew MAKONNEN (Ethiopia): I wish to
ray, in explanation of the affirmative vote that my
delegation cast this afternoon, that our position with regard
to the grave situation in Southern Rhodesia remains the
same as that outlined in draft resolution S/8545 which I
had the honour to introduce in the name of my delegation
and on behalf of the delegations of Algeria, India, Pakistan
and Senegal.

108. Things being asthey are, however, between what one
wants, what is possible and what is impracticable, we were
obliged to choose the possible, especially since the question
will remain before the Security Council. When we meet
again to discuss this matter, we shall be able to judge how
the sanctions provided in the resolution have been applied.
At that time all the responsibilities will be determined and
we shall see the consequencesof the attitudes adopted by
the various States.

104. My delegation considers the resolution approved
today as an elaboration, albeit somewhat incomplete, of

109. Mr, PARTHASARATHI (India): I should like to take
this opportunity to refer to your forthcoming departure.
9

the present resolution may not have the desired effect. We
must proceed with cautious optimism but at the same time
we must plan for all contingencies. Now is the time for the
administering Power, in particular, to think constructively
about what the next. logical step might be if our present
efforts do no succeed. The indomitable will of the people
of Zimbabwe cannot be crushed and they will be free. It is
only a matter of time. But timely action by the international community could help to avoid an explosion that
may extend far beyond the frontiers of Zimbabwe.

You have been an outstanding personality in the United
Nations for nearly three years. Your valuable contribution
to our work is well known and will indeed become a part of
the history of this Council. My delegation has alwayshad a
high respect for your political vision and judgement. Your
practical approach to the problems that we have faced and
your patience in negotiations made it possible to carry on a
fruitful dialogue with you at all times. We shall miss you
around this chamber. We wish you every successin your
futuri endeavours, which we are sure will be as significant
and outstanding as they havebeen in the United Nations.

113. It is important also for the international cornrnunity
to appreciate and recognize the special position of Zambia.
This country has suffered immensely on account of the
selective economic sanctions applied earlier; it is likely to
suffer even more if the comprehensive sahctions envisaged
in the present resolution are applied. It is not enough,
however, for us merely to applaud the heroic sacrifices of
the people of Zambia. It is the responsibility of the
international community to render all possible assistanceto
Zambia at this juncture to enable it to overcome at least
part of the hardships to which it will doubtless be
subjected. It is with that in view that my delegation would
strongly urge help to Zambia in a collective way through
the United Nations and other international organizations.

The Security Council has just approved unanimously
a resolution on the situation in Southern Rhodesia. The
fact that it wasunanimously approved is significant in more
ways than one. First, it set the seal of approval of the
Council on comprehensive mandatory economic sanctions
to help the Government of the United Kingdom put an end
to the rebellion in Southern Rhodesia. Secondly, it puts on
record its displeasure with those States which have in the
past thwarted the attempts, limited though they were, to
topple the illegal Smith regime and to restore to the people
of Zimbabwe their fundamental rights. Thirdly, the resolution, by its very nature, is a compromise between the
positions of those who believed that no measure available
under the Charter should be excluded, and those who
believed in graduated doses of the medicine. The exact
position of my delegation on this question wasset out in
draft resolution S/8545 sponsored by the delegations of
Algeria, Ethiopia, Pakistan, Senegal and my own country,
and submitted to the Council on 16 April 1968. India
continues to believe that the most effective and certain
method of dealing with the rebellion would be resolute
action by the administering Power, including the use of
force. Even a clear unequivocal declaration by the administering Power that it does not rule out the use of force
would in itself be sufficient to bring the illegal regime to its
knees.
110.

114. The PRESIDENT: I wish to thank Ambassador
Parthasarathi for his warm and generous remarks directed
to me. They reflect his kindly and sympathetic nature, so
characteristic of his great country. I have enjoyed our close
co-operation as colleagues in very critical times and look
forward to a continuing and warm friendship, notwithstanding my departure from my present post.
115. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): In explanation of the
vote of the Canadian delegation, I need to add little to what
I have already said, on 20 March, on Canadian policy
regarding the Rhodesia question.

111. A compromise is, by its very nature, imperfect.
However, the resolution just adopted by the Council does
contain, for the first time, a scheme of comprehensive
mandatory sanctions against Southern Rhodesia and thus
constitutes a step forward in our common endeavour. My
delegation hopes that the efforts of the Security Council
will meet with universal support and co-operation, and
build up sufficient pressureagainst the illegal regime. It is
only with the co-operation of all States, whether Members
of the United Nations or not, that the measures decided
upon by the Security Council now can take the people of
Zimbabwe in the direction of freedom and independence.

116. The objective of the United Nations, which is also
the Canadian objective, has been put succinctly and well by
the Secretary-General in the meantime in a pressstatement
read on his behalf in London on 3 April at a dinner for the
United Nations Association, which I think should be part of
our record on this question. He said:

112. I should like to reiterate the hope of my delegation
that the comprehensive sanctions proposed in the draft
resolution will receive universal support. The actions of
certain Powers were earlier instrumental in the failure of
the selective sanctions approved by the Security Council. It
is most likely that these very Powers will continue to
counter the effects of the comprehensive mandatory
sanctions proposed by us. I hesitate to voice pessimism in
regard to the present resolution at its very outset. If
experience is any guide, however, and if we are to be
realistic and look at *things the way they are rather than the
way we would like them to be, we shall have to prepare
ourselves for the contingency that the measures outlined in

117. The Canadian authorities have repeatedly stated that
Rhodesia must not be granted independence before majority rule and we have supported Security Council action
directed towards change in the regime and return to legality
in Rhodesia.

“In Southern Rhodesia, the United Nations seeks to
give expression to the will of the overwhelming majority
of the world community that no people shall be
oppressed and tyrannized-in this case, a black majority
by a small and totally self-centred minority.”

118. In its resolution 232 (1966) the Security Council
embarked on a programme of economic sanctions. AS I
explained on 20 March, my delegation believed it right at
this time to move from these selective measures, whose
effect has been only partial, to a more severeprogramme
based on a comprehensive trade embargo, with tighter
implementation.
10

t, .

119. The resolution which we have just unanimously
adopted corresponds to that concept and represents an
accommodation of various points of view about what is the
most effective programme of action that the Security
Council can, at this stage, undertake in promoting the
objective of ending the present situation in Rhodesia. My
delegation has noted with satisfaction that past procedures
for implementation
and verification of measures taken
against the illegal regime are to be strengthened in the
manner proposed in paragraphs 18 to 22 of the resolution.

on the goodwill and co-operative determination of those
Governments that are most directly interested in and
connected with the area. In the past few years, unfortunately, we have experienced a great deal of hesitation as
well as open resistanceon the part of certain Powers with
regard to those resolutions. Moreover, in this context, the
racist Government of South Africa and the colonialist
Government of Portugal have direct responsibility for
maintaining the illegal Smith regime by rendering it
economic and military assistance.As a result of the hesitant
attitude of the United Kingdom towards Southern
Rhodesia and the defiance of the General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions by other States, including the
United States and the Federal Republic of Germany, the
Smith regime has not only survived the previous sanctions
but has even been able to achieve significant economic
development.

120. For those reasons, the Canadian delegation has voted
in favour of the resolution.
121. Members of the Council will understand, I am sure,
that the implementation of the provisions of this far-reaching resolution will require further action by Member
Governments. My Government naturally intends to observe
the provisions of the resolution which the Council has
adopted. In respect to some paragraphs, such action may
require new laws and regulations, and in such cases
appropriate measures will be placed before the Canadian
authorities concerned as soon as possible.

127. According to data well known in United Nations
economic circles and, furthermore, published in British and
other economic publications, in the first sevenmonths of
1967 alone, the volume of the United Kingdom’s exports to
Southern Rhodesia amounted to $16 million sterling, twice
as much as during the whole year of 1966. The gross
national product of Southern Rhodesia rose as a result by
3.4 per cent in 1967 and it is expected to rise by another 4
to 5 per cent in 1968.

122. In conclusion, I should not like to miss this occasion
to express the gratification of the Canadian delegation by
the fact that this unanimous decision on this important
question should have been registered under your chairman
ship, Mr. President. We fully respect the reasons given by
Lord Caradon for relinquishing the Chair temporarily. We
only regret that, for reasons eloquently set out by several
preceding speakers, you will not be among us in the Council
as a colleague much longer. The Canadian delegation wishes
to take this opportunity of thanking you for your signal
and distinguished services in many ways to the United
Nations.

128. The Hungarian delegation cannot fail to note that, as
a result of this economic co-operation and of very
important investments, a further rise in Southern
Rhodesia’s economy is in progress. Some publications in
Great Britain have clearly indicated that today, more than
180 British industrial and commercial firms have nearly 300
subsidiaries in Southern Rhodesia, including such monopolies as Imperial Chemical Industries, the 3MC, Dunlop,
etc.; and the yearly profit earnings of these firms from their
approximately g200 million sterling worth of investments
runs to about 220 million sterling.

123. The PRESIDENT: I thank Ambassador Ignatieff for
what he has said. In view of the fact that several of the
delegations have said such nice things about me, I am
impelled to say that I wish my mother and father were
here, because my mother would have believed all the nice
things my colleagues have said about me, and my father
would have appreciated them.

129. If it is asked where the sources can be found to
compensate Zambia and certain other countries for any
losses they may sustain, it can readily be seen that such
sources are easy to End, and that if we searchfurther, even
more means could be found to be put to good purpose.

124. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): Mr. President, first of
all I wish to express my appreciation for the personal touch
which has characterized your relations with your colleagues
and has facilitated the settlement of difficult problems. I
must admit that we have disagreed a number of times, but
that did not affect our personal contacts and, in fact, your
personality has helped to bridge the gap existing between
political positions.

130. In the view of the Hungarian delegation, in the
resolution just adopted, paragraph 15, which was a matter
for discussion and for separate voting, does not do full
justice to those countries that have definitely and unreseryedly complied with the resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly of our Organization. It
conceals the fact that there are a great number of countries
that have consistently violated and ignored those resolutions and that therefore bear the primary responsibility to
avert any negative consequencesthat might ensue for the
countries bordering on Southern Rhodesia as a result of
sanctions. Paragraph 15 also ignores the fact that the
existence of the Smith regime depends on the assistanceof
such Western Powers as the United Kingdom, the United
States and the Federal Republic of Germany, and of such
other States as South Africa and Portugal. This unholy
alliance frustrates all serious measures aimed at solving the
very difficult and delicate problem of Southern Rhodesia.
On the contrary, it encourages the Smith regime to

125. The Hungarian delegation voted in favour of the
resolution just adopted by the Council in the expectation
that as a result effective measures will be applied to bring
an end to the illegal rule of the white minority regime in
Southern Rhodesia. In the same spirit we have accepted and
carried out the stipulations contained in Security Council
resolution 217 (1965) and other relevant resolutions of the
Council and the General Assembly on this matter.
126, We are well aware, as we have stated several times,
that the effective implementation of the resolution depends
11

today, which envisages the imposition of virtually total
mandatory economic sanctions against the Salisbury r&ime
and the establishment of the appropriate machinery to
follow the implementation. We also note with satisfaction
that all the members of ‘the Council Lave been able to
support the resolution, not by abandoning fundamental
viewpoints or positions but by aiming at the widest possible
area of agreement.

continue with its outrageous violations of Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions, committed in complete
disregard of world public opinion. The responsibility of
these countries is clear, and we cannot condone mY
formula that would allow them to escape from that
responsibility or that would attempt to distribute it among
the whole community of the United Nations membership.
There should be no attempt by anyone to relieve those
States of their responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations.

137. The resolution is the result of long and arduous
negotiations among members of the Security Council, and
we, for our part, pay a tribute especially to the responsible
administering Power and to the Afro-Asian members for
their goodwill and open-mindedness which made possible
this compromise. The value of decisions of the Secuiity
Council is very much enhanced when we can act in unity,
and in the present case the unanimous support for the
resolution, as well as the extent of the sanctions, should
clearly persuade the men in Salisbury of their isolation
from the rest of the world and convince them that there is
no future in persisting in their illegal course.

13 1. The Hungarian People’s Republic, on its part, maintains good and close relations with Zambia, and in the
course of this co-operation my Government is rendering
economic assistance to the people of Zambia. This policy
we shall continue in the future as well, no matter what is
contained in this resolution or what is not.
132. In view of all the above and many other facts, we
believe it is high time that really effective and comprehensive sanctions are applied against the illegal r&me in
Salisbury. At the same time, those States, Members or
non-Members of the United Nations, which bear the
primary responsibility for the present situation in Southern
Rhodesia should translate the lofty ideas they constantly
advocate into resolute deeds in implementation of those
sanctions. The Hungarian delegation, therefore, puts strong
emphasis on, inter alia, paragraphs 9, 11, 12 and 16 of the
present resolution.

138. May I be allowed to make two concrete remarks,
With regard to operative paragraph 5 (b) of the resolution, 1
just wish to make clear that my Government is not in a
position to prevent the return to Denmark of Danish
citizens from abroad.

133. In the view of my delegation, even though the
resolution is not entirely satisfactory, those provisions, if
properly implemented and carried out with the necessary
determination, could contribute towards Jhe achievement
of self-determination and independence for the people of
Zimbabwe. The Hungarian delegation will do everything
within its ability to contribute, through its efforts, to the
attainment of that goal.
134. The PRESIDENT: I wish to thank the representative
of Hungary for his kind remarks. I have never conceived
that differences between Governments-which are, perhaps,
inevitable, certainly understandable, and which we all work
to minimize and often to eliminate-should affect the very
cordial relations that should and do exist between their
representatives here. I have enjoyed those relations with the
representative of Hungary very much and I hope to
continue them.

139. With regard to paragraph 9 of the resolution, for the
sake of good order I have to make a brief remark about the
implications of the provisions of that paragraph. In so far as
it deals with postal communications and telecommunications, we are faced with a complicated matter affecting
international arrangements which would have to be studied
with great care and which would be difficult for one
country alone to deal with, irrespective of the attitude of
other countries; another complication is the fact that the
communications networks are governed by two of the
specialized agencies of the United Nations: the Universal
Postal Union and the International Telecommunication
Union.
140. Denmark has always maintained that our support of
enforcement measures under the Char& must be con&
tioned by a test of effectiveness. lnstcad of being taken
unilaterally, therefore, the measures foreseen in paragraph 9
should be taken in concert with the larger countries which
carry the bulk of communications. I&eed, the problem
would appear to be international in nature and it would
therefore seem natural to look for a multilateral approach.

135. Mr. BORCH (Denmark): Denmark has voted for the
resolution in the belief that the Security Council has
thereby taken a significant step towards independence for
Southern Rhodesia under constitutional government and
majority role. The Council has thus once again manifested
its protest against the illegal minority r&me in Salisbury,
against its systematic policies of separate racial development, and against its increasingly repressivemeasureswhich
violate the human rights and fundamental freedoms of the
people of Southern Rhodesia.

141. I do not wish at this stage to go into further details
on the provisions of the resolution. I only wish to welcome
the establishment of the committee of the Council. It is our
hope that that committee will prove a valuable instrument
in ensuring full and effective implementation
of the
resolution.
142. My delegation realizes that sanctions are hardly a
means of bringing about radical political changes swiftly.
They may rather be a method whose effects, like those of
most political measures, are somewhat slow to appear.
Patience and perseverance are therefore of the essence-the
kind of patience and perseverilnce which made this resolution possible. If we continue to act with decisiveness and

136. The Danish Government is gratified at the unanimous
wish of this Council to see an end to the rebellion in
Southern Rhodesia, a wish reflected in the resolution now
adopted. Consistent with the attitude of my Government
over the years, Denmark welcomes the resolution adopted
1’

determination, we shall, however, prove that it is possible in
today’s world, by peaceful means and the concerted action
of this body, to bring about respect for human rights and
the rule of law.

148. The representative of Ethiopia has asked to be
allowed to speak in order to supplement his remarks.
149. Lij Endalkachew MAKONNEN (Ethiopia): Mr. President, when I spoke earlier on in our debate in explanation
of my vote I was somewhat in the same position as my
colleague and neighbour, the representative of Denmark. I
was not aware that this might be the last opportunity for
me to pay a tribute to you in formal sessionof the Council
for your contribution to the United Nations effort. Since
this may well be the only opportunity for me to do so, I
wish, with your permission, to join my other colleagues,
first in applauding and commending the magnanimous
gesture of Lord Caradon who, by his noble act, has enabled
us to benefit once more at this eleventh hour of your
services at the United Nations, from your proven experience and competence in the affairs of the Council.

143. Mr. President, I had not thought that this might be
the last time you would be here, but since it seems that that
is possible it would not be amiss for me to add my words of
gratitude and appreciation to you personally before the
meeting comes to an end.
144. It is somewhat difficult to find new ways in which to
express that appreciation or to add to the characterizations
which my colleagues have already given. I am helped by one
thing, namely, the tendency of United States representatives on the Security Council to write books. Although you
did not write the book I have in mind in your own name, so
to say, it was compiled by someone else, all the words
contained in it are yours. I should like to be permitted to
quote from that book because I think this quotation gives a
better characterization than I could give.

150. During the past three years you have served your
country and the United Nations cause with a dedication
and a zeal that is fully known and widely recognized. You
have sought every opportunity to hsve the United Nations
machinery utilized in; the settlement of international
disputes. You have, moreover, contributed to the pattern of
common accord which has become a characteristic of our
work during the past difficult months, never sparing any
effort in the common endeavour to reconcile opposed views
or to find an honourable compromise. Hers in the Council,
as indeed in the consultations that took place in the
background, we have many times argued, sometimes agreed,
and more often than not agreed to disagree on many
complex problems and issues. It is a mark of your
statesmanship that, like my colleague the representative of
Hungary, I have never known you to allow the heated
sentiments of political debate to interfere with our personal
and mutual relationships in the great United Nations family
to which we all belong.

145. At a meeting of the United States Senate Committee
on Foreign Relations on 23 July 1965, which you attended,
you said :
‘I . . * I know full well that the search for world order,
the pursuit of peaceful settlement, and the struggle
toward the rule of law iu international affairs must be our
guiding star, and that is not an easy path to follow,
particularly since our search for a rule of law in the world
must be carried forward in a revolutionary setting for
many nations of the world in which rapid change is not
only likely but in many instances necessary.
“But I am sustained and emboldened by the thought
that what Adlai Stevenson stood for, worked for, and
when need be fought for valiantly, these things are
imperishable. And others can and must stand for them,
and work for them, and when need be tight for them with
their own talents and in their own ways, however
inadequate these talents may be.“3

151. Therefore, when you leave the United Nations, as
you are to do soon, you will leave behind a host of friends,
colleagues and well wishers, and I wish to seize this
opportunity to join them in bidding you Godspeed and in
wishing you the best for the future.

146. Allow me to say, in all modesty, that your part in the
United Nations and particularly in this Council is testimony
to the way in which you have followed up the principles
you set for yourself. ‘You said the other day at a luncheon
which the Secretary-General gave in honour of you and
Mrs. Goldberg, that you were proud of two things: to have
served at the Court of Warren and the United Nations of
U Thant. I am proud to have served at the Security Council
of Goldberg.

152. The PRESIDENT: I thank you very much, Ambassador Makonnen. I must say that I am really at a loss for
words to expressmy appreciation for the warmth of what
you have said, not only on this occasion, but on other
occasions as well when we have had the, opportunity to
work together. I am deeply appreciative, not only of this
expression, but of all you have done throughout the last
three years to make me feel that what I have been doing
here has been a contribution to the causeto which YOU are
so devoted.

147. The PRESIDENT: I thank you very much, Ambassador Borch, for your very warm remarks. I had two
thoughts in mind as I heard them, I became a little worried
when yo‘u mentioned a book. It is rather dangerous for
Permanent Representatives, present or putative, to write
books. Also, since you mentioned Adlai Stevenson, I was
reminded of one of his remarks. He said that he did not
mind a little praise provided it was fulsome. I very much
appreciate what you have said.

153. The representative of the United Kingdom, Lord
Caradon, would like to exercisehis right of reply, and I call
upon him for that purpose.
154. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I would not, at
late hour, wish to delay the Council by endeavouring to
reply to some of the comments made by the representative
of Hungary, but I would not wish to allow the occasion to
pass without telling him that, in my opinion, some of the
statements he made to us were either inaccurate or
this

3 D. P. Moynihan, Editor, The Defenses of Freedom, The Public
of Arthur
J. Goldberg,
New York, Harper and Row, 1966,
p. XVI.

Papers

13

-

vision-that can only have come from your long experience
on the bench and as a champion of the labour movement.
Above all, I would say that I admire you for your sense of
justice and for your unfailing faith in human nature which
has not been dimmed by the frustrations and fatigue which
I know have been the constant companions of all of us in
this Council. My consolation is that although you may be
leaving your post in the United Nations, you will long be
with us, and I understand that you will be continuing a very
strong association for the support of the principles and
objectives of the United Nations All power to you.

misleading; and I look forward to a subsequent opportunity
to make my commentary on what he has said to us tonight.
155. I especially do not wish to pursue any acrimonious
controversy at a time when we are about to terminate our
proceedings in an atmosphere of general admiration for our
President. On the latter subject I would content myself
with saying that I refuse to believe that I shall not have
other opportunities of referring to the qualities we have
learned over the past three years to admire in you, Sir.
156. The PRESIDENT: I thank Lord Caradon very much
for what he has said. I did not quite understand the
implication of his remark, but I thank him anyway.

:
’
i

165. The PRESIDENT: I thank you, Ambassador Liu,
very much for what you said and how you said it. I am
running out of words with which to reply, so you will
forgive me if I just say: thank you, from the bottom of my
heart.

157. Mr. BOYE (Senegal) (translatedfrom French): When
I took the floor just now to explain my vote I found myself
in the same position as that of my colleagues of Denmark
and Ethiopia in failing to realize that this might be the last
time we would see you sitting.at this table. In any event,
the elegant and noble gesture of Lord Caradon givesme an
opportunity today to tell you of the high esteem in which
my country, my Government and I myself hold you
because of your work in the United Nations and-why not
say it-in the serviceof the international community.

166. The next speaker is the representative of Paraguay,
our colleague and friend, Ambassador Solano Lopez.
167. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translated porn
Spanish): I had not intended to speak at this meeting until
I suddenly became aware that this was indeed a unique
opportunity to pay tribute to you, Mr. President, for your
co-operation and for the great contribution you have made
to the United Nations as a whole and to the Security
Council in particular.

158. Because of the high post that you have held in your
own country in the Supreme Court, a post which I have just
held myself in the Supreme Court of Senegal-I am sure my
colleagues will pardon me for saying this-1 have a natural
inclination to try and understand you and to grasp the
subtleties of your reasoning.

168. My feelings at this moment are mixed: on the one
hand, I am gratified that we have unanimously adopted a
resolution in this Council-always a difficult thing to
achieve-after painstaking and time-consuming negotiations
in which each and every member of the Council participated. On the other hand, I have a feeling of regret, because
we know that this is one of the last times that you will sit
with us at this table as the representative of the United
States of America.

159. In any case, now that you are about to leave our
forum, I should like to express our hope that you will
pursue the work that you have undertaken to the benefit of
all the regions of the world.
160. The PRESIDENT: I thank you, Ambassador Boye,
for what you have said. You and I have shared common
experiences and a common dedication to the same ideals,
and I am deepy appreciative of what you have said.

169. It is for this last reason in particular that I wish to
speak-because it is a matter of elementary justice to pay
you the tribute you deserve for your brilliant qualities, for
the generous and loyal co-operation you have always given
us and for the friendship with which you have honoured
each and every one of us. It is a great pleasure for me,
therefore, to offer you publicly this expression of admiration and respect.

161. The next speaker on my list is the representative of
China, Ambassador Liu, also a friend who has worked with
me for three years in many situations, and it is with
pleasure that I call on him.
162. Mr. LIU (China): As far as the position of my
delegation on the Rhodesian question is concerned, it was
made quite clear in my statement on 26 March, at the
1408th meeting of the Council, and I therefore do not find
it necessaryto reiterate it.

170. The PRESIDBNT: I thank you, Ambassador Solano
Lopez,‘most sincerely for your comments. You will, I am
sure, forgive me if at this stage I am not able to expressmy
feelings as eloquently as a distinguished Latin American

163. Whatever may have been said about the resolution we
have just adopted, my delegation believes that it is a great
step forward in dealing with the situation in Rhodesia.

171. Mr. MALIK

Call.

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian): Mr. President, I find myself in a

rather special situation. As a newcomer to the Security
Council I have not had the pleasure nor the opportunity to
“share a peck of salt with you”, as the Russian saying goes,
in this Council-in other words, to have spent a number of
years, or any length of time, working with you. My present
duties have given me the chance of working with you for
only two months. I must say, and it is gratifying for me to
do so, that during this short period of time I have had the
opportunity for talks with you on general issues as well as

164. Mr. President, I nbw come to the main reason for my
asking to speak. The universal sentiment that has been
expressed, both inside and outside this Chamber, on your
impending departure would seem to make it superfluous for
me to add any further tribute. But, if I may say so, I feel
that you have brought to this Council some very rare
qualities-outstanding
juridical acumen and political
14

-

^,
..d

working contacts, and that on several occasions we arrived
at mutual understanding on a number of topics. We did not,
of course, achieve mutual understanding on all matters, but
we did understand each other’s position in regard to those
matters on which we differed.

179. I have no further names on the list of speakers, and
therefore I should like now to make a very brief statement
on the resolution in my capacity as representative of the
UNITED STATES.

172. In particular I should like to mention your high
qu&ies as a diplomat, as a servant of the United Nations
and asa statesman.

180. The, policy of my Government remains to seek a
peaceful solution of the Rhodesian problem that will ensure
political justice and equal opportunity for ah Rhodesians,
regardless of race. We have given, and will continue to give,
our full support to the efforts of the United Kingdom and
the United Nations directed to that end.

173. In the course of my work, even during the coldest
years of the cold war, I have always had the pleasure and
the honour of not carrying over the mutual relations
existing between the two sides into personal relationships
with representatives. I have the pleasantest recollections of
working in the Security Council with some of your eminent
predecessors such as the late Senator Austin, the distinguished lawyer, Philip Jessup, Ambassador Gross, Ambassador Lodge and others. It will therefore be a pleasure for
me to continue our work together and our contacts in the
Security Council in the future.

181. My Government is very much gratified that ten
weeks of exceedingly difficult consultations have produced
a resolution that commands the unanimous support of the
Council and will contribute towards the attainment of our
goal. Although all delegations on this Council have played a
constructive role in the various discussions that have
ensued, the major credit for the final product must go to
the representative of the United Kingdom, the African and
Asian members of the Council and the Latin-American
members, all of whom displayed the most commendable
negotiating skill and a sincere desire to preserve the
Council’s unanimity on this important issue, on which it is
so difficult to achieve unanimity. It is very significant to me
that in unanimously adopting this resolution we have for
the first time achieved the affirmative vote of all permanent
members of the Council for a resolution on Southern
Rhodesia.

174. I should like to think that this is not the last meeting
of the Security Council in which you will take part and that
you will be able to occupy once more the Chair as President
and representative of the United States. We hope so.
However, the situation is such that, in the view of our
Danish colleague, this is your farewell meeting, and it is my
duty to do asI promised and pay you my compliments.
175. I wish you every successin your future work for the
strengthening of peace and the development of relations of
friendship and co-operation between our two countries and
all the other States Members of the United Nations, in
order that the wish expressed by you at the recent
luncheon given in your honour by the Secretary-General of
the United Nations, that there should be no war, will be
realized through the efforts of the United Nations and the
Governments of States, and wars which are still going on
will be brought to a speedy end.

182. The measures contained in the resolution we have
just adopted are consistent with United States policy on
Southern Rhodesia. The resolution just approved extends
mandatory economic sanctions from a selected list of
products to all trade with Rhodesia. The United States will,
of course, apply these mandatory provisions with the same
vigour we have applied those of resolution 232 (1966).
183. The architects of the resolution have also shown
wisdom in using phrasing that takes into account various
practical, legal, humanitarian and other factors. Paragraph 5, for example, recognizes that many States do not
have the legal possibility to bar.entry to their territories of
their own nationals, as several members of the Council have
pointed out.

176. In conclusion, I would like to express the hope that
those positive qualities which have been shown by you here
in your dealings with your colleagues and in the work of
the Security Council, will be bequeathed by you to your
successor.
177. The PRESIDENT: Ambassador Malik, I became
worried because I was going to recall the promise that YOU
made when Lord Caradon jumped the gun and had
something kindly to say about me at an earlier meeting, but
you have fulfilled my hopes, and I appreciate it very much.
Of course, you have been no stranger to me. I do not mean
in person, but I knew about your fine contribution towards
solving international problems. It has been a great privilege
and honour to work with you in the interests of world
peace and in the interests of achieving the objectives of the
Charter.

184. The language of paragraphs 9 and 10 is not of a
mandatory character, being a request and an expression of
need. The United States will give careful consideration to
those paragraphs, and in so doing we will have to take into
account our profound belief in a free flow of information
and communication throughout the world, which we feel
should apply to Rhodesia as well. I would also say that the
United States has no trade representation there.
185. In closing, I wish to say that my Government deeply
regrets and deplores that the regime in Salisbury has
intensified its efforts to maintain its illegal control over the
Rhodesian people. In these circumstances, there is no
alternative but to undertake to make the sanctions programme aseffective as possible, as we have done today.

178. I express the same hope that I expressed to my other
colleagues that my departure will not diminish the opportunities to maintain the friendship that we have developed
in our very short stay together, and I am sure that you will
continue to make the fine contribution that you have made
during the last two months to the work of this Organization. I thank you very much for what you have had to say.

186. Based on the history of the programme to date we
are under no illusions that, even in the strengthened form,
it will produce a quick and clear-cut solution. We do
15

adopted the Security Council has decided to establish a
committee of the Security Council to undertake certain
very important tasks. The President of the Security Council
for this month, Lord Caradon, has suggested that, as I an-r
the presiding officer for this meeting and since the
Permanent Representative of the United States will be the
Council President for June, it would be appropriate for my
delegation to undertake consultations on the establishment
of that committee. I have consulted with members of the
Council on this point and, there being no objection, my
delegation will therefore accordingly plan to undertake
consultations on the establishment of the committee
promptly and assoon as possible. There being no objection,
it will be so decided.

expect, however, that the resolution tb.a Council has just
adopted, particularly those passages pertaining to the
implementation of sanctions, which ‘we welcome, will
produce a tighter and more effective programme. I pledge
that my Government will play its full part in bringing this
about, and hopefully expects other Member Governments
to do the same.
187. We hope that the Council’s unanimous action today
will bring .nearer the day and time when a Government,
representing all of the people of Rhodesia on sound
democratic principles, will be welcomed into the community of nations.
188. Speaking again as PRESIDENT and before concluding this meeting I wish to call the attention of members
to the fact that under paragraph 20 of the resolution just

The meeting rose at 8.35 p.m.

.6

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Notions
publicolions
the world.
Consult
your

NATIONS

PUBLlCATlONS

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Soles Section,

throughout
New York

or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBllCATlONS

Ler publications
der Notions
Unies
ronl
dipositoirer
du monde entier.
Informer-vaur
Notions
Unies, Section
der venter, New York

HAK rlO,lYVHTb

tl3~AHHR

DES NATIONS

UNIES

en vente
dons
les librairier
ouprbr
de votrt
libroiric
ou
ou GenCve.

OPTAHIISAIJHH

06bEAHHEHHblX

et 10s ogencer
odrersez-vour
&I

HAlWfi

~I:I~~~IIII~I Opnr~~:~n~~nn
06zc~n11c1111lss
IIar\iG ~o;iiiio
K~IIIIT~ n K~~‘III~I~
~tarwlluax
ILI’OIITI’TIIaS no nrcs palioilas
mlpa.
~h%O~llT~? rnpanlirl
06 I1:1Aaiiiir[s n IlaUlPJI IillllilillOl
0he~mle1l111~1~
IIaIpA.
Ccwrn
w4ra:milc
II.711 lllllllllTC
110 aqwq
: Opraun~aqiitr
npo;(a;lio
r&!(allnil,
HMO-lIOltli IIXI %mna.
COMO

CbNSEGUlR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publicocioner
de lar Nacioner
Unidas
est6n
en todor parter del mundo. Consulte
o IU librero
Ventor,
Nueva York o Ginebro,

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

uo

UNIDAS

en vento en librerias
y cosos distribuidoros
o dirijare
a: Nocioner
Unidor,
Secci6n

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

11

in other

currencies)

de

355694eptember

1972-2,100
