A/66/PV.100

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-sixth session

100th plenary meeting

Friday, 16 March 2012, 12.35 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

In the absence of the President, Mr. Meetarbhan
(Mauritius), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 12.35 p.m.
Agenda item 138 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/66/668/Add.5,
A/66/668/Add.6 and A/66/668/Add.7)
The Acting President: I should like, in keeping
with established practice, to draw the attention of the
General Assembly to documents A/66/668/Add.5 to 7,
in which the Secretary-General informs the President
of the General Assembly that, since the issuance of
his communications contained in document A/66/668/
Add.4, Gabon, the Dominican Republic and Tonga have
made the payments necessary to reduce their arrears
below the amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes
note of the information contained in these documents?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 37 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Letter from the Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People (A/66/742)
The Acting President: I should like to draw
the attention of the General Assembly to a letter

(Qatar)

dated 14 February 2012 from the Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People, addressed to the President
of the General Assembly and circulated in document
A/66/742.
In this letter, the President is informed of the interest
of the Government of Ecuador in becoming a member
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People. As delegations are
aware, in accordance with resolution 3376 (XXX) of
10 November 1975, members of the Committee are
appointed by the General Assembly.
The proposal before the General Assembly is
for Ecuador to be added to the membership of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People. May I take it that the General
Assembly agrees to the enlargement of the membership
of that Committee by appointing Ecuador as a member
of the Committee?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
37.
Agenda item 123 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
(a) Strengthening of the United Nations system
Draft resolution (A/66/L.39)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-24978 (E)

*1224978*

A/66/PV.100

The Acting President: Members will recall that the
Assembly considered agenda item 123 and its sub-item
(a), in joint debate with agenda item 14, agenda item 117
and agenda item 124 at its 72nd plenary meeting, on
2 December 2011.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Indonesia to introduce draft resolution A/66/L.39.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): It is a privilege for me to
speak and introduce to the General Assembly, on behalf
of Canada, Indonesia and all other sponsors, a draft
resolution entitled “Civilian capacity in the aftermath
of conflict”, contained in document A/66/L.39.
I would also like to report that the draft resolution
has been extensively discussed among Member States
in a series of open-ended informal consultations, as
well as in informal informal meetings among other
interested delegations. Indonesia and Canada wish to
profoundly thank all delegations for their continued
support and constructive engagement throughout the
process of consultations on the draft resolution.
Now more than ever, we are bearing witness to the
importance of effective and timely civilian deployment
in fragile and post-conflict situations. Readily deployed
and skilled civilian capacities and resilient institutions
are vital to building and sustaining peace. However,
building capable and accountable national institutions
requires effective international civilian capacity
to support national recovery. This in turn requires
effective partnerships between the United Nations and
Member States, as well as other relevant stakeholders,
including country-specific configurations and regional
organizations, to deploy more effective, demand-driven
civilian capacities.
The draft resolution before us lays down a clear
and viable political framework that has potential for the
stakeholders. Member States, United Nations system
entities, regional and subregional organizations, along
with others, work synergistically to enable effective
civilian capacities in post-conflict countries that require
them. The draft resolution before us today stresses,
among others, the following key elements: the need
to fully respect the principles of national ownership,
enhanced cooperation and inclusive processes towards
developing civilian capacities and expertise. Allow me
to elaborate on these elements.
First, in highlighting the centrality of national
ownership as the fundamental principle of peacebuilding,

2

our focus shall be on better supporting the development of
home-grown capacities in conflict-affected countries,
and on fully respecting their nationally identified
priorities. If national ownership of civilian capacity is
to develop in a meaningful way, it must be nationally
identified, owned and driven.
Secondly, with respect to inclusive processes, the
draft resolution calls for the establishment of close
consultation and collaboration with the Member States
and the United Nations system, aimed at broadening
and deepening the pool of experts, particularly from
the global South and among women. Countries with
relevant experience in post-conflict peacebuilding
or democratic transition also house pools of civilian
experts who could be readily mobilized.
Thirdly, with regard to enhanced partnership,
there is a need to clarify and synergize the United
Nations system in order to harness available global
capacities and match them effectively with civilian
gaps. In that regard, the draft resolution stresses the
need for enhanced regional, South-South and triangular
cooperation, thereby intensifying the existing and
encouraging new international cooperation on the
provision of civilian expertise.
Let me conclude by reiterating our sincere gratitude
to the many delegations that have demonstrated their
profound interest in and affirmed their support for this
important issue. I would be remiss if I did not thank
Canada for its effective and constructive partnership
in jointly steering this process. Indonesia is grateful
for its fervent support and vital role throughout the
entire process, displaying effective cross-regional
partnership.
It is the hope of Indonesia and Canada, along with
many other countries, that the draft resolution will
succeed in the manner it deserves, and that it will be
adopted by consensus.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution A/66/L.39, entitled
“Civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/66/L.39, the following countries have

12-24978

A/66/PV.100

become sponsors: Argentina, Belgium, Benin, the
Czech Republic, Georgia, Greece, Latvia, Malaysia,
Portugal, the Republic of Moldova, Rwanda, Serbia,
Slovakia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/66/L.39?
Draft resolution A/66/L.39 was adopted (resolution
66/255).
The Acting President: I call on the representative
of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada): I am very pleased to
speak following the adoption by consensus of resolution
66/255 on civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict,
jointly advanced by the Republic of Indonesia and
Canada. Canada believes that the United Nations
system has before it a unique opportunity to strengthen
its contribution to States facing the possibility of a lapse
or relapse into violence. Too often, opportunities have
been missed because important civilian capacities are
lacking, international efforts are disjointed, or expertise
is simply too slow to arrive.
This resolution provides a procedural basis for
Member States and the United Nations system to
carry forward discussions on how to improve the ways
in which the Organization develops, draws on and
deploys civilian expertise in post-crisis settings. It also
underscores the need for continued close consultations.
The resolution emphasizes several important points.
(spoke in French)
First, the international community has long
recognized that national ownership is central to
peacebuilding. Yet we have been less successful turning
this commitment into practice. The resolution focuses
attention on this issue, noting the fundamental principle
of national ownership and stressing the importance of
supporting national civilian capacity development and
institution-building.
Secondly, there is an evident need to leverage,
nurture and support latent capacity within national
institutions in regional and subregional contexts on the
part of developing countries and emerging donors alike.
Doing so holds promise for strengthening the supply of
expertise properly tailored to the specific demands of a
given situation.

(spoke in English)
Thirdly,
the
resolution
requests
the
Secretary-General to report on the measures outlined
in his previous report (A/66/311), as well as on the
development of further initiatives. It also underscores
the need for regular consultation through the General
Assembly and its subsidiary bodies. The current
inadequacies in the United Nations approach to civilian
capacity have real consequences for States struggling
to rebound from violent conflict or facing the prospect
of instability.
The civilian capacity review is also under way
at a time when the Organization is undergoing a
broader reform process, and when the international
community better understands the deep challenges
posed by peacebuilding. This resolution thus lays out a
consensual and comprehensive approach to developing,
considering and adopting important changes to the
way the Organization addresses civilian capacity
issues. Most importantly, this approach is based on
close cooperation and mutual understanding between
Member States and the United Nations system. This,
we believe, is a very useful step forward.
Finally, let me close by thanking the many
delegations that have demonstrated such high levels of
interest and support. Canada would also like to take
this opportunity particularly to thank the Republic of
Indonesia for serving as such a dedicated, proactive and
effective partner in this process. For the reasons I have
outlined today, we strongly encourage all delegations
to support the implementation of this resolution and to
engage actively in the subsequent consultation process.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of El Salvador.
Mr. Escalante Hasbún (El Salvador) (spoke
in Spanish): El Salvador welcomes the adoption of
resolution 66/255, entitled “Civilian capacity in the
aftermath of conflict”. We take this opportunity to
thank the Permanent Missions of Canada and Indonesia
for their efforts and flexibility during the consultations
that led to the consensus adoption of the resolution.
El Salvador attaches great importance to
national, regional and international efforts to
address the transition from conflict to development,
which also strengthens support for national civilian
capacity-building in countries recently emerged from
conflict. Our interest is based on our own experience

12-249783

A/66/PV.100

of recovery and transition from war to peace following
the armed conflict that took place in our country from
1980 to 1992, when peace agreements were signed
between the parties, drawing on the strong support of
the United Nations system and the Group of Friends.
Since then, by way of seeking to repay the
international community for its valuable assistance,
El Salvador has played an active role in the work of
the Peacebuilding Commission, a platform from which
we are committed to sharing our experience in this
field. In that regard, I note that, on Sunday, 11 March,
new legislative and municipal elections were held
in El Salvador. The elections were assessed by the
electoral observation mission of the Organization of
American States to have been a successful milestone
in the consolidation of democratic institutions and
the alternation of power in our country. At the same
time, this success highlights the novel participation of
independent candidates.
Ours could be a useful experience in the
analysis of the role that electoral processes play in
post-conflict situations, the shaping of institutions
and the strengthening of governance. We wish further
to stress that the principles of national ownership,
civilian capacity-building and the establishment of
State institutions that uphold and protect rights and
promote citizen participation are key to ensuring a
successful transition from conflict to development and
the strengthening of democracy in those countries.
These principles also guide our international efforts
in the context of the Peacebuilding Commission and
are reflected in the third preambular paragraph of the
resolution.
In that context, we welcome the request made to
the Secretary-General to include the Peacebuilding
Commission in the consultations on civilian capacity­
building. The experience that the Commission has
accumulated in its years of functioning will allow it
to make a valuable contribution to future discussions
on civilian capacity-building. We also welcome the
inclusion of the views of United Nations country teams
on the ground, in particular those involved in the
follow-up to and implementation of the agenda of the
Commission in its specific configurations.
Similarly, El Salvador recognizes the need to draw
on cross-cutting experience, including the advancement
of women and the promotion of a gender-based
perspective, in the mobilization of capacity and

4

initiatives of the various stakeholders of civil society and
the private sector in order to support and complement
national policies aimed at strengthening institutions and
building capacity.
Our delegation believes that this important
resolution unfortunately overlooks one significant
issue related to the need to promote and strengthen
North-South
cooperation.
While
North-South
cooperation is supplementary to South-South and
triangular cooperation, it must be considered a key
component of support for civilian capacity-building
and institution-building in countries emerging
from conflict. The Peacebuilding Fund, under the
Secretary-General’s auspices, is a specific example of
the role that such cooperation can play.
We believe that consistent and strong North-South
cooperation, as well as broadened and strengthened
South-South and triangular cooperation, are an
effective combination for assisting States that require
help in peacebuilding. The fact that such countries are
no longer in the media spotlight or on the international
agenda once their conflicts are considered to have
been resolved does not mean that the international
community should reduce its support. Rather, its aim
should be to better focus and develop such assistance,
along with each beneficiary State, in order to ensure
that the social and economic conditions that prevailed
during the so-called resolved conflict do not undermine
the gains that have been made. At this stage, civilian
participation and the promotion of civilian capacity are
essential, as reflected in resolution 66/255.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate the commitment
and political resolve of the Government of El Salvador
to contribute to the intergovernmental discussions on
this significant matter, and its willingness to share
the lessons we have learned from our own process
of transition from conflict to development, which we
believe could be useful to future processes.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 123.
(b) Central role of the United Nations system in
global governance
Draft resolution (A/66/L.38)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held the debate on sub-item (b) of agenda

12-24978

A/66/PV.100

item 123 at its 88th plenary meeting, on 16 December
2011.
I now give the floor to the representative of Chile to
introduce draft resolution A/66/L.38.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour, on behalf of Chile, Kenya, Singapore and
Switzerland — representing all the sponsors — a
draft resolution entitled “The United Nations in global
governance”, contained in document A/66/L.38, under
agenda item 123 (b), “Strengthening of the United
Nations system: central role of the United Nations
system in global governance”.
The draft resolution is the result of open and
transparent negotiations held over more than four
weeks. A balanced and substantive agreement has been
reached by all interested parties, as reflected in the text
under consideration. The main purpose of the draft
resolution is to reaffirm that the United Nations system
must remain the cornerstone of global governance and
to provide a road map for improving and strengthening
the Organization to that end.

“include in the provisional agenda of its
sixty-seventh session, under the item entitled
‘Strengthening of the United Nations system’, the
sub-item entitled ‘Central role of the United Nations
system in global governance’, and in this regard
[to request] the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly, by the end of February 2013,
an analytical report focusing on global economic
governance and development”.
Two elements must be underscored. First, we have
provided for a year for the preparation of that report
in order to obtain a comprehensive analysis with
concrete recommendations. We hope that we will have
adequate time and opportunity next year for a serious
consideration of the report, which was not the case last
year.

In the third preambular paragraph of the draft
resolution, we acknowledge

Secondly, we have also asked that the report be
prepared in consultation with Member States and all
relevant entities of the United Nations system, and
taking into account the results of the Rio+20 United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development to
be held in Rio, and all other United Nations processes,
including the relevant financing for development
process.

“the vital importance of an inclusive, transparent
and effective multilateral system in order to better
address the urgent global challenges of today,
recognizing the universality of the United Nations,
and reaffirming its commitment to promote and
strengthen the effectiveness and efficiency of the
United Nations system”.

In order to maintain the central role of the United
Nations in the evolving framework of global governance,
we must consider how to engage effectively with the
relevant institutions and stakeholders that have an
impact on and a role to play in global issues. In that
regard, the draft resolution also refers explicitly, in
paragraph 3, to the

In the fourth preambular paragraph, we also
reaffirm

“importance and benefit of a continuing interaction
between the General Assembly and international,
regional and subregional forums, organizations and
groups dealing with global matters of concern to
the international community”.

“the role and authority of the General Assembly
on global matters of concern to the international
community, as set out in the Charter”.
The United Nations holds a unique position
within the multilateral system. As a body of universal
membership, it enjoys unquestioned legitimacy in
addressing all matters of global concern. The draft
resolution was formulated with that in mind, and
we have decided for a second time that the General
Assembly will concentrate on the issue of global
economic governance and development.
By paragraph 4 of the draft resolution, the General
Assembly would decide to

We are living in a time of great challenges, and the
world needs an effective United Nations system that has
the capacity to respond to the many global problems.
We should consider how the United Nations can be
strengthened in order to remain relevant and responsive
to the evolving challenges of global governance. We
invite the entire United Nations system, including the
regional commissions, and the international financial
and trade institutions to discuss and make proposals
concerning the central role of the United Nations in
global economic governance. We have also called on

12-249785

A/66/PV.100

civil society, academia, the private sector and other
stakeholders to contribute to this debate.
I note that the draft resolution invites the President
of the General Assembly and the President of the
Economic and Social Council to consider organizing, in
a coordinated manner, informal thematic debates on the
central role of the United Nations in global governance.
Last week, the President of the Economic and Social
Council hosted an important event on that topic. We are
prepared to support the leadership of the President of
the Assembly in that area.
It is now important to identify and address
deficiencies in global governance. We hope that the
President will help us to develop a comprehensive agenda
of relevant issues in this regard and to promote a broad
international consensus towards an adequate response,
helping thereby to strengthen the inclusive international
framework for global economic cooperation in support
of development.
Fair and cooperative reform of global governance
is essential if globalization is to have a future. To
that end, the legitimacy of the inclusive framework
represented by the United Nations is invaluable and
irreplaceable. The draft resolution is a call on the United
Nations leadership to promote inclusive and effective
responses to improve global economic governance and
development.

6

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution A/66/L.38, entitled “The
United Nations in global governance”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that, since the submission of draft
resolution A/66/L.38, and in addition to the delegations
listed in the document, the following countries have
become sponsors: Albania, Andorra, Benin, Brunei
Darussalam, Colombia, Cyprus, Estonia, Guyana,
Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Monaco,
Mongolia, Nepal, the Philippines, the Republic of
Moldova, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Ukraine and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/66/L.38?
Draft resolution A/66/L.38 was adopted (resolution
66/256).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 123.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

12-24978
