A/62/PV.76

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-second session

76

th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 18 December 2007, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kerim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Reports of the Third Committee
The President: The General Assembly will
consider the reports of the Third Committee on agenda
items 42, 62, 63, 65 to 69, 70 and its sub-items (a) to
(f), 106, 107, 121 and 129.
I request the Rapporteur of the Third Committee,
Ms. Tebatso Future Baleseng of Botswana, to introduce
in one intervention the reports of the Third Committee.
Ms. Baleseng (Botswana), Rapporteur of the
Third Committee: I have the honour to present for
consideration the following reports of the Third
Committee on the agenda items allocated to it by the
General Assembly.
Under agenda item 42, entitled “Report of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced
persons and humanitarian questions”, the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 17 of document
A/62/431, the adoption of three draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 62, entitled “Social
development”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 47 of document A/62/432, the adoption of
six draft resolutions and, in paragraph 48, the adoption
of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 63, entitled “Advancement of
women”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 43 of Part II of document A/62/433, the

(The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia)

adoption of seven draft resolutions and, in paragraph
44, the adoption of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 65, entitled “Report of the
Human Rights Council”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 16 of document A/62/434,
the adoption of one draft resolution and, in paragraph
17, the adoption of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 66, entitled “Promotion and
protection of the rights of children”, the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 32 of document
A/62/435, the adoption of four draft resolutions and, in
paragraph 33, the adoption of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 67, entitled “Indigenous
issues”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 7 of document A/62/436, the adoption of one
draft decision.
Under agenda item 68, entitled “Elimination of
racism and racial discrimination”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 26 of document A/62/437,
the adoption of three draft resolutions and, in
paragraph 27, the adoption of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 69, entitled “Right of peoples
to
self-determination”,
the
Third
Committee
recommends, in paragraph 23 of document A/62/438,
the adoption of three draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 70, entitled “Promotion and
protection of human rights”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 5 of document A/62/439,
the adoption of one draft decision.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

07-64864 (E)

*0764864*

A/62/PV.76

Under agenda item 70 (a), entitled “Promotion
and protection of human rights: implementation of
human rights instruments”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 16 of document
A/62/439/Add.1, the adoption of two draft resolutions.
In addition, I would like to draw the attention of the
Assembly to a correction which should be made to
paragraph 7 of the report. The date of 31 October
should be changed to read “1 November”.
Under agenda item 70 (b), entitled “Promotion
and protection of human rights: human rights
questions, including alternative approaches for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 173 of document
A/62/439/Add.2, the adoption of 19 draft resolutions
and, in paragraph 174, the adoption of one draft
decision. In operative paragraph 9 of draft resolution
IX of the report, the words “pursuant to Human Rights
Council decision 1/107” should be deleted.
Under agenda item 70 (c), entitled “Promotion
and protection of human rights: human rights situations
and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives”,
the Third Committee recommends, in paragraph 49 of
document A/62/439/Add.3, the adoption of four draft
resolutions.
Under agenda item 70 (d), entitled “Promotion
and protection of human rights: comprehensive
implementation of and follow-up to the Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action”, the Third
Committee, in document A/62/439/Add.4, advises that
no action was taken under the sub-item.
Under agenda item 70 (e), entitled “Promotion
and protection of human rights: Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities”, the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 10 of document
A/62/439/Add. 5, the adoption of one draft resolution.
In operative paragraph 2 of the draft resolution, the
number “one hundred and eighteen” should be changed
to “one hundred and nineteen” and the number “seven”
should be changed to “fourteen”.
Under agenda item 70 (f), entitled “Promotion
and protection of human rights: celebration of the
sixtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 8 of document A/62/439/Add.6, the adoption
of one draft resolution.

2

Under agenda item 106, entitled “Crime
prevention and criminal justice”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 24 of document A/62/440,
the adoption of four draft resolutions and, in paragraph
25, the adoption of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 107, entitled “International
drug control”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 12 of document A/62/441, the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 121, entitled “Revitalization
of the work of the General Assembly”, the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 6 of document
A/62/442, the adoption of one draft decision.
Finally, under agenda item 129, entitled
“Programme planning”, in document A/62/443, the
Third Committee agreed that no action was required by
the Committee at the sixty-second session of the
General Assembly.
Before concluding, I should like to thank the
members of the Bureau of the Third Committee for
their support and help in ensuring the successful
completion of the work of the Committee. I
respectfully commend the reports of the Third
Committee to the plenary of the General Assembly for
its consideration.
The President: If there is no proposal under rule
66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of
the Third Committee which are before the Assembly
today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the
Third Committee have been made clear in the
Committee and are reflected in the relevant official
records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, that is, either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”

07-64864

A/62/PV.76

May I also remind delegations that, in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Third
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Third Committee, unless the
Secretariat is notified otherwise in advance. That
means that, where a separate vote or recorded votes
were taken, we will do the same. I should also hope
that we may proceed to adopt without a vote those
recommendations that were adopted without a vote in
the Third Committee.
Before proceeding further, I would like to draw
the attention of members to a note by the Secretariat,
entitled “List of draft proposals contained in the
reports of the Third Committee”, which has been
circulated as document A/С.3/62/INF/1. The note has
been distributed desk to desk in the General Assembly
Hall as a reference guide for action on draft resolutions
and decisions recommended by the Third Committee in
its reports.
In that connection, members will find, in the third
column of the note, the numbers of the draft
resolutions or decisions for action in the plenary, with
the corresponding numbers of draft resolutions or
decisions in the Third Committee in the fourth column
of the same note.
Agenda item 42
Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, questions relating to refugees, returnees
and displaced persons and humanitarian questions
Report of the Third Committee (A/62/431)
The President: The Assembly has before it three
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 17 of its report.
We will now take a decision on draft resolutions I
to III.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Enlargement of the
Executive Committee of the Programme of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?

07-64864

Draft resolution
62/123).

I

was

adopted

(resolution

The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees”. The Third Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
62/124).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced
persons in Africa”. The Third Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
62/125).
The President: I call on the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic, who wishes to speak in
explanation of vote.
Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation has asked to speak in order to
explain its position on resolution 62/124, entitled
“Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees”, just adopted by the Assembly.
My delegation joined the consensus because it
believes that it is important to provide a dignified life
to the refugees and the forcibly displaced until they are
guaranteed a dignified return to their homeland, in
accordance with all international, humanitarian and
moral conventions and treaties, and because the issue
of refugees is not only a humanitarian one at its core,
but is also highly political in essence. We reaffirm that
we joined the consensus in that particular context.
Since my country is not a signatory to the 1951
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its
1967 Protocol, we also wish to reaffirm that my
country will continue to cooperate with the United
Nations, including the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, in order to facilitate
its humanitarian work in assisting refugees and
internally displaced persons in the framework of its
national laws.
The international community is aware of the
amount of assistance and cooperation that Syria
extends to refugees on its territory, who currently
number over 2 million, representing 12 per cent of its

3

A/62/PV.76

population. Despite that great burden on Syria, the
international community has yet to offer a helping hand
to our country, even though several international
conferences have been convened to act on that
important and worrying phenomenon.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 42?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 62
Social development
Report of the Third Committee (A/62/432)
The President: The Assembly has before it six
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 47 of its report and one draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 48 of the
same report.
I call on the representative of Qatar for an
explanation of position before the voting.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar): Upon instructions from
my Government, I would like to place on record our
explanation of position regarding draft resolution I,
entitled “Policies and programmes involving youth:
youth in the global economy — promoting youth
participation in social and economic development”,
included in the report of the Third Committee in
document A/62/432.
This is the first time that my Government has cosponsored a youth resolution in the Third Committee.
Our co-sponsorship was in support of the major thrust
of the draft resolution, which represents a national
priority, reflects our national policy and aims for the
future with regard to youth policy development.
Our main concern is the reference to the
terminology “sexual and reproductive health” in the
annex of the draft resolution. The purpose of our
explanation of position is to note that reference to
sexual
and
reproductive
health
has
many
interpretations, some of which are counter to our
national legislation and religious beliefs. We will
undertake such initiatives related to that terminology in
accordance with our national laws, religious beliefs
and national interests.

4

The President: We will now take a decision on
draft resolutions I to VI and the draft decision, one by
one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Policies and
programmes involving youth: youth in the global
economy — promoting youth participation in social
and economic development”. The Third Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution
62/126).

I

was

adopted

(resolution

The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Implementation of the World Programme of Action
concerning Disabled Persons: realizing the Millennium
Development Goals for persons with disabilities”. The
Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
62/127).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Cooperatives in social development”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
62/128).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Follow-up to the tenth anniversary of the International
Year of the Family and beyond”. The Third Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
62/129).
The President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“Follow-up to the Second World Assembly on Ageing”.
The Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution
62/130).
The President: Draft resolution VI is entitled
“Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit
for Social Development and of the twenty-fourth
special session of the General Assembly”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?

07-64864

A/62/PV.76

Draft resolution VI was adopted (resolution
62/131).
The President: We now turn to the draft
decision, entitled “Report on the World Social
Situation 2007”. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to adopt the draft decision recommended by the
Third Committee?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 62?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 63 (continued)
Advancement of women
Report of the Third Committee А/62/433
(Part II)
The President: Members will recall that, at its
62nd plenary meeting, on 6 December 2007, the
Assembly considered the report of the Third
Committee on this item, contained in document
A/62/433 (Part I) and adopted the decision contained
therein.
The Assembly has before it seven draft
resolutions recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 43 of its report and one draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 44 of the
same report.
Before proceeding further, I should like to inform
members that action on draft resolution VI, entitled
“Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women”, is postponed to a later
date to allow time for the review of its programme
budget implications by the Fifth Committee. The
Assembly will take action on draft resolution VI as
soon as the report of the Fifth Committee on its
programme budget implications is available.
We will now take a decision on draft resolutions I
to V and draft resolution VII, as well as on the draft
decision.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Violence against women migrant workers”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?

07-64864

Draft resolution
62/132).

I

was

adopted

(resolution

The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Intensification of efforts to eliminate all forms of
violence against women”. The Third Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
62/133).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Eliminating rape and other forms of sexual violence
in all their manifestations, including in conflict and
related situations”. The Third Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
62/134).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“United Nations Development Fund for Women”. The
Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
62/135).
The President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“Improvement of the situation of women in rural
areas”. The Third Committee adopted it without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution
62/136).
The President: Draft resolution VII is entitled
“Follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on Women
and full implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action and the outcome of the twentythird special session of the General Assembly”. The
Third Committee adopted draft resolution VII without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution VII was adopted (resolution
62/137).
The President: We now turn to the draft
decision, entitled “Documents considered by the
General Assembly in connection with the question of
the advancement of women”. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to adopt the draft decision
recommended by the Third Committee?

5

A/62/PV.76

The draft decision was adopted.
The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to explain their position on
the resolutions just adopted.
Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I wish to explain Syria’s position on
resolution 62/134, entitled “Eliminating rape and other
forms of sexual violence in all their manifestations,
including in conflict and related situations”.
My delegation joined the consensus on the
resolution in its belief in the importance and sensitivity
of addressing this issue in all its manifestations, given
its close relationship to the advancement of women.
My delegation believes that the document is of a legal
nature and should have covered all forms of legal
accountability. Our understanding of this issue is that
the text, especially the fifth preambular paragraph and
operative paragraph 1, is totally in harmony with and
should be addressed pursuant to international law,
international humanitarian law and the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Times of War.
Mr. Rees (United States of America): The United
States must dissociate itself from the consensus on
resolution 62/137, entitled “Follow-up to the Fourth
World Conference on Women and full implementation
of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and
the outcome of the twenty-third special session of the
General Assembly”, for the reasons that we stated in
the Third Committee.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
63.
Agenda item 65
Report of the Human Rights Council
Report of the Third Committee (A/62/434)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 16 of its report and a draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 17 of the
same report.
Before proceeding further, I should like to inform
Members that action on the draft resolution, entitled
“Report of the Human Rights Council”, is postponed to
a later date to allow time for the review of its

6

programme budget implications by the Fifth
Committee. The Assembly will take action on the draft
resolution as soon as the report of the Fifth Committee
on its programme budget implications is available.
We shall now take action on the draft decision,
entitled “Report of the Human Rights Council”. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the draft
decision recommended by the Third Committee?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: I call now on representatives
wishing to speak in explanation of position on the
decision just adopted.
Mrs. Eilon Shahar (Israel): We disassociated
ourselves from the report of the Human Rights Council
in the Third Committee, and we would like to do the
same at this time.
Mr. Rees (United States of America): The United
States too wishes to dissociate itself from the
consensus on the report just adopted under agenda item
65, “Report of the Human Rights Council”, with
respect to the non-institution-building sections of the
Human Rights Council’s report, for the reasons that we
stated in the Third Committee.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 65.
Agenda item 66 (continued)
Promotion and protection of the rights of children
Report of the Third Committee (A/62/435)
The President: The Assembly has before it four
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 32 of its report and a draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 33 of the
same report. The Assembly will now take a decision on
the four draft resolutions and the draft decision, one by
one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Supporting efforts
to end obstetric fistula”. The Third Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution
62/138).

I

was

adopted

(resolution

The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“World Autism Awareness Day”. The Third Committee

07-64864

A/62/PV.76

adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
62/139).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“The girl child”. The Third Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
62/140).
The President: We now turn to draft resolution
IV, entitled “Rights of the child”. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,

07-64864

Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan,
Suriname,
Swaziland,
Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
United States of America.
Draft resolution IV was adopted by 183 votes to 1
(resolution 62/141).
[Subsequently, the delegations of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Maldives and Turkey advised the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President: We now turn to the draft
decision, entitled “Documents considered by the
General Assembly in connection with the promotion
and protection of the rights of children”. May I take
that the Assembly wishes to adopt the draft decision
recommended by the Third Committee?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: I call on the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic, who has asked to speak in
explanation of vote after the vote.
Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would like to explain its vote
with respect to the resolution just adopted entitled
“Rights of the child”. We voted in favour of the
resolution. I would like to reaffirm that the Syrian Arab
Republic is very practical in its approach to the rights
of the child, using its national legislative and legal
frameworks to promote and protect these rights. Our
delegation has signed and ratified the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and its two Optional Protocols.

7

A/62/PV.76

We would like to stress that fundamentally we
have no objections to the resolution that has just been
adopted and we appreciate the efforts exerted by its
sponsors, especially those pertaining to problems
relating to the elimination of all forms of violence
against children living under foreign occupation.
My delegation understands that operative
paragraph 61 confers upon the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on violence against children a
clear mandate to address all forms of violence against
children living under foreign occupation. Syria
reserves the right to interpret operative paragraphs 15,
17, 18 and 32 of the resolution in accordance with
Syrian law.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 66?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 67
Indigenous issues
Report of the Third Committee (A/62/436)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft decision recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report.
We will now take action on the draft decision,
entitled “Document considered by the General
Assembly in connection with indigenous issues”. May
I take it that the General Assembly wishes to adopt the
draft decision recommended by the Third Committee?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 67?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 68
Elimination of racism and racial discrimination
Report of the Third Committee (А/62/437)
The President: The Assembly has before it three
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 26 of its report and one draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 27 of the
same report.

8

Before proceeding further, I should like to inform
members that action on draft resolution II, entitled
“Global efforts for the total elimination of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance and the comprehensive implementation of
and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action”, is postponed to a later date to
allow time for the review of its programme budget
implications by the Fifth Committee. The Assembly
will take action on draft resolution II as soon as the
report of the Fifth Committee on its programme budget
implications is available.
I now call on the representative of the Russian
Federation, who wishes to speak in explanation of vote
before the voting.
Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I am taking the floor with regard to the draft
resolution entitled “Inadmissibility of certain practices
that contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance”.
Unfortunately, during the voting in the Third
Committee, not all delegations had the political will to
support the draft resolution or to oppose those who are
committing acts of violence against those of a different
skin colour or religious faith, including immigrants and
minorities.
Extremist groups, including “skinheads” —
motivated by an ideology and committing practices
that the United Nations was created to resist — and the
glorification of those who were involved in the crimes
of Nazism, including former members of the SS, who
were recognized as criminals by the Nuremberg
Tribunal, are inadmissible. Nevertheless, there have
recently been frequent instances of, inter alia, the
formal dedication of monuments to Nazis, the
awarding of governmental decorations and the granting
of State protection to individuals guilty of crimes
against
humanity,
the
designation
of
days
commemorating liberation from Nazism as days of
mourning, the harassment of anti-Fascists and the
honouring of former members of the SS as “martyrs”.
Such actions clearly constitute abuses of the right to
freedom of peaceful assembly, association, opinion and
expression and may fall within the purview of article 4
of the International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination, which would

07-64864

A/62/PV.76

require that their perpetrators be brought to justice as
criminals.
Therefore, the delegation of the Russian
Federation calls on all those who seek to prevent a
revival of Nazism and who are fighting for the
elimination
of
racism,
racial
discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance to vote in favour of
the present draft resolution.
The President: We will now take a decision on
draft resolutions I and III and on the one draft decision.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Inadmissibility of
certain practices that contribute to fuelling
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance”. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Israel, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,

07-64864

Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Marshall Islands, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Papua New
Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Vanuatu.
Draft resolution I was adopted by 130 votes to 2,
with 53 abstentions (resolution 62/142).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Nauru advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Report of the Human Rights Council on the
preparations for the Durban Review Conference”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,

9

A/62/PV.76

Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland,
Italy,
Jamaica,
Japan,
Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Israel, Marshall
America.

Islands,

United

States

of

Abstaining:
Australia, Canada, Norway.
Draft resolution III was adopted by 177 votes to 3,
with 3 abstentions (resolution 62/143).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Norway advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President: We now turn to the draft
decision, entitled “Document considered by the
General Assembly in connection with the elimination
of racism and racial discrimination”. May I take it that

10

it is the wish of the General Assembly to adopt the
draft decision recommended by the Third Committee?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
68.
Agenda item 69
Right of peoples to self-determination
Report of the Third Committee (A/62/438)
The President: The Assembly has before it three
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 23 of its report. We will now take a
decision on draft resolutions I, II and III.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Universal
realization of the right of peoples to selfdetermination”. The Third Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution
62/144).

I

was

adopted

(resolution

The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Use of mercenaries as a means of violating human
rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples
to self-determination”. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chad, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s
Democratic
Republic,
Lebanon,

07-64864

A/62/PV.76

Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.
Abstaining:
Chile, Liechtenstein, New Zealand, Switzerland,
Tonga, Tunisia.
Draft resolution II was adopted by 127 votes to
52, with 6 abstentions (resolution 62/145).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Nauru advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“The right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

07-64864

In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Moldova,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan,
Suriname,
Swaziland,
Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.

11

A/62/PV.76

Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Palau, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, Canada, Nauru.
Draft resolution III was adopted by 176 votes to
5, with 4 abstentions (resolution 62/146).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 69?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 70
Promotion and protection of human rights
Report of the Third Committee (А/62/439)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft decision recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 5 of its report. We will now take action on
the draft decision, entitled “Reports considered by the
General Assembly in connection with the promotion
and protection of human rights”. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to adopt the draft decision
recommended by the Third Committee?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 70.
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
Report of the Third Committee
(A/62/439/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it two
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 16 of its report. We will now take a
decision on draft resolutions I and II.
We first turn to draft resolution I, entitled
“International Covenants on Human Rights”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 62/
147).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment”. The Third Committee

12

adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
62/148).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 70?
It was so decided.
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms
Report of the Third Committee
(A/62/439/Аdd.2)
The President: The Assembly has before it
19 draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 173 of its report and one draft
decision recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 174 of the same report.
Before proceeding further, I should like to inform
members that action on draft resolution X, entitled
“Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy
in Central Africa”, is postponed to a later date to allow
time for the review of its programme budget
implications by the Fifth Committee. The Assembly
will take action on draft resolution X as soon as the
report of the Fifth Committee on its programme budget
implications is available.
I call on the representative of Portugal, who
wishes to speak on a point of order.
Mrs. Martins (Portugal): My delegation would
like to request that the report of the Third Committee
contained in document A/62/439/Add.2 be corrected to
include Burundi and Côte d’Ivoire in the list of
sponsors of draft resolution IX, entitled “Elimination
of all forms of intolerance and of discrimination based
on religion or belief”.
The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote before the voting.
Ms. Akbar (Antigua and Barbuda): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the Bahamas, Barbados,
Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the

07-64864

A/62/PV.76

Grenadines, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago and my
own country, Antigua and Barbuda, on draft
resolution I, “Moratorium on the use of the death
penalty”, contained in the report of the Third
Committee (A/62/439/Add.2).
I would like to reiterate that the Caribbean
Member States on whose behalf I speak are committed
to the promotion, protection and enforcement of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms, consistent
with our legal obligations under international law. In
that regard, we have supported international efforts
aimed at reaffirming the importance of all human rights
and ensuring the universality, objectivity and
non-selectivity of the consideration of those rights. We
hold that there can be no true development of our
peoples without an environment conducive to the full
enjoyment of their human rights.
We are fully committed to the rule of law at both
the national and international levels. Consequently, we
have integrated into our domestic laws our legal
obligations under the various international human
rights instruments to which we are States parties.
Additionally, in the context of the availability of
resources, we have in large measure complied with our
reporting obligations to the various monitoring
committees established by those conventions.
Moreover, we acknowledge the importance of the
recommendations of those bodies in assisting us as we
strive to improve the protection, promotion and
enforcement of the human rights of all of our citizens.
In that context, Caribbean Member States that
maintain the death penalty reiterate their difficulty with
the tone and the intent of draft resolution I contained in
document A/62/439/Add.2. We find the provisions of
the draft resolution to be unbalanced and contrary to
international law. We are therefore very disappointed
that its authors did not provide us with sufficient
opportunity to air our views or submit reasonable
proposals to improve the text.
The Caribbean States that are parties to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights do
not contravene the Covenant when a capital sentence is
adjudged. Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Covenant
applies specifically to countries that have not abolished
the death penalty. It provides that a sentence of death
may be imposed only for the most serious crimes and
pursuant to a final judgement rendered by a competent
court.

07-64864

We uphold the independence of the judiciary as a
bulwark of our democracy and as a guardian against
any deprivation of the fundamental and inalienable
rights and freedoms of our citizens. That is supported
through the observance and enforcement of the sacred
legal principle that no citizen, including those accused
of capital offences, can be deprived of their human
rights, except through due process of law.
We regret any implication that we arbitrarily
apply capital punishment for insignificant crimes and
without regard for the human rights of the prosecuted.
Caribbean States that maintain the death penalty apply
it only for cases of murder or treason. As a matter of
fact, in most of our countries capital punishment has
not been carried out in more than a decade. To that end,
the executive arm of Government upholds the decisions
of the courts, including those handed down by the
Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, which for
most of us still remains the final appellate court.
We have complied with the landmark judicial
decisions of that highly respected court, and have
commuted to life imprisonment the sentences of death
imposed on certain prisoners. That is yet another
demonstration of our commitment to observing and
maintaining the safeguards guaranteeing the protection
of the rights of those facing capital punishment.
We regret equally the unwillingness of many
abolitionist countries to engage in productive
discussion and collaboration that could better address
the very complex issues of criminality and crime
prevention, their root causes and how they impact
upon, and undermine the fundamental human rights of,
our citizens. There appears to be scant interest in
collaborating with Caribbean member States to deal not
only with the symptoms of criminal activities but also
with the socio-economic stimuli and triggers.
Finally, given the reality of the situation in the
Caribbean, the countries associated with this statement
are forced to question the intent and argument of the
authors of the draft resolution. Caribbean opponents of
the draft resolution have not contravened any laws,
international or domestic, by maintaining the death
penalty in their domestic laws. We respect the right of
other States to abolish the death penalty but, in turn,
they should respect our sovereign right to choose the
judicial, political, economic and social systems that
pertain to our societies. In that vein, we maintain our
right to uphold or abolish the death penalty, ever

13

A/62/PV.76

mindful of our domestic and international legal
obligations.
Mr. Degia (Barbados): I take the floor to explain
my country’s position on draft resolution I as contained
in document A/62/439/Add.2. We associate ourselves
with the statement made earlier by the representative of
Antigua and Barbuda on behalf of 13 Caribbean States.
At the outset, Barbados wishes to state clearly its
position that any attempt by a country or group of
countries to impose its values on other member
countries by calling on it to abolish the death penalty
or to establish a moratorium on its use is an
infringement upon the sovereignty of those member
States.
Although the Government of Barbados has not
carried out an execution in close to a quarter of a
century, the death penalty exists in the legal statutes of
Barbados. It is our right to retain it or abolish it. We
respect the right of those countries that have abolished
the death penalty or established a moratorium to do so.
We only ask that the same courtesy be accorded to us.
My delegation has a different perspective on the
issue before us. Permit me to raise a few points to
clarify our position and to highlight the serious
shortcomings in the approach of the co-sponsors of this
draft resolution.
Barbados attaches the highest importance to the
issue of human rights and democracy, both in our
domestic and our foreign policy. We are proud of our
human rights record, not just from a civil and political
aspect but also in the areas of economic, social and
cultural rights. Since our independence, we have based
our development on the provision of free health care to
all, free education — including at university level —
gender equality and the empowerment of women, a
commitment to civil and political liberties and
development with a human face.
We are a signatory to all the major regional and
international human rights conventions and treaties,
including the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. We are a stable
and vibrant democracy and maintain an independent
judiciary and a system of due process. Indeed, our
Westminster system of Government and the inclusion
of the death penalty within the legal code as a
punishment were inherited from one of the main

14

co-sponsors. The death penalty can only be applied
after an exhaustive process of appeals within our courts
and is subject to strict safeguards and guidelines.
Until 2005, the British Privy Council was our
highest court of appeal. In 2004, shortly before the
Caribbean Court of Justice replaced it, the Privy
Council ruled that the death penalty sentence within
Barbados’ statutes was lawful and in conformity with
the Constitution. In other words, as opposed to the
sentiments implied in the draft resolution, we operate
within a rational, structured and sound system of laws
and checks and balances.
It is important to highlight that the death penalty
is not prohibited in international law. The International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights states that
“In countries which have not abolished the
death penalty, sentence of death may be imposed
only for the most serious crimes in accordance
with the law in force at the time of the
commission of the crime and not contrary to the
provisions of the present Covenant and to the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of
the Crime of Genocide”. (resolution 2200 A
(XXI), annex, International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, part III, article 6,
paragraph 2)
Barbados does not in any way view the retention
of the death penalty in our statutes as contradictory to
our obligations under the Convention.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights also
does not prohibit the death penalty. What we find
interesting is the fact that many of the sponsors who
signed on to the Declaration in 1948 preserved the
death penalty in their statutes and also implemented it.
They have chosen to abolish it in their national legal
systems, as it is their sovereign right to do. But capital
punishment remains legal under international law and
Barbados wishes to exercise its sovereign right to use it
as a deterrent to the most serious crimes.
Beyond all of that is the simple fact that the
question of the death penalty is basically one of
criminal justice as enforced and upheld within national
legal systems. As long as the death penalty is not
applied arbitrarily or summarily and is subject to a
system of due process by competent courts, Barbados
believes that it is both lawful under international law
and must be seen as an internal matter fully in keeping

07-64864

A/62/PV.76

with the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and all of the human rights treaties to which
Barbados is a party.
In the light of the foregoing, the Government of
Barbados will vote emphatically against draft
resolution I. We ask that this statement be included in
the official records of this meeting.
Mr. Menon (Singapore): My delegation is
delivering this explanation of vote in connection with
draft
resolution
I
contained
in
document
A/62/439/Add.2, entitled “Moratorium on the use of
the death penalty”.
In declaring victory, the sponsors of the draft
resolution have claimed proof that the values of the
European Union (EU) are increasingly universal
values. But let us look at the reality. The reality is that
many countries — a significant number — did not vote
in favour of the draft resolution in the Third
Committee. That proves yet again that there is no
international consensus on the use of the death penalty.
The acrimony that we saw this year also underscores
the point that the draft resolution is divisive. The
reality is that for many delegations this is a criminal
justice issue and not a purely human rights issue, as the
European Union and its allies assert.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights does
not prohibit the death penalty. Neither does the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. In
fact, many EU countries had the death penalty on their
statutes when they signed the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.
For Singapore, capital punishment is a strong
deterrent that is imposed with robust safeguards and
only for the most serious crimes. We believe that it is
the right of all our citizens to live in a safe
environment, free from criminal threat to their lives
and personal safety.
It is unfortunate that the sponsors have handled
this not as a debate but a lecture — their views, in their
reckoning, being the only legitimate ones. They may
have made pronouncements to the contrary, but there
was never any real attempt to seek consensus or to
persuade by argument. We saw the main sponsors
refusing to acknowledge an Article in the Charter of
the United Nations that states that
“Nothing contained in the present Charter shall
authorize the United Nations to intervene in

07-64864

matters which are essentially within the domestic
jurisdiction of any state” (Article 2, para. 7).
They opposed what they said was selective quotations
and then quoted selectively themselves. They voted en
masse against amendments that no reasonable person
would dispute. For instance, there is a great diversity
of legal, social, economic and cultural conditions in the
world. They suppressed the efforts of retentionist
States to express themselves on individual paragraphs
and resorted to pressure tactics and demarches.
The main sponsors will celebrate their so-called
victory, but let us not forget that that victory was at the
cost of much acrimony in the Third Committee and of
the undermining of the sense of commonality and
cooperation that should characterize our work at the
United Nations. There will be ramifications for the
Third Committee’s relevance.
Each State has a sovereign right to choose its own
political, economic, social and legal system, based on
what it considers to be its own best interests. In this
regard, this resolution will make no difference to
Singapore’s policies. We will continue to implement
policies that work for us and best serve the interests of
our people.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the 87 delegations
representing all regional groups that sponsored draft
resolution I, on a moratorium on the use of the death
penalty, in the Third Committee. We would like this
initiative to open a process of dialogue and
compromise at the level of the General Assembly on a
matter of fundamental importance in the prolonged
efforts towards the improvement and progressive
development of human rights.
For a number of years now, this matter has been a
source of concern for the international community for a
variety of reasons. That is why we are pleased that the
General Assembly is finally approving a draft
resolution that urges States to establish a moratorium
on the use of the death penalty pending its abolition.
This draft resolution reflects the results of intensive
dialogue throughout the negotiating process among the
sponsors, who see the text as the beginning of a
process that will increasingly involve the United
Nations in the question of the death penalty.
We hope that as of now we may begin to have an
open and transparent discussion among all Member

15

A/62/PV.76

States on this matter of great importance and
sensitivity in many of our societies. The purpose of this
draft resolution is not to interfere in or impose our
views on others. Our intention is to promote and to
strengthen the growing trend towards the elimination
of the death penalty.
As in the Third Committee, the sponsors of this
draft resolution urge other States to support it by voting
in favour.
Mr. Akindele (Nigeria): I would like to explain
Nigeria’s vote before the vote on draft resolution I, on
the moratorium on the use of the death penalty,
contained in document A/62/439/Add.2. The Nigerian
Government upholds the rule of law, including the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
as well as their enjoyment by our citizens. Indeed, the
thrust of my statement was made by the representative
of Nigeria on 15 November when this matter was dealt
with in the Third Committee.
The death penalty is retained on our statute books
in order to serve the purpose of our internal security
and as a deterrent to criminals who would not balk at
threatening and taking the lives of innocent people,
including civilians. My delegation cannot accept the
inference in the draft resolution that the death penalty
is undermining human dignity and that imposes an
obligation on the States that maintain the death penalty
to restrict its use. We do not accept that a moratorium
will serve our purpose in the security in our country.
Let there be no doubt that capital punishment is
meted out only in very serious criminal cases, where
human lives have been taken or where the security of
the State has been gravely endangered. Punishment is
administered only after exhaustive legal and judicial
processes, including recourse to the supreme court of
the land.
Although it is on record that Nigeria has not
administered capital punishment in recent years, the
Nigerian delegation believes that a moratorium on the
death penalty should not be imposed by a group of
States, irrespective of their views or values on a subject
that falls strictly under the exclusive domestic
jurisdiction of States. In order to command
acceptability and respect, any moratorium should be a
matter of serious negotiation and agreement in terms of
criminal law at the international level rather than as an
issue of human rights.

16

Indeed, this draft resolution falls far short of that.
Therefore, in view of its limited and limiting nature,
including its subjectivity and inflexibility, as well as its
attempt to interfere in matters that should fall within
the domestic jurisdiction of States and in consonance
with the laws of Nigeria and its constitution, Nigeria
will vote against the draft resolution on the death
penalty.
The President: We will now take a decision on
draft resolutions I to IX and XI to XIX, and on the
draft decisions, one by one. After all the decisions have
been taken, representatives will again have the
opportunity to explain their vote.
We first turn to draft resolution I entitled
“Moratorium on the use of the death penalty”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium,
Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of),
Moldova,
Monaco,
Montenegro,
Mozambique,
Namibia,
Nauru,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of).
Against:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Barbados,
Belize,

07-64864

A/62/PV.76

Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Chad, China,
Comoros, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Dominica, Egypt, Ethiopia, Grenada,
Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Malaysia,
Maldives,
Mauritania, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Uganda, United States of America, Yemen,
Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Belarus, Bhutan, Cameroon, Central African
Republic, Cuba, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Fiji,
Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Malawi, Morocco, Niger, Republic of Korea,
Sierra Leone, Swaziland, Togo, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Viet
Nam, Zambia.
Draft resolution I was adopted by 104 votes to
54, with 29 abstentions (resolution 62/149).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Strengthening the role of the United Nations in
enhancing the effectiveness of the principle of periodic
and genuine elections and the promotion of
democratization”.
A separate vote has been requested on the fifth
preambular paragraph of draft resolution II. Is there
any objection to that request? There is none. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,

07-64864

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco,
Mozambique,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Yemen, Zambia.
Against:
None.
Abstaining:
Belarus, Brunei Darussalam, Cuba, Egypt, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Malaysia, Myanmar,
Singapore, South Africa, Sudan, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Viet Nam.
The fifth preambular paragraph of draft
resolution II was retained by 168 votes to none,
with 13 abstentions.

17

A/62/PV.76

The President: I shall now put to the vote draft
resolution II as a whole. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Moldova, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan,
Suriname,
Sweden,
Switzerland,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad
and
Tobago,
Tunisia,
Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United

18

Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
None.
Abstaining:
Democratic
Swaziland.

People’s

Republic

of

Korea,

Draft resolution II as a whole was adopted by
182 votes to none, with 2 abstentions (resolution
62/150).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Nauru advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Globalization and its impact on the full enjoyment of
all human rights”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chad, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji,
Gabon,
Gambia,
Ghana,
Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the

07-64864

A/62/PV.76

Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Marshall
Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Moldova,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Brazil, Chile, Equatorial Guinea, Singapore.
Draft resolution III was adopted by 129 votes to
54, with 4 abstentions (resolution 62/151).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of
Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote
and Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms”. The Third Committee
adopted draft resolution IV without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
62/152).
The President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“Protection of and assistance to internally displaced
persons”. The Third Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution
62/153).

07-64864

The President: Draft resolution VI is entitled
“Combating defamation of religions”. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chad, China, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Grenada,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua,
Niger, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Marshall
Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Moldova,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,

19

A/62/PV.76

Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

Draft resolution XII was adopted (resolution
62/159).

Abstaining:
Argentina, Armenia, Botswana, Brazil, Chile,
Colombia, Ecuador, Ghana, Guatemala, India,
Japan, Kenya, Madagascar, Malawi, Mexico,
Mongolia, Nepal, Nigeria, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Rwanda, Solomon
Islands, United Republic of Tanzania.

The President: Draft resolution XIII is entitled
“Enhancement of international cooperation in the field
of human rights”. The Third Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?

Draft resolution VI was adopted by 108 votes to
51, with 25 abstentions (resolution 62/154).

The President: Draft resolution XIV is entitled
“The right to development”. A recorded vote has been
requested.

The President: Draft resolution VII is entitled
“Human rights and cultural diversity”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution VII was adopted (resolution
62/155).
The President: Draft resolution VIII is entitled
“Protection of migrants”. The Third Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution VIII was adopted (resolution
62/156).
The President: Draft resolution IX, entitled
“Elimination of all forms of intolerance and of
discrimination based on religion or belief”, has been
orally corrected by the Rapporteur. The Third
Committee adopted draft resolution IX. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to adopt resolution IX, as
orally corrected?
Draft resolution IX, as orally corrected, was
adopted (resolution 62/157).
The President: Draft resolution XI is entitled
“Human rights in the administration of justice”. The
Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution XI was adopted (resolution
62/158).
The President: Draft resolution XII is entitled
“Protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
while countering terrorism”. The Third Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?

20

Draft resolution XIII was adopted (resolution
62/160).

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab

07-64864

A/62/PV.76

Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Moldova,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Draft resolution XIV was adopted by 136 votes to
53 (resolution 62/161).
The President: Draft resolution XV is entitled
“Human rights and unilateral coercive measures”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji,
Gabon,
Gambia,
Ghana,
Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,

07-64864

Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Marshall
Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Moldova,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Draft resolution XV was adopted by 132 votes to
54 (resolution 62/162).
The President: Draft resolution XVI is entitled
“Promotion of peace as a vital requirement for the full
enjoyment of all human rights by all”. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chad, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,

21

A/62/PV.76

Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Marshall
Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Moldova,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Argentina, Armenia, Chile, Mexico, Samoa,
Singapore.
Draft resolution XVI was adopted by 126 votes to
54, with 6 abstentions (resolution 62/163).
The President: Draft resolution XVII is entitled
“The right to food”. A recorded vote has been
requested.

22

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Moldova, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,

07-64864

A/62/PV.76

Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
United States of America.
Abstaining:
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Draft resolution XVII was adopted by 186 votes
to 1, with 1 abstention (resolution 62/164).
The President: Draft resolution XVIII is entitled
“Strengthening United Nations action in the field of
human rights through the promotion of international
cooperation and the importance of non-selectivity,
impartiality and objectivity”. The Third Committee
adopted draft resolution XVIII without a vote. May I
take it that the General Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
Draft resolution XVIII was adopted (resolution
62/165).
The President: Draft resolution XIX is entitled
“Respect for the purposes and principles contained in
the Charter of the United Nations to achieve
international
cooperation
in
promoting
and
encouraging respect for human rights and for
fundamental freedoms and in solving international
problems of a humanitarian character”. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chad, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,

07-64864

Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Moldova,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Kazakhstan, Nauru,
Peru, Singapore, Thailand, Tonga, Uruguay.
Draft resolution XIX was adopted by 120 votes to
55, with 10 abstentions (resolution 62/166).
The President: We now turn to the draft decision
entitled “Effective promotion of the Declaration on the
Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic,
Religious and Linguistic Minorities”. The Third
Committee adopted the draft decision. May I take it
that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: I shall now give the floor to
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote following the voting.

23

A/62/PV.76

Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
voted against resolution 62/149, entitled “Moratorium
on the use of the death penalty”, because it contradicts
several internationally agreed and respected religious,
legal and practical elements and consideration.
Like other religions, Islam respects human
dignity and the sanctity of life, for life is a gift from
God to all human beings equally. The death penalty is
therefore restricted to the most serious crimes in
Islamic law. It may only be imposed following the
application of due process of law, so as to ensure that
the punishment is compatible with legal and religious
provisions and that no one is arbitrarily deprived of his
or her life.
Although article 6 of the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights does not prohibit the
imposition of the death penalty, the aim is clearly to
ensure that the death penalty is only imposed for the
most serious of crimes under the national law in force
at the time the crime was committed. At the same time,
it contains provisions for the granting of the right to
seek pardon or to appeal for the commutation of a
sentence. The key element in this regard should
therefore have been due process and the thorough
implementation of legal procedures, rather than
focusing on the abolition of the penalty.
The restriction contained in article 6 of the
Covenant on the imposition of the death penalty for
crimes committed by minors reflects the existing
international consensus that the death penalty may only
be applied to mature adults who are aware of the
consequences of their serious crimes.

disregarding the world’s great diversity of legal, social,
economic and cultural conditions. It also ignores the
fact that rules cannot always apply on the same level in
all societies, or at all times.
While we recognize that some Member States
have voluntarily decided to abolish the death penalty,
and that others have chosen to apply a moratorium on
executions, many Member States that have retained the
death penalty in their national legislation, in full
compliance with their obligations under the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
No side is more right than the other; each State has
decided and will continue to decide freely, in
accordance with its own sovereign right established by
the Charter of the United Nations, to choose the path
that responds to its own social, cultural and legal
needs, in order to maintain security, social order and
peace.
We are fully convinced that the divergent legal,
practical and human rights arguments and
considerations on this issue can be reconciled only
through a comprehensive process of multilateral debate
and negotiation. If we are sincere about respecting
cultural diversity and promoting mutual understanding,
we must not depart from the path of dialogue.
Although Egypt voted against the resolution for
the aforementioned reasons, we strongly believe that it
remains the obligation of all States that retain and carry
out the death penalty for the most serious crimes to
ensure that it is carried out pursuant to a final
judgement rendered by a competent court of law, with
due process being observed. Hence, we reaffirm that
the focus of international efforts should be on
strengthening international commitments to ensure that
no one is arbitrarily deprived of the right to life,
particularly as regards extrajudicial executions.

Moreover, the restriction on carrying out the
death penalty on pregnant women reflects respect for
the right to life of unborn children, who in some cases
are arbitrarily deprived of their right in the absence of
crime, court sentence or right to appeal. That is
especially relevant in many conflict areas and regions
under harsh occupation. Islamic sharia law also
prohibits abortion, except in very rare and necessary
circumstances.

Mr. Rastam (Malaysia): I take the floor to
explain my country’s position in reference to draft
resolution I entitled “Moratorium on the use of the
death penalty”, as contained in the report of the Third
Committee (A/62/439/Add.2).

In spite of our sincere efforts to overcome the
selectivity that characterized the draft resolution prior
to its adoption, in keeping with the provisions of
existing international legal instruments, our call
regrettably went unheeded. The resolution fails to
address extrajudicial executions. It stresses the
particular needs of specific social systems while

Malaysia firmly believes in the protection and
promotion of human rights and upholds the rule of law.
Every State has the right to choose its own political,
economic, social, cultural and legal justice system,
including the use of the death penalty, as suitable for
its own society and national context, without
interference in any form by another State.

24

07-64864

A/62/PV.76

For
Malaysia,
capital
punishment
is
fundamentally an issue of the criminal justice system
and is used only for the most serious crimes, in
accordance with the due process of law and with the
necessary safeguards.

further
deepens
disagreement
and
worsens
confrontation, and China is opposed to such practices.
We are opposed to resolution 62/149, entitled
“Moratorium on the use of the death penalty”, and we
question its effectiveness.

The results of the voting on the resolution here
today and in the Third Committee are a clear indication
that the international community is divided on the issue
of the death penalty. A sizable number of countries
have shown their opposition to the content and intent
of the resolution. The resolution is unbalanced and
does not take into account the views of those countries
that have chosen to maintain capital punishment in
their legal systems. The resolution attempts to impose
the values of some countries on others and allows some
countries to dictate a singular view for the
development of customary international law and the
evolution of the international legal framework. It was
for those reasons that Malaysia voted against the
resolution.

Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): I am taking the floor in
explanation of my delegation’s vote after the vote on
the adoption of draft resolution I entitled “Moratorium
on the use of the death penalty”, the text of which is
contained in document A/62/439/Add.2.

Ms. Zhang Dan (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation expresses its regret that the
Assembly has been obliged to discuss the issue of the
death penalty in plenary meeting. Resolution 62/149,
entitled “Moratorium on the use of the death penalty”,
is the result of pressure exerted by some countries,
using the death penalty as a pretext.
The fact that the Third Committee had to resort to
a vote on the draft resolution and that 85 members did
not vote in favour of it clearly reflects the level of
disagreement on this issue. We express our
dissatisfaction with the practice by which some
countries of imposing this resolution on Member
States. We also regret that certain countries blocked the
various amendments aimed at improving the draft
resolution.
China would like to reiterate that, in today’s
world, deciding on the use of the death penalty is a
matter of domestic legislation and the judicial process.
It is not a matter of human rights. It is the right of each
and every country to decide, on the basis of its justice
system and its historical and cultural background,
when to use a given form of punishment and when to
decree a moratorium on or abolish it. They should be
able to do so without interference from other countries.
Disagreement on the issue of the death penalty should
be resolved through dialogue and consultations on an
equal footing. Pushing through such a resolution only

07-64864

The criminal justice system of Bangladesh has
provisions for the death penalty. However, its
application is very selectively restricted to cases
involving the most heinous and serious crimes. It is
important to note that our domestic legal system has
the necessary safeguards in place to avoid any
miscarriage of justice. The process involves an
elaborate, exhaustive and transparent legal procedure,
which goes through various tiers of the judiciary.
Extreme caution is exercised at every stage, and there
are adequate measures for redress. Ultimately, there is
a provision for presidential clemency.
Mr. Hannesson (Iceland), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The resolution just adopted is a demonstration of
the growing trend against the death penalty. However,
we believe that the time has not yet come for its total
abolition. A moratorium ultimately leading to the
abolition of the death penalty, as called for in the
resolution, would involve a full appraisal of the
criminal justice system worldwide. Hence, Bangladesh
was constrained to vote against the resolution. We have
already explained that opposition during the
consideration of the draft resolution in the Third
Committee.
Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation voted against resolution
62/149, entitled “Moratorium on the use of the death
penalty”, because of our conviction that States
Members of the United Nations enjoy equal
sovereignty, in accordance with the principles of the
Charter. That sovereignty is based on mutual respect
and non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
My delegation believes that the resolution just adopted
constitutes explicit interference in the internal affairs
and political independence of States, in contravention
to the Charter. The resolution does not pertain to
whether or not the death penalty is implemented.

25

A/62/PV.76

Rather, it mainly affects each country’s sovereign right
to select its own political, social, cultural and judicial
system.
Calling upon States to establish a moratorium on
the use of the death penalty is to ask them to change
their judicial systems, which are the culmination of
their political, historical, religious and cultural
specificities. The debate on the implementation of the
death penalty undermines human dignity and
completely ignores the human dignity of victims, for it
ignores their rights. Those rights require that human
values and ideals be respected.
In addition, the use of the death penalty has been
endorsed by legal authorities in many countries,
including those of my country. The Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic, which applies the death penalty
on the basis of the directives of its legislative system,
seeks primarily to protect the rights of victims and to
preserve various judicial, social, religious and cultural
elements. If my Government is not authorized to
interfere in the judicial systems of other States, then
how can a group of States interfere in the internal
affairs of another State and ask it to eliminate the death
penalty from its national legislation?
In addition, the democratic process requires noninterference in the work of the judicial branch. States
that apply the death penalty in line with their national
legislation never ask States that do not implement it to
do so. How can those States ask States that do carry out
the death penalty to eliminate it? Moreover, a State or
group of States cannot impose its values, opinions or
legal systems on others, for every State has its own
specific characteristics. The laws of each country are a
natural reflection of those specificities.
The death penalty is a judicial penal measure
pertaining to criminal justice, not to human rights.
Eliminating the death penalty entrenches violations of
human rights and rewards criminals — who may have
killed more than one person — for their crimes.
Protecting
human
rights
necessarily
requires
considering the rights of victims before considering the
penalty itself. Furthermore, States that call for the
elimination of the death penalty are actually putting
criminals before victims. That is something that must
be considered when proposing a resolution of this sort.
Syria, which has also signed the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, carries out the
death penalty only for the most serious crimes. It does

26

so only in line with article 6 of the Covenant and
following due process, which ensures the rights of
accused persons and provides them with every
opportunity to defend themselves. However, those
found guilty are subject to the just verdict of the
judiciary in order to protect the rights of innocent
victims.
Given our firm belief that draft resolution I
contained in document A/62/432/Add.2 constituted
clear interference in the laws and rights of States, and
in line with what I have said today, we voted against it.
Mr. O’Reilly (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption of the important
resolution 62/164, on the right to food. However, the
United Kingdom would like to place on record its
considerable concerns with paragraph 12 of the
resolution, which stresses the General Assembly’s
commitments to promote and protect, without
discrimination, the economic, social and cultural rights
of indigenous peoples, in accordance with international
human rights obligations. As stated at the adoption of
the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples, the United Kingdom does not
recognize the concept of collective human rights in
international law. Our interpretative statement at that
time made clear that the United Kingdom fully
supports the provisions in the Declaration that
recognize that indigenous individuals are entitled to the
full protection of their human rights and fundamental
freedoms in international law on an equal basis to all
other individuals, as all human rights are universal and
equal to all.
However, as we reaffirmed, the United Kingdom
does not accept that some groups in society should
benefit from human rights that are not available to
others. With the exception of the right to selfdetermination — common article 1 of the two
international human rights Covenants — we therefore
do not accept the concept of collective human rights in
international law. That is, however, without prejudice
to the United Kingdom’s recognition of the fact that the
Governments of many States with indigenous
populations have granted them various collective rights
in their constitutions, national laws and agreements.
For those same reasons, while the United
Kingdom voted in favour of the resolution on the right
to food, we do not and cannot support the language
contained in paragraph 12. Accordingly, we stress that

07-64864

A/62/PV.76

we will be unable to support that or similar language
appearing in future draft resolutions on this or any
other subject. Accordingly, the United Kingdom
reserves the opportunity to continue to negotiate that
language further in subsequent discussions.
Ms. Booker (Bahamas): My delegation, on behalf
of the Government and the people of the Bahamas,
considers this an important opportunity to address this
body in explanation of vote on draft resolution I, as
contained in document A/62/439/Add.2, entitled
“Moratorium on the use of the death penalty”.
Irrespective of the sentiments expressed by many in the
divisive debate on this item, my delegation, as
demonstrated by its vote against the resolution, firmly
believes that this matter is one of national sovereignty,
subject to the domestic jurisdiction of national
Governments.
Having attained independence some 34 years ago,
following more than 240 years of continuous
parliamentary democracy, the Bahamas is a sovereign
nation with a proud history of respect for human rights.
Indeed, since 1647, settlers have braved the perils of
the Atlantic in search of freedom and the promise of a
better life in the Bahamas. Many continue to do so
today.
The Bahamas prides itself on adhering to the
fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual,
irrespective of race, place of origin, political opinion,
colour, creed or sex, as guaranteed in chapter III of its
constitution — the supreme law of the land —
underpinning its commitment to the principles of
international law, including the respect for sovereignty
and the juridical equality of States, territorial integrity,
the peaceful resolution of disputes and noninterference in the internal affairs of States.
The Bahamas, in its sovereign exercise, has
always considered, and continues to consider, the
matter of the death penalty for the most serious crimes
as a legal measure to be determined by individual
States without interference, in accordance with
international law. It is for those reasons that we voted
against draft resolution I.
Mr. Suárez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to say that it abstained in the
voting on draft resolution VI, entitled “Combating
defamation of religions”, and voted in favour of draft
resolution XIV, entitled “The right to development”,
and draft resolution XVII, entitled “The right to food” —

07-64864

all contained in document A/62/439/Add.2. We did so
against the backdrop of the considerations and
statements we put forth at the time when each was
considered in the Third Committee.
Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I should now like to explain our position on
resolution 62/159, entitled “Protection of human rights
and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism”.
My delegation joined the consensus on that resolution
because we firmly believe in the importance of
combating all forms of terrorism and its root causes,
given its catastrophic effects on all human rights,
especially the right to self-determination of peoples
living under foreign occupation, who suffer the ugliest
form of State terrorism. My delegation reaffirms that,
as we have not ratified the 1951 Convention relating to
the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol, our
understanding of operative paragraph 6 of the present
resolution reinforces our continued cooperation with
the United Nations within the framework of our
national laws.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 70.
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives (A/62/439/
Add.3)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it four draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 49 of its report.
Before proceeding further, I should like to inform
members that action on draft resolution II, entitled
“Situation of human rights in Myanmar”, is postponed
to a later date to allow time for the review of its
programme budget implications by the Fifth
Committee. The Assembly will take action on draft
resolution II as soon as the report of the Fifth
Committee on its programme budget implications is
available.
I now call on the representative of Belarus.
Mr. Rachkov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
delegation of Belarus has requested the floor with
regard to draft resolution IV, entitled “Situation of
human rights in Belarus”. The submission of the draft

27

A/62/PV.76

resolution on Belarus is an unjustified and politically
motivated step that undermines the Human Rights
Council’s consensus agreement on institution-building.
An inherent element of that agreement is elimination of
the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the situation
of human rights in Belarus.
Consideration of the draft resolution on Belarus
runs counter to the mechanism of the universal
periodic review of human rights situations, which is
designed to eliminate, to the greatest extent possible,
bias and lack of grounds in the consideration of human
rights situations in various countries. The draft
resolution on Belarus contradicts the efforts to
systematically develop a uniform and wide-ranging
approach to the Organization’s consideration of human
rights situations.
It is clear that the draft resolution on Belarus had
very little support in the Third Committee. A total of
124 States voted against it, abstained in the voting or
did not participate in the voting. The draft resolution’s
lack of political and moral legitimacy is more than
obvious.
Belarus is a party in good faith to international
legal documents on human rights and is duly carrying
out its international obligations. We call upon other
States not to support the draft resolution on the
situation regarding human rights in Belarus.
The Acting President: We will now take a
decision on draft resolutions I, III and IV.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bosnia and
Herzegovina,
Brazil,
Bulgaria,
Burundi,
Cambodia, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall

28

Islands,
Mauritania,
Mexico,
Micronesia
(Federated States of), Moldova, Monaco,
Montenegro, Morocco, Nauru, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tonga,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America,
Uruguay, Vanuatu.
Against:
Algeria, Belarus, China, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt, Guinea,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Myanmar, Oman, Russian
Federation, Somalia, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chad, Colombia, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Ethiopia, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, India,
Jamaica, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Mali, Mauritius,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao
Tome and Principe, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
Suriname, Swaziland, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, Yemen, Zambia.
Draft resolution I was adopted by 101 votes to
22, with 59 abstentions (resolution 62/167).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Situation of human rights in the Islamic
Republic of Iran”.
I call on the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, who wishes to speak on a point of
order.

07-64864

A/62/PV.76

Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Invoking rule 74 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly, my delegation moves that no action
be taken on draft resolution III.
The Human Rights Council, as the most
competent and specialized United Nations institution,
has been entrusted with the mandate of the
international consideration and monitoring of human
rights throughout the world through an efficient
mechanism, namely, the universal periodic review.
Therefore, together with the overwhelming majority of
the members of the international community, my
delegation is of the opinion that consideration by the
General Assembly of questions such as that referred to
in the draft resolution before us is categorically
unwarranted and unjustified and should be excluded
from the agenda of the Assembly today.
The Acting President: The representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran has moved, within the terms
of rule 74 of the rules of procedure, that no action be
taken on draft resolution III. Rule 74 reads in part:
“During the discussion of any matter, a
representative may move the adjournment of the
debate on the item under discussion. In addition
to the proposer of the motion, two representatives
may speak in favour of, and two against, the
motion, after which the motion shall be
immediately put to the vote.”
I now call on those representatives who wish to
speak regarding the motion.
Mr. Salguiero (Portugal): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The candidate
countries Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia, the
European Free Trade Association countries Iceland and
Norway, members of the European Economic Area, as
well as Ukraine, Moldova and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.
We regret that a motion to adjourn the debate on
draft resolution III, on this human rights situation, has
been called. As we have repeatedly stated, there should
be no question about the General Assembly’s mandate
to look into human rights situations. The Assembly
must assume its responsibility and consider all issues
within its mandate whenever delegations put proposals

07-64864

on the table. Therefore, we do not consider it
appropriate to seek to avoid taking action altogether,
through procedural motions. Draft resolutions should
pass or fail according to their merits and not fall victim
to procedural tricks. Suppressing debate is contrary to
one of the ideas on which the creation of United
Nations was based, namely, that issues of concern to
Member States will be addressed and discussed openly
in order to find solutions.
Moreover, we regret that the motion to adjourn
the debate is being moved for the second time on the
same draft resolution, after the first motion was
rejected by the Third Committee. We believe that the
Third Committee took that action because it chose to
consider the draft resolution before us according to its
merits. The no-action motion on this draft resolution in
plenary meeting is thus a vote of no confidence in the
Third Committee. It undermines that body, which is the
only one at the United Nations dealing with human
rights that has universal membership.
For both of those reasons, we will vote against
this no-action motion and urge all States to vote no,
regardless of their voting intentions on the draft
resolution itself.
Mr. Arias Cárdenas (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela once again expresses
its firm disagreement with the ongoing practice
promoted by some Member States of seeking to
condemn certain States, individually or selectively,
within the United Nations, using their human rights
situation as justification. Such draft resolutions then
become instruments to promote specific political
interests and could lead to strategic confrontation,
repeated engagement in which is undesirable,
inconsistent and illegitimate. In addition, they have no
genuine interest in the victims of these violations, nor
do they offer them any real assistance.
The Governments of certain countries sponsoring
the present draft resolution have violated human rights,
and similar draft resolutions have not been presented
against them, because it does not advance the interests
of the countries promoting this text. That demonstrates
that they are selective in their approach to the issue of
human rights. That is why the Human Rights Council,
the forum for such cases, has adopted guidelines and
measures, through the universal periodic review, which
guarantee impartial, objective and non-selective

29

A/62/PV.76

scrutiny of human rights situations everywhere in the
world, without focusing solely on developing countries
or on countries of particular interest to a given
powerful country.
Similarly, my delegation believes that any
measure or action taken within the framework of the
United Nations must be focused on promoting and
protecting human rights, on the basis of promoting
international cooperation and dialogue among States.
For our country, this is a question of principle.
In that regard, we express our support for the noaction motion proposed by the delegation of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, in accordance with rule 116
of the rules of procedure, with regard to draft
resolution III contained in document A/62/439/Add.3,
and we urge all delegations to support the motion and
thus prevent human rights from being used as a tool for
intervention and political pressure.
The Acting President: May I remind delegations
that, as agreed at the beginning, we are not discussing
substance. Delegations should express support for or
against the motion.
Mr. Hayee (Pakistan): I have requested the floor
to support the motion to adjourn the debate on draft
resolution III, entitled “Situation of human rights in the
Islamic Republic of Iran”. Pakistan strongly believes
that all human rights are universal, indivisible and
interdependent. It is, however, important that the
international human rights agenda be addressed in a
fair and balanced manner. That can be achieved only
with an approach based on dialogue and cooperation,
and not one of exclusion and confrontation such as that
exemplified by the country-specific resolutions. As a
member of the Organization of the Islamic Conference
and the Non-Aligned Movement, Pakistan has
consistently opposed country-specific resolutions. In
line with our firm and principled position, Pakistan
supports the no-action motion on draft resolution III,
and will vote in favour of it. We would urge all other
delegations to do likewise.
Ms. Molaroni (San Marino): I am pleased to
deliver this statement on behalf of Andorra, Argentina,
Australia, Canada, Japan, Liechtenstein, New Zealand,
Palau, the Republic of Korea, Timor-Leste, the United
States of America and my own country, the Republic of
San Marino.

30

To begin, we express our deep disappointment
that a no-action motion has been proposed in a plenary
meeting of the General Assembly. This is an
extraordinary step taken to stifle debate and undermine
the jurisdiction and responsibility of the Assembly. The
draft resolution before us was adopted by the Third
Committee after a no-action motion was presented and
failed. Allow me to repeat that: this draft resolution
was adopted in the Third Committee, after an identical
no-action motion failed. The draft resolution was then
recommended by the Third Committee to the Assembly
for our consideration today. That is how the work of
the Committees of the Assembly has always proceeded.
We debate and discuss and amend and argue in the
Third Committee, and then we reach a decision, and
that decision becomes our collective recommendation
to the General Assembly.
A no-action motion in the General Assembly after
the Committee has recommended this draft resolution
to the Assembly for adoption signifies a complete
disregard for the Third Committee and its decisionmaking process. Such a motion seeks to prevent the
General
Assembly
from
acting
upon
the
recommendation of the Third Committee. If successful,
it would have the effect of undermining the work of the
Third Committee, the United Nations body with
universal membership responsible for human rights,
and of undermining the work of the Assembly itself.
We may differ on the gravity of a specific human
rights situation, but we must all agree on the critical
importance of maintaining the integrity of our work in
the Third Committee and in the Assembly. We
therefore strongly urge all Member States to vote “no”
on this no-action motion in order to allow the
Assembly to vote for the draft resolution on its merits.
The Acting President: I shall now put to the vote
the motion submitted by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran that no action be taken on
draft resolution III. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda,
Armenia,
Azerbaijan,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Bolivia, Brunei
Darussalam,
Cambodia,
Central
African
Republic, Chad, China, Comoros, Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of

07-64864

A/62/PV.76

Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Egypt, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Guinea, India,
Indonesia,
Iran
(Islamic
Republic
of),
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nicaragua, Niger, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo,
Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kiribati,
Latvia,
Liberia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome
and Principe, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tonga,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Vanuatu.
Abstaining:
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil,
Colombia, Dominica, Ghana, Guyana, Jamaica,
Lesotho, Malawi, Mauritius, Mozambique, Nepal,
Nigeria, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Sierra Leone,
Trinidad and Tobago.
The motion was rejected by 84 votes to 80, with
19 abstentions.

07-64864

[Subsequently, the delegation of Grenada
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to
vote against.]
The Acting President: I call on the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Arias Cárdenas (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): In accordance with rule
119 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly, the
delegation of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
requests a recorded vote relating to a portion of
operative paragraph 5 of draft resolution III, entitled
“Situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of
Iran”, since that paragraph requests the SecretaryGeneral to prepare a comprehensive report on the
situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of
Iran. If it were adopted, it would create a dangerous
precedent that would eventually undermine the work
and the credibility of the Human Rights Council. We
believe that international scrutiny of the protection of
human rights in any country should be managed in an
objective and just manner, with no abuse of the
relevant United Nations mechanisms. The relevant
Human Rights Council mechanism is the universal
periodic review, whose mandate covers these matters
of great importance.
Similarly, with regard to country-specific reports,
if a report is required, the precedent and the common
practice within the United Nations human rights
mechanisms is to have such reports be prepared by a
special rapporteur who has been appointed and whose
mandate has been established by the competent organ —
in this case, the Human Rights Council. My delegation
therefore considers it unnecessary and a bad precedent
to bypass the Human Rights Council in this case. In
conclusion, one gets the impression that the sponsors
of this draft resolution are intentionally trying to
misuse the Assembly in order to undermine the Human
Rights Council.
For that reason, my delegation is requesting that
the last part of operative paragraph 5, from the words
“and to this end” to the end of the paragraph, be
deleted.
The Acting President: The representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has submitted an oral
amendment to operative paragraph 5 of draft resolution
III. In accordance with rule 90 of the rules of
procedure, the Assembly shall first take a decision on

31

A/62/PV.76

the amendment submitted by the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
I call on the representative of Canada, who
wishes to speak on a point of order.
Mr. McNee (Canada): On a point of order, I wish
to state that we have not had any opportunity to discuss
this proposed amendment, and would ask you, Sir, to
open the floor so that we can do so.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation fully supports the proposal just made by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
that the second part of operative paragraph 5 be
deleted. I would like to repeat, we support the deletion
of the second part of operative paragraph 5 of draft
resolution III, and would like to make the following
observations.
First and foremost, in addition to its fundamental
substantive deficiencies, unsubstantiated allegations,
outdated and baseless claims and provisions and its
confrontational, accusatory and counterproductive
approach, draft resolution III is a futile attempt, driven
solely by political motivations rather than by objective
issues.
Second, Canada’s resentful strife and this illintended ritual, which has overburdened the Assembly
for the past four years, is a vivid manifestation of the
deceitful and politically motivated campaign of
disinformation launched against the Islamic Republic
of Iran for ulterior motives.

is a highly implausible phenomenon in the context of
human rights. It is a globally held belief that the
safeguarding of human rights by political means and
the application of double standards will never be
achievable.
Sixth, by contaminating the Assembly with
political considerations; Canada not only damages the
spirit of cooperation; it also has a negative impact on
the credibility of the Assembly. My delegation
reiterates the necessity of strengthening the Human
Rights Council and highlights the damage that the
presentation of such a draft resolution inflicts on that
newly established United Nations human rights
institution.
To that end, the emphasis of the resolution on the
establishment of the Human Rights Council (resolution
60/251) should be borne in mind. It sets a two-thirds
majority requirement for voting to suspend the
membership of any country because of gross violations
of human rights. That is indicative of the fact that,
following the establishment of the Human Rights
Council, the presentation of country-specific draft
resolutions in the Assembly, which is of higher
standing, would only be admissible if it enjoyed the
support and agreement of the majority of the members
of the international community. Therefore, a draft
resolution such as the one contained in the document
before us today cannot be construed as a factual
reflection of the viewpoint of the international
community.

Fourth, having barely and surprisingly managed
to acquire a nominal and marginal endorsement of the
Third Committee by the lowest number of votes and
the narrowest margin, the draft resolution suffers
acutely from a lack of legitimacy in the view of at least
113 countries, who either opposed it or, because of its
major substantive or conceptual clauses, were not
inclined to support it. It is therefore unhelpful and
inapplicable.

Seventh,
having
briefly
expressed
my
delegation’s objective assessment and analysis of draft
resolution III, I would now like to draw the Assembly’s
attention to an unprecedented and most troubling new
element that has been added to the last part of
operative paragraph 5, which says — and I would like
all delegations to take note of this — “and, to this end,
requests the Secretary-General to submit to it at that
session a comprehensive report on the situation of
human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran”
(A/62/439/Add.3, draft resolution III, para. 5). Clearly,
by virtue of those elements, the draft resolution, if
adopted, would undoubtedly undermine the mandate
and the competence of the Human Rights Council and
derail all its existing mechanisms and procedures.

Fifth, Canada’s blatant political pressure aimed at
changing the votes of Member States by various means
throughout the current session of the General Assembly

Finally, like the rest of the provisions of the draft
resolution, the new element not only does not have any
meritorious justification, but its official inclusion in the

Third, the draft resolution before us not only is a
blatant abuse of the Assembly, but also constitutes
deliberate and unconventional defiance of the mandate
and the competence of the Human Rights Council and,
as such, it is totally unwarranted and must be stopped.

32

07-64864

A/62/PV.76

draft resolution clearly demonstrates the ill-intended
and ambitious attempt of the sponsor to fish in troubled
waters and cleverly pave the way for the furtherance of
their political agenda at the next session of the
Assembly.
My delegation therefore unequivocally supports
the proposal of the representative of Venezuela to
delete the last part of operative paragraph 5 and
cordially invites all countries which are either opposed
to the resolution or are not supporting it to vote in
favour of the proposal by the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela.
Mr. McNee (Canada): I am grateful for giving
our delegation the opportunity to comment on the
proposed amendment. We are taking the floor in
explanation of vote before the vote to comment on the
proposed amendment. We are taking the floor to
explain why we will be voting against the proposed
amendment. We shall do so for several reasons, both
procedural and substantive.
With regard to procedural matters, we express our
surprise and disappointment that this last-minute
amendment has been put forward. Proposing an
amendment when concerns have not previously been
raised at any point in the Third Committee, despite
numerous opportunities to do so, is highly irregular, to
say the least.
With regard to substantive matters, my delegation
questions the reasons behind the opposition to
paragraph 5. In the Third Committee, we heard the
representative of Iran argue that the information
contained in the draft resolution was out of date. The
42 sponsors of the draft resolution categorically reject
that assertion. In fact, events of the past few days in
Iran confirm that there is real cause for concern. That
said, we can think of no better way to resolve this
debate in a balanced, accurate fashion than to ask the
Secretary-General to report on the human rights
situation in that country.
I should also point out that only a few moments
ago the Assembly adopted a resolution on the situation
of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea that contains a similar provision.
For all those reasons, my delegation will be
voting against the proposed amendment and
encourages all other delegations to do so as well.

07-64864

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the oral amendment submitted by
the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Bolivia, China, Comoros,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gambia, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Mali, Morocco, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Niger,
Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Togo, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, El
Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kiribati,
Latvia,
Liberia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marwill Islands, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Moldova,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Vanuatu.
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Cape Verde, Chad, Colombia, Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Dominica, Ecuador, Equatorial
Guinea, Ghana, Guyana, Jamaica, Kenya,
Lesotho,
Malawi,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,

33

A/62/PV.76

Mongolia, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria,
Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Republic of
Korea, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and
Principe, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Suriname,
Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, United Arab
Emirates, Uruguay, Zambia.
The oral amendment was rejected by 70 votes to
57, with 45 abstentions.
The Acting President: Since the oral amendment
submitted by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela has not been adopted, we will
proceed to take a decision on draft resolution III as a
whole. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas,
Belgium,
Belize,
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada, Chile,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Grenada, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro, Nauru,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Vanuatu.
Against:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, China, Comoros,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Egypt, Ethiopia, Gambia, Guinea, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Morocco,
Myanmar, Nicaragua, Niger, Oman, Pakistan,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,

34

Togo, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chad, Colombia, Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire,
Dominica,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Eritrea, Georgia, Ghana, Guatemala,
Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, Kenya, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Malawi, Mali,
Mauritius, Mongolia, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Philippines,
Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Suriname, Swaziland, Thailand,
Trinidad and Tobago, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Zambia.
Draft resolution III was adopted by 73 votes to
53, with 55 abstentions (resolution 62/168).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Situation of human rights in Belarus”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium, Bhutan,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Grenada, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Tonga, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu.

07-64864

A/62/PV.76

Against:
Algeria, Armenia, Bangladesh, Belarus, China,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Egypt, Gambia, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Myanmar, Nicaragua, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Somalia, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Zimbabwe.
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain, Barbados,
Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Georgia, Ghana, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lesotho, Malawi, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico,
Moldova, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Swaziland, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Yemen, Zambia.
Draft resolution IV was adopted by 72 votes to
33, with 78 abstentions (resolution 62/169).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Kuwait advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: I call now on the
representative of the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, who wishes to speak in explanation of vote
on one of the resolutions just adopted.
Mrs. Sipraseuth (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic): My delegation would like to explain our
vote on resolution 62/167, entitled “Situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea”.
The protection and promotion of human rights and
fundamental freedoms are the obligation of every
nation. As a party to international conventions on

07-64864

human rights, my country is of the view that human
rights issues should be addressed in the global context,
through constructive and mutually beneficial
cooperation and dialogue based on the principles of
objectivity, non-selectivity and transparency, taking
into account the political, historical, social and
religious specificities of each country.
Unfortunately, this country-specific resolution is
not consistent with those principles. It would not only
cause divisions and tension among Member States, but
also contribute to an undesirable politicization of the
work of the General Assembly. That is why our
delegation voted against resolution 62/167.
The issue of abduction remains worrisome to the
international community. The Government of the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic is at all times against all
forms of abduction. In that regard, as always, we
extend our sincere sympathies to the families of
victims. We hope that the international community will
undertake appropriate preventive measures. But
whenever and wherever abduction occurs, it should be
resolved through a constructive and peaceful approach.
Mr. Rachkov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
delegation of Belarus is speaking in connection with
the adoption of resolution 62/169. Belarus does not
recognize the resolution just adopted, either in form or
in content. We reject the accusations contained in the
resolution as unfounded and as not in keeping with
reality. For Belarus, the resolution has no legal or
political — much less moral — force.
Belarus is a party in good faith to international
legal documents on human rights issues and is properly
carrying out its international commitments. Belarus is
actively and fully participating and will continue to
participate in the international cooperation on human
rights, including interaction with the special
procedures of the United Nations human rights
machinery.
With the Human Rights Council’s recent adoption
of its very important decision on institution-building,
we are looking optimistically towards the future of the
entire United Nations human rights system. We see it
as a system in which human rights issues will be
resolved on a comprehensive and equal footing.
Belarus is ready for open and full-fledged participation
in that process. Belarus also reaffirms its interest in
dialogue on all human rights issues, with all countries
without exception. We believe that the basis for such a
dialogue is partnership on an equal footing and with
mutual respect.

35

A/62/PV.76

Mr. Suárez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia would like, at this meeting, to express our
complete condemnation of kidnapping in all its forms
and our solidarity with the victims of kidnapping
throughout the world and their families. We reiterate
our appeal to all States to take the action and decisions
that will make it possible to effectively deal with the
crime of kidnapping. We demand the unconditional
release of all kidnapped persons, regardless of the
reasons invoked by those responsible for that serious
crime.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 70.

36

Programme of work
The Acting President: I would like to draw the
attention of members to the date of recess of the
current session. Members will recall that, at its 2nd
plenary meeting, on 21 September 2007, the General
Assembly decided that the sixty-second session would
recess on Tuesday, 18 December 2007. However, in
view of the work that remains to be done for this part
of the session, I would like to propose to the Assembly
that it postpone the date of recess of the current session
to Friday, 21 December. If there is no objection, may I
take it that the Assembly agrees to that proposal?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

07-64864
