United Nations

S/PV.6650

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6650th meeting
Wednesday, 9 November 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cavaco Silva . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Portugal)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Messone
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Assaf
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-58543 (E)

*1158543*

S/PV.6650

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
The President (spoke in Portuguese; English
interpretation provided by the delegation): I wish to
welcome the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon. His presence here today is an
affirmation of the importance of the subject matter to
be addressed.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Australia, Austria, Bangladesh,
Canada, Chile, Egypt, Georgia, Guatemala, Honduras,
Israel, Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Mexico, Morocco, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Slovenia,
Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Tunisia and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional
rules
of
procedure,
I
invite
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Catherine
Bragg, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Philip
Spoerri, Director for International Law and
Cooperation of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
I wish to inform members that I have received a
letter dated 8 November 2011 from the Permanent
Representative of Portugal, in which he requests that a
representative of the International Humanitarian FactFinding Commission be invited to participate in the

2

consideration of the item, in accordance with rule 39 of
the provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the President of the Republic of Portugal.
It is especially gratifying for me to be here today
to preside over this open debate of the Security Council
on the protection of civilians in armed conflicts. This is
a topic on the Council’s agenda to which Portugal
attributes the utmost importance.
I am grateful to the Secretary-General, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, the Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and the
Director for International Law and Cooperation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross for joining
us in the Chamber. Their presence demonstrates the
interest and relevance of this debate.
I have made a point of speaking in Portuguese. In
this way, my words will be immediately understood by
more than 250 million citizens of the eight countries,
and one autonomous region of the People’s Republic of
China, where Portuguese is the official language, as
well as by the many other millions who have studied or
who are studying Portuguese, and who identify with it
and see in it an important cultural or economic asset.
I am therefore speaking in one of the most rapidly
expanding languages in the world, the third-most
spoken European language worldwide, and the sixth
most spoken in general. It is a language that has long
deserved to be attributed the status of official language
of the Organization. Indeed, there are two Portuguesespeaking countries represented in the current formation
of the Council, which is an expressive sign of those
nations’ unwavering commitment to the promotion of
the values of peace, security and respect for the
inalienable rights of all human beings, as embodied in
the United Nations Charter and reflected in the
founding charter of the Community of Portuguesespeaking Countries.
Every year, many millions of men, women and
children are killed, kidnapped, injured or forced to
leave their homes as a result of armed conflicts in
different parts of the world. Portugal vehemently

11-58543

S/PV.6650

condemns all attacks targeting civilians, whether in
Libya, the Great Lakes region of Africa, Afghanistan or
Iraq, where arms and explosive devices continue
indiscriminately to cause suffering, or even in Syria,
where intense violence has already caused the deaths of
more than 3,000 people.
Civilians have always represented and remain the
majority of the victims of armed conflicts. Victims are
not only those who are party to the conflict and who
are killed, mutilated or injured because they form part
of a regular army or a group of combatants; it is
civilians who, on a large scale, continue to suffer the
direct effects of war.
It is our obligation to learn from the lessons of
the past. Inaction is never a solution and can never be
the response of the United Nations to civilian
populations that are the targets of indiscriminate
attacks by parties to a conflict; in failing to act, we abet
those who violate international humanitarian law and
human rights. When civilians are targeted and national
authorities or the conflicting parties fail in their
obligation to protect them, the United Nations, and
especially the Security Council, have the duty to speak
up and the obligation to act.
The attention that this Council has dedicated to
the protection of civilians is part of a long tradition.
The Council has been improving its legal framework to
ensure that its actions in this area are more effective
and more responsible. A remarkable number of
peacekeeping missions have been set up with strong
protection of civilians mandates, and the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations has been doing very
important work in that respect. Local strategies have
been created and cooperation with regional structures
has been improved. These developments have had a
significant impact on improving the protection of
civilian populations.
We agree with the Secretary-General regarding
the need for further coordination among all of the
parties involved in the protection of civilians, whether
on the ground or in raising international awareness of
the need to develop efficient mechanisms for the
prevention, monitoring and protection of civilians in
armed conflicts.
In that context, the European Union has acquired
vast experience both in supporting the work of the
United Nations and all the relevant parties involved,
and with regard to the missions and operations

11-58543

conducted under the European Security and Defence
Policy. We therefore believe that it would be useful to
improve and deepen cooperation between the European
Union and the United Nations with regard to the
protection of civilians, as well as between the United
Nations and other regional organizations such as the
African Union.
We share the general consensus on the
importance of drawing up realistic mandates for the
protection of civilians and ensuring those mandates are
adapted to the real situation on the ground and
compatible with the capacity and human resources
available to the respective peacekeeping missions.
Whether in Darfur or in the east of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the safety of thousands of
civilians, many of whom are women and children,
largely depends upon peacekeeping missions with a
mandate to protect them. We also deem it necessary to
closely involve the main troop- and police-contributing
countries in the definition of those mandates.
Another fundamental aspect for the protection of
civilians is, without doubt, the need to strengthen
accountability for human rights violations. Fighting
impunity, whether through national institutions or
international ones such as the International Criminal
Court, is fundamental to the prevention of future
violations. As the Secretary-General emphasized in his
last report on this issue,
“In many conflicts, it is to a large degree the
absence of accountability and, worse still, the
lack in many instances of any expectation
thereof, that allows violations to thrive.”
(S/2009/277, para. 61)
Some days ago, Portugal, together with the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
organized a seminar on international criminal
accountability, the investigation of human rights
violations and violations of international humanitarian
law, as well as on the question of reparations for
victims. The aim was to identify challenges and
possible further steps that the Council could take on
these important areas.
We believe that today more than ever the Security
Council has the capacity to protect civilians. It has
more and better regulatory instruments. It has acquired
knowledge and skills with previous experiences and
has more, and increasingly multifaceted, missions on
the ground. Today it is better prepared to act

3

S/PV.6650

appropriately and effectively, with real time
information on threats to civilians. We Member States
have the political responsibility to ensure that the
Security Council acts consistently and with
determination in order to guarantee respect for
international humanitarian law and the protection of all
civilians who are directly targeted or who become
accidental victims in conflicts.
Before I conclude my remarks, I would like to
reiterate my country’s firm commitment to continue to
work to promote more effective protection for civilians
from the devastating effects of armed conflicts. We will
continue to do this in all the international forums in
which we participate — whether at the United Nations,
the European Union or the Community of Portuguesespeaking Countries — not only due to an evident moral
imperative but also because we believe that, in this
way, we will be helping in a very concrete and
objective manner to build a better, more just and
peaceful world.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I thank Portugal for
convening today’s debate on the protection of civilians.
I very much welcome the presence here today of His
Excellency President Mr. Aníbal António Cavaco
Silva — a clear sign of the commitment of Portugal to
this very important issue.
All of us share a fundamental responsibility to do
more to protect civilians caught up in the horrors of
war. In conflicts throughout the world, women, girls,
boys and men continue to be subjected to blatant and
frequent violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law. The violations include killing,
torture, kidnapping, rape and mutilation. We see forced
recruitment, including of children, and the denial of
access to medical care and life-saving assistance. And
we see displacement, which is so often the precursor to
lasting dependency, destitution and lost opportunities.
Let us remember that civilians suffer such horrors
not because they are in the wrong place at the wrong
time and become what is still euphemistically referred
to as collateral damage. Civilians suffer more and more
frequently because they are deliberately targeted. My
past two reports (S/2007/643 and S/2009/277) to the

4

Security Council on the protection of civilians sought
to guide the Council, Member States and parties to a
conflict on the steps they could, should and must take.
The five core challenges I identified remain painfully
relevant today.
First, we need to see enhanced compliance with
international human rights and humanitarian law.
Violations must be met with appropriate action from
the Council, including strong condemnation where
clearly warranted. Moreover, demands for compliance
should be backed by the threat of targeted sanctions
and intense scrutiny, including through commissions of
inquiry or referrals to the International Criminal Court.
Secondly, we need to more consistently and
effectively engage non-State armed groups in order to
improve their compliance with the law. Member States
need to recognize and accept the fundamental necessity
of this engagement.
Thirdly, we need proactive, well-trained and
appropriately resourced peacekeepers who can use a
full spectrum of tools — military, police, justice,
corrections and human rights — in a cohesive fashion.
Additionally, peacekeeping missions and other partners
must continue to strengthen national institutions so that
they are able to discharge their primary responsibility
for enhancing security and the rule of law by the time
the mission leaves.
Fourthly, we need improved humanitarian access
to affected populations. That means refraining from
attacks against humanitarian workers and eliminating
excessive bureaucratic requirements on the entry and
movement of assistance and workers. It means
cooperation between humanitarian actors and parties to
conflict. And it means action against those who
systematically obstruct assistance.
Last but not least, we must see enhanced
accountability. Those in breach of the law must be held
to account. Perpetrators must be able to see that we are
serious about that. I urge the Council to closely study
the recommendations that emerged from last week’s
workshop on accountability convened by Portugal and
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs.
Protection is essential. Yet, we must not lose sight
of the need to address the causes of conflict, not just its
symptoms. Humanitarian actors can contribute to the
survival of affected populations. Ultimately, though,

11-58543

S/PV.6650

only political solutions can end and prevent the vast
majority of conflicts and ensure the safety and wellbeing of those who would otherwise bear the brunt.
The
President
(spoke
in
Portuguese;
interpretation provided by the delegation): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now give the floor to Ms. Pillay.
Ms. Pillay: I am very grateful for the opportunity
to address the Security Council on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and other situations of
violence.
Since the Council last debated the subject in May
(see S/PV.6531), a people’s spring has continued to
thaw the global landscape. A few days after the May
debate, we saw the inauguration of a new Government
in Côte d’Ivoire. Two months later, a new nation was
born in South Sudan. The end of violent upheaval
promises the beginning of a new era in Libya that, I
hope, will embrace human rights. In all of those cases,
progress has been made in responding to people’s
aspirations for peace, justice, human rights and
democracy. It is critical to consolidate those gains by
ensuring accountability and respect for the rule of law.
In Côte d’Ivoire, I have called on the Government
to investigate and prosecute serious violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law
committed by all sides. My Office supported the
Commission of Inquiry established by the Human
Rights Council earlier this year. Its findings, and those
of previous commissions, provide a point of departure
to end impunity, including with respect to elements in
the new armed forces who continue to commit
summary executions, rape and torture. Accountability,
reconciliation and comprehensive security sector
reform, including the vetting of officers, must be
priorities at this juncture.
In South Sudan, violent clashes between heavily
armed communities and the related resurgence of
armed activity by rebel factions are undermining the
stability of our newest Member State and pose a
serious threat to civilians. In order to stop the cycle of
violent reprisals, the Government needs more support
to better control small arms, prosecute perpetrators of
serious violations and ensure reparations to victimized
communities who have lost their livelihoods.
In Libya, my Office has held initial discussions
on transitional justice and will continue its engagement

11-58543

through the United Nations Support Mission in Libya.
Given the seriousness and extent of the crimes
committed in the past, the needs are colossal and
pressing. With the full support of my Office, the
International Commission of Inquiry on Libya will
continue to investigate alleged violations by all sides
until presenting its final report to the Human Rights
Council in March. An advance team began work in
Libya at the end of October, and the Commission itself
will be in Libya in early December.
Where basic human rights are trampled and
peaceful demands for change are met by brutal force,
people are eventually compelled to have recourse to
rebellion against tyranny and oppression. It happened
in Libya; it may happen in Syria. More and more
soldiers refuse to become complicit in international
crimes and are changing sides. There is a serious risk
of Syria descending into armed struggle.
Since I briefed the Council in August on the
findings of the fact-finding mission I established
pursuant to Human Rights Council resolution S-16/1,
Government military and security forces have
continued to commit serious violations. Well over
3,500 people have been killed since March. Tens of
thousands of people, including doctors, nurses and
wounded patients, have been arbitrarily arrested, and
many remain detained incommunicado, placing them at
serious risk of torture. However, in today’s world, facts
cannot be incarcerated, thanks not least to local human
rights defenders reporting through social media.
While I welcome the commitments Syria most
recently made to the League of Arab States, I am
concerned that the killing of civilians has not stopped.
We have to see actual progress on the ground. A human
rights monitoring presence can help to ensure that. The
international community must insist that the
Government end the killing of civilians, release all
those arbitrarily detained for their peaceful protest and
finally provide full and unimpeded access to the
International Commission of Inquiry, which was
established by the Human Rights Council in August
and will report before the end of the month. At the
same time, a credible spectre of criminal accountability
may lead individual military commanders and political
decision-makers to pause, reflect and change course.
An assessment mission to Yemen carried out by
my Office in June found that civilians were at risk due
to the lethal intersection of two separate struggles —

5

S/PV.6650

the Government’s suppression of peaceful protesters,
on the one hand, and its conflict with armed opponents,
on the other. Government security forces have
continued to deploy excessive and lethal force against
civilians, using live ammunition and even snipers. The
situation is exacerbated by armed opponents bringing
weapons to otherwise peaceful demonstrations.
The Government has not initiated the type of
credible independent investigations referred to in
resolution 2014 (2011). I remain convinced that we
need an international investigation and a human rights
presence on the ground to lay the groundwork for
accountability — rather than amnesty — for
international crimes. In the meantime, I intend to seek
the agreement of Yemeni authorities for the
deployment of a follow-up mission. I will report to the
Human Rights Council next March.
I am concerned that the number of civilians killed
in Afghanistan is increasing, in a climate characterized
by a lack of accountability for serious violations of
international law. In the first half of 2011, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
Human Rights Unit tracked a 15 per cent increase in
conflict-related civilian deaths. Among the 1,462
civilian deaths recorded, 80 per cent could be
attributed to anti-Government forces. Civilian deaths
for which the Afghan army and other pro-Government
forces are responsible have declined to 14 per cent, due
to improved safeguards. I draw the Council’s attention
to the systematic torture of suspected insurgents in
many National Security Directorate and police
detention facilities, which has been documented in a
comprehensive report prepared by the UNAMA Human
Rights Unit.
In Iraq and Somalia, our human rights
components in the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq and the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia continue to observe patterns of indiscriminate
bombings and targeted killings of civilians.
I strongly condemn indiscriminate rocket attacks
from Gaza, which flagrantly violate international law. I
am also concerned that Israeli raids in Gaza are placing
civilians at grave risk. In recent months, my office in
the occupied Palestinian territory has observed an
increase in the frequency and severity of violence
perpetrated by Israeli settlers against Palestinian
civilians in the West Bank. I urge Israeli authorities to

6

do more to prevent such attacks and to hold
perpetrators accountable.
A little more than a year ago, my Office released
a mapping report on serious violations that were
committed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
between 1993 and 2003. Actors flagged in the mapping
report, including in the army and intelligence services,
continue to be implicated in serious violations up to
this day. The Government’s initiative to send a bill to
Parliament that would establish special chambers to try
the most serious crimes is encouraging. My Office
provided recommendations on amendments aimed at
guaranteeing
international
standards
and
the
participation of international judges and prosecutors. I
am very pleased to note that the Government has
accepted my Office’s proposal to hold a national
conference on transitional justice.
Today the Joint Human Rights Office published a
report on police and intelligence services’ arresting,
assaulting and threatening opposition activists,
journalists and human rights defenders in the run-up to
the elections to be held at the end of this month in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is urgent that the
Government ensure that the electoral process is not
tainted by violence and that it lives up to the standards
set by resolution 1991 (2011).
In June, the Council charged the SecretaryGeneral with ensuring effective human-rights
monitoring of the situation in Abyei (resolution 1990
(2011), para. 10), following massive displacement of
people and the burning and looting of Abyei town in
May. Effective monitoring requires monitors on the
ground. Given that my Office’s repeated requests for
access to Abyei have been denied, the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) should
include a civilian human rights component to carry out
the Council’s mandate. Since my briefing to the
Council last summer, I have continued to receive
disturbing reports from credible sources on the ground
about serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law in Southern Kordofan
and Blue Nile state. As the Council is aware, the
United Nations no longer has a human-rights
monitoring presence, and even temporary access is
refused. In the absence of any credible national
investigations, I reiterate my call for a thorough and
independent international investigation into violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law.

11-58543

S/PV.6650

Where national authorities fail to investigate
credible allegations of the most serious violations, it is
incumbent on the international community to
rigorously establish the facts. Over the last two
decades, my Office has supported more than 30
commissions of inquiry and similar mechanisms set up
by the Security Council, the Human Rights Council,
the Secretary-General and by myself under my own
mandate. We have strengthened our capacity to support
such mechanisms. They provide a solid basis for
informing international action and national processes
on justice, truth and reconciliation. I would therefore
encourage the Council to play a more active role in
securing follow-up to the recommendations of these
mechanisms.
My Office participated in last week’s workshop
convened by Portugal and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on enhancing the
role of the Security Council in ensuring accountability
for violations. The Council has an important role to
play in ensuring practical arrangements to secure
accountability: the establishment of facts, the
identification and prosecution of perpetrators, and,
importantly, the right to reparation for gross violations
of human rights. Without it, impunity emboldens
perpetrators and breeds more violations that undermine
peace and progress. My Office stands ready to assist
this Council in its efforts to protect civilians.
The President (spoke in Portuguese; English
interpretation provided by the delegation): I now give
the floor to Ms. Catherine Bragg, Assistant-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs.
Ms. Bragg: I am grateful for this opportunity to
brief the Council. The following statement is
attributable to the Emergency Relief Coordinator,
Ms. Valerie Amos.
These debates are an important opportunity for
focused discussion of the protection of civilians in a
number of situations and serve to convey some sense
of what we see in conflicts, which is marked by the
consistent failure of the parties concerned to comply
with their legal obligations to respect and protect
civilians. That failure manifests itself in many ways:
the killing and maiming of civilians; sexual violence;
the forced recruitment of children; displacement across
and within borders; impeded provision of assistance;
and a failure to hold accountable those who perpetrate

11-58543

or instigate violations and to provide support, justice
and redress to victims.
Eight months of conflict in Libya has led to the
death and injury of thousands of civilians, the internal
displacement of more than 200,000 people and the
outflow of nearly one million migrant workers and
third-country nationals. Intense fighting in urban
centres routinely prevented the wounded, as well as
lifesaving supplies and international assistance, from
reaching hospitals. In addition to posing a serious
threat to civilians at the time, the use of explosive
weapons in densely populated areas in such places as
Misrata and Sirte has led to significant destruction of
housing and essential infrastructure.
Displaced people are starting to return home, and
schools have reopened throughout most of the country.
But normalcy is far from assured. The widespread
availability of small arms and light weapons is of grave
concern, as is the National Transitional Council’s
apparent lack of effective command and control over
various militia forces. I am alarmed by reports that
some of those forces are involved in the ill-treatment,
including killing and arbitrary detention, of segments
of the population perceived as loyal to the former
regime and of sub-Saharan African migrants. It is a
reminder that the protection of civilians remains
acutely relevant in the post-Al-Qadhafi period.
Throughout Libya, the risk posed to civilians,
especially children, by abandoned weapons and
ammunition and by explosive remnants of war, is very
high. In parts of Misrata, the presence of unexploded
cluster sub-munitions underlines the importance of the
comprehensive ban on such weapons, as is stipulated in
the Convention on Cluster Munitions. That is why the
ongoing efforts of some States parties to the
Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use
of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be
Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have
Indiscriminate Effects to adopt new international legal
standards that would undermine that ban and facilitate
the use of cluster munitions is very troubling.
I remain extremely concerned by events in Syria.
Currently, the situation falls short of armed conflict.
However, military operations are exacting a heavy toll.
More than 3,500 Syrians have been reported killed
since March. There are reports of serious human rights
violations, including excessive use of force and
restrictions on freedom of movement. I am also

7

S/PV.6650

concerned by the interruption of water and electricity
supplies during military operations, and by interference
with medical services.
In Yemen, conflict, poverty, drought, soaring food
prices and collapsing State services have created a
daily struggle for survival for millions of people,
including 100,000 displaced by recent fighting in the
South, and thousands of refugees from the Horn of
Africa, as well as 300,000 persons displaced by
previous conflicts, in the North. The response to
peaceful demands for greater freedoms, an end to
corruption and respect for the rule of law has been
marked by excessive and disproportionate use of force
by the State. Hundreds have been killed and thousands
injured.
Turning to Gaza and southern Israel, in August, a
series of attacks launched from Egypt into southern
Israel by unknown militants resulted in the death of six
Israeli civilians. In response, Israel conducted air raids
on Gaza, resulting in 30 Palestinian fatalities and 103
injured, the majority of whom were reported to be
civilians. One Israeli civilian was also killed and seven
injured by rockets fired from Gaza during this period.
A more limited escalation of violence at the end of last
month resulted in the death of an Israeli civilian and
injuries to another three Israeli and two Palestinian
civilians.
In Colombia in June, the Government took the
historic and welcome step of enacting legislation that
will provide restitution for up to 4 million victims of
the conflict, including through land restitution for
those who were forcibly displaced. However, ongoing
hostilities involving the guerrilla groups and armed
groups that emerged following the demobilization of
paramilitary forces in 2006 continue to be marked by
violations
of
international
humanitarian
law,
displacement and the confinement of civilian
populations in particular areas. In addition, during the
first eight months of this year, 104 civilians were
wounded and 16 killed by mines and improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) planted by the various
groups. Mines and IEDs have also hampered the ability
of humanitarian organizations to reach vulnerable
populations in a timely manner.
In Afghanistan, some half a million Afghans have
been internally displaced by the conflict, 130,000 of
them during the first six months of this year. The
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan

8

documented over 1,400 civilian deaths in the first six
months of this year, a 15 per cent rise over the same
period last year. More civilians were killed in May than
in any other month since 2007, when the Mission
began to document civilian casualties. Those deaths
were attributed to the increased use of improvised
explosive devices, as well as suicide attacks, targeted
killings, increased ground fighting and air strikes
involving helicopters.
Turning to sub-Saharan Africa, the recent
escalation in fighting and insecurity along the SomaliaKenya border risks increasing the suffering of civilians
already devastated by conflict, drought, famine and
displacement. I am concerned by the air strikes
conducted by Kenyan armed forces against Al-Shabaab
earlier this month, which reportedly killed civilians in
a camp for internally displaced Somalis. The Somali
conflict has long been characterized by the failure of
all parties to respect international humanitarian law,
including the principles of distinction and
proportionality. The need for scrupulous compliance
with the law by all parties is of the utmost urgency.
In the Sudan’s Darfur region, fighting between
the national armed forces and armed movements in
such areas as eastern Jebel Marra displaced an
estimated 70,000 people during the first eight months
of this year, while 425 civilians were killed, including
as a result of intertribal fighting. In Southern
Kordofan, fighting between Sudanese forces and the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North has
severely affected the civilian population, including the
20,000 people who have fled to South Sudan. In Blue
Nile State, the fighting that erupted in September
initially displaced 130,000 people. A further 28,700
people fled to Ethiopia and over 6,200 to South Sudan.
Meanwhile, the continued presence of Sudanese and
South Sudanese armed forces in Abyei, following
hostilities in May, is preventing up to 110,000 people
from returning home.
South Sudan faces additional security challenges
stemming from militia and intertribal violence. Since
January, there have been nearly 430 conflict-related
incidents, resulting in 3,100 deaths and displacing over
215,000 people. There is the prospect of further
violence as competition over natural resources
increases with the return of South Sudanese from the
Sudan to areas in which basic services are already
stretched.

11-58543

S/PV.6650

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, attacks
against civilians by armed groups have intensified in
the North and South Kivu provinces this year. The
number of internally displaced persons in North Kivu
increased by 30 per cent during the first half of 2011,
reaching over half a million people by the end of July.
Only 20,000 returns have been registered in North
Kivu this year, compared with 235,000 in 2010.
Throughout the Kivus and neighbouring provinces,
insecurity has made humanitarian access increasingly
difficult, with 135 security incidents involving
humanitarian workers having been reported this year.
Five humanitarian workers were killed last month and
two were abducted in September.
Along with those in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and South Sudan, civilians in the Central
African Republic continue to confront the brutality of
the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA). Between January
and August, 254 attacks by the Lord’s Resistance Army
were reported across the three countries, resulting in
126 deaths and 368 abductions. We estimate that
approximately 440,000 persons are now internally
displaced or living as refugees owing to LRA actions.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo alone,
335,000 people have been displaced, including 49,000
during the first six months of this year.
The situations I have described have many
aspects in common, not least the perpetration of
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law. Equally common to most of these situations
is the failure to hold accountable those responsible for
such violations and to provide any form of justice or
redress for their victims. The failure of accountability
has to end. We cannot continue to ignore war crimes
and serious violations of human rights law in situations
of conflict, nor can we ignore the need to ensure that
victims see justice and reparations for the wrongs they
have suffered.
As mentioned by the Secretary-General and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Portugal, together with the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, convened a one-day workshop
last week on enhancing the role of the Council in
ensuring accountability for violations. The workshop
saw constructive exchanges on three key aspects of
accountability: individual criminal responsibility, factfinding and reparations. With regard to the first aspect,
suggestions were made on the possible development of
a checklist of issues for the Council to consider when

11-58543

making referrals to the International Criminal Court,
and on how the Council could support national
authorities
in
conducting
investigations
and
prosecutions, including the possible role of
peacekeeping missions in that regard.
Participants recognized the richness of factfinding practices and the challenges involved,
including selectivity as to the situations under review
and the need to improve follow-up on their findings
and recommendations. Participants also emphasized
the need for the Council to have greater resort to the
findings of fact-finding mechanisms established by
other United Nations bodies.
Finally, participants highlighted the significant
number of reparations mechanisms that exist at the
international and national levels and the breadth of
practice in terms of the forms of reparation awarded. It
was agreed that more detailed discussion was
necessary to determine how such mechanisms could be
supported in the future.
The Council has come far in its efforts to address
the protection of civilians and has set important
precedents, in particular on accountability. However,
we cannot afford to be complacent. We must do more
to advance the protection of civilians and ensure that
progress is made where it matters most — in the midst
of conflict.
The
President
(spoke
in
Portuguese;
interpretation provided by the delegation): I thank
Ms. Bragg for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Spoerri.
Mr. Spoerri: The International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) is honoured to brief the Security
Council once again on this very important subject and
would like to thank Portugal, as President of the
Council, for the invitation.
Among the many different views that may be
expressed here today by the various actors concerned
with the protection of civilians in armed conflict, there
is surely at least one common theme, which is that the
reality on the ground has not kept pace with the
considerable normative progress achieved in recent
years. The undeniable reality is that civilians continue
to be the main victims of armed conflict, due to
indiscriminate attacks or targeted violence. Hundreds
of thousands of women, men and children bear the
brunt of conflicts that are in many cases protracted and

9

S/PV.6650

increasingly complex
consequences.

in

both

their

causes

and

of such key notions as distinction, military objectives,
the principle of proportionality and precaution.

Since the ICRC briefed the Council one year ago,
we have noted a number of ongoing and emerging
concerns related to the protection of civilians that
confront us in our daily work in armed conflicts and
other situations of violence around the world. I will
mention three of them here.

The overarching challenge presented by these
issues is to achieve consistent respect for international
humanitarian law by States and non-State actors in
international and domestic armed conflicts, irrespective
of the reasons for going to war. Coupled with this is the
need to enhance accountability for violations of
international humanitarian law both by parties to
conflict and by individual perpetrators, be it at the
national level or by referral to the International
Criminal Court. Indeed, the Secretary-General included
these issues in the five core challenges first set out in
his 2009 report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2009/277).

First, events in North Africa, the Middle East and
elsewhere have confirmed that violence against healthcare facilities and personnel is one of the most serious
yet neglected humanitarian issues of the day. In some
cases, ambulances or hospitals are directly targeted,
killing or wounding medical staff and patients. In many
cases, health workers are harassed or threatened by
fighters sometimes seeking to obstruct treatment for
their wounded enemies or demanding supplies.
Ambulances are deliberately blocked from accessing
wounded people or held up for hours at checkpoints.
Each incident effectively denies the right of wounded
and sick people to health care. Yet, beyond the direct
impact of attacks on medical infrastructure or workers,
there are immeasurable longer-term repercussions on
entire communities with war-related or chronic health
problems.
The ICRC is so concerned by the far-reaching
and profound humanitarian consequences of threats to
the provision of health care in armed conflicts and
other situations of violence that it recently launched a
multi-year project and communication campaign on the
issue.
Secondly, the so-called Arab Spring has also
helped to highlight the extreme vulnerability of
migrants living in or crossing through countries
affected by armed violence. These migrants are
extremely vulnerable to abuse and exploitation by all
sides to a conflict, ranging from illegal confiscation of
their belongings to sexual exploitation or even torture.
In some cases, they are made the scapegoat for causing
or exacerbating the conflict.
Thirdly, events over the past year have
underscored concerns related to the conduct of
hostilities, particularly in urban settings. Military
operations conducted in densely populated urban areas,
often using heavy or highly explosive weapons, have
had devastating humanitarian consequences for civilian
populations. This situation has further highlighted the
need for strict interpretation and rigorous application

10

Working to ensure respect for international
humanitarian law is at the heart of the ICRC’s mandate
and mission. That is reflected in our impartial, neutral
and independent approach. Of course, principled
humanitarian action is nothing more than an empty
mantra unless it is translated into a meaningful
response on the ground, and the many different actors
involved in protection work have many different
approaches. For the ICRC, a meaningful response
essentially requires an approach that is needs-based,
has proximity to the beneficiaries, and entails
engagement with all stakeholders, thereby gaining the
widest possible acceptance and respect, and thus the
widest possible humanitarian access. This approach
also helps to ensure the safety of our staff. Protection,
for us, goes together with assistance, and one may
facilitate the other.
Crucially, if the ICRC’s approach is to be
effective and credible, it must remain consistently
distinct from any kind of political process or decision,
be they peace processes, political negotiations,
Security Council mandates, the human rights agendas
of various organizations, military or peace operations,
or judicial investigations and prosecutions. At the same
time, the ICRC respects the sovereignty of States and
contributes to national capacity-building, for example
by supporting authorities in incorporating international
humanitarian law into national legislation and into
army training manuals, by advising on rules of
engagement in order to limit risks for civilian
populations and prevent abuses, or by helping existing
structures to continue functioning. In so doing, the
ICRC contributes to strengthening accountability for
violations.

11-58543

S/PV.6650

In recent crises, such as those in Côte d’Ivoire,
Libya and Yemen, the ICRC has managed to gain and
maintain access to people affected by adhering strictly
to this approach. Likewise, in protracted armed
conflicts — Afghanistan is just one example — the
perception of the ICRC’s work as impartial, neutral and
independent has been absolutely crucial to achieving
dialogue with parties on all sides of the conflict, and
thus to obtaining humanitarian access to those in need.
In this regard, all measures that effectively hamper
contact by humanitarian agencies with organized
non-State armed groups are a cause for concern. Under
international humanitarian law, the ICRC must be
allowed to offer its services to any party to an armed
conflict.
The success of protection, which is ultimately
manifested in the prevention of abuses occurring in the
first place, is notoriously hard to measure. It is
generally not possible to know how much suffering has
been prevented in any given armed conflict or how
many more abuses might have been committed without
the efforts of all the various protection actors. Yet the
difficulty of measuring success should never serve as
an excuse or obviate the need for accountability. When
protection fails, we have all witnessed the terrible
consequences — for health-care workers, migrants and
the countless women, men and children suffering in the
face of conflict.
Ultimate responsibility for the protection of
civilians clearly lies with States, both on their own
territory and in their military operations in other
contexts. Little can be achieved without the requisite
political will. But other actors — including non-State
armed groups, which are also bound by international
humanitarian law, military forces and humanitarian
organizations — also have important roles to play.
Indeed, all of us here today must help to ensure, in our
different ways, that normative achievements are felt
where they matter, not in the debating chamber, but on
the ground, so that they make a real difference for
people in the midst of war or other situations of
violence.
The
President
(spoke
in
Portuguese;
interpretation provided by the delegation): I thank
Mr. Spoerri for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.

11-58543

Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank you, Sir, for scheduling this important debate
today. Let me begin by thanking the Secretary-General
for his comments and for his personal valuable
contribution to the protection of civilians agenda. I
would also like to thank the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem
Pillay;
the
Assistant
Secretary-General
for
Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Catherine Bragg; and the
Director for International Law and Cooperation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Philip
Spoerri, for their insights into subject matter of today’s
debate.
As Mr. Spoerri has just reminded us, the primary
responsibility to protect civilians lies with States. The
concept of protection of civilians is firmly embedded
in modern military doctrine in many countries and in
the thoughts of policymakers around the world. It is
now central to most United Nations peacekeeping
operations and to military operations authorized by the
Security Council. But to ensure its practical
implementation in conflict situations, the principle
needs to be underpinned by enforcement mechanisms
at both the domestic and international levels, including,
ultimately, the possibility of individual criminal
liability.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) is
bringing to account those responsible for atrocities
against civilians. The ICC is a visible demonstration of
the international community’s increasing intolerance
for impunity.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
cornerstone of international humanitarian law. The
United Kingdom therefore urges all States to ratify
outstanding international humanitarian law treaties and
to incorporate the relevant provisions of those treaties
into their domestic law. And we agree with the
Secretary-General that those Member States —
including some members of this Council — that have
not signed and ratified the Rome Statute of the ICC
should be encouraged to do so.
We believe that a link exists between
international and national efforts to enhance
accountability. It is the responsibility of States to
investigate and prosecute crimes. But it is important
that steps be taken at the international level when
national efforts fail.

11

S/PV.6650

The United Kingdom shares many of the
concerns raised during the course of today’s briefings.
I would like briefly to mention just three situations.

important tool for the sharing of information from the
field, and we look forward to the next report of the
Secretary-General on the subject in May 2012.

In Syria, the United Kingdom condemns the
brutal repression of peaceful demonstrators and the
massive violations of human rights that President
Al-Assad and his authorities have been committing for
the last six months. As Ms. Pillay has just reminded us,
more than 3,500 people have now been killed. The
Syrian Government should immediately end the
violence, release all prisoners of conscience and allow
free, unhindered and immediate access to United
Nations monitors for an independent assessment of the
situation on the ground.

Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow
me to welcome the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Aníbal António Cavaco Silva, President of the
Portuguese Republic, at this meeting. I wish to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing. I also
thank United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights Ms. Navanethem Pillay, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs Ms. Catherine Bragg,
and Mr. Philip Spoerri, Director for International Law
and Cooperation of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, for their remarks.

In Somalia, Al-Shabaab’s terrorist campaign
continues to have terrible humanitarian consequences.
We congratulate the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) on their recent successes in Mogadishu.
Those military gains now need to be followed up by a
stabilization effort to enable the provision of basic
services, such as electricity, water, food, hospitals and
schools, to the civilian population in those areas. We
recognize that the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) has begun to address the protection of civilians,
and we encourage them to continue to do so. We
continue to explore ways in which we can support the
TFG and AMISOM in order to minimize the risk of
civilians when they come under attack and to protect
the citizens of Mogadishu.

The issue of protection of civilians in armed
conflict is one to which Bosnia and Herzegovina
attaches great importance.

In Burma, we remain seriously concerned for the
well-being of the civilian population, especially in the
Shan, Kachin and Karen states. We call upon the
Burmese army and ethnic militia to make every effort
to protect civilians and bring to account those
responsible for human rights abuses against them.
Peace and stability can be achieved only through a
genuine process of national reconciliation, starting
with inclusive dialogue among all ethnic and political
opposition groups.
In conclusion, we welcome the mainstreaming of
protection of civilians activity with the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict and with the working
group of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict. The United
Kingdom continues to implement our national strategy
on protection of civilians, and to lead the informal
Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians. That is an

12

The Security Council has undertaken many
activities to protect civilians and improve the
protection of civilians agenda. Nonetheless, many
civilians continue to suffer from the consequences of
violent conflicts. Serious and ongoing violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
including systematic violence against civilian
populations, are being committed. It is the unfortunate
and unacceptable reality of our times that civilians
continue to be a main target for armed attacks and
account for a high number of casualties in conflicts.
In light of the fact that responsibility for the
protection of civilians rests primarily with the State,
additional efforts are necessary to make Governments
aware of their responsibility to protect civilians. It is
essential to support relevant national institutions and
strengthen their role and capacity to deal with those
issues. Furthermore, all parties to armed conflict must
fully comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law concerning the protection of civilians
in armed conflict.
We particularly underline the need to combat
impunity for perpetrators of violence against civilians.
The Security Council should take every opportunity to
send the message that crimes committed against
civilians are unacceptable and that all perpetrators of
grave violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law will be brought to justice. In
addition, Council-mandated action to protect civilians
must ensure full respect for the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as the sovereignty and integrity of

11-58543

S/PV.6650

Member States. The international response must be
proportional to the threat, while the use of force should
be a last resort.

society, ending the ongoing unrest and suffering of the
civilian population, and to hold accountable those
responsible for the killings.

Protection of civilians is an integral part of
multidimensional peacekeeping operations. In that
regard, Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the work of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations with
police- and troop-contributing countries to improve
understanding, implementation of civilian-protection
mandates, development of a strategic framework for
the protection of civilians in peacekeeping missions
and the use of recently developed scenario-based
training modules.

In Afghanistan, the high number of conflictrelated casualties caused by anti-Government forces, as
well as cases of child recruitment for military and
suicide attacks, is unacceptable. All parties to the
conflict need to respect the principles of international
humanitarian and human rights law, while the
Government must take decisive measures to investigate
such acts and bring the perpetrators to justice.

Existing mechanisms for the protection of
civilians and of children in armed conflict and the
monitoring and reporting arrangements established in
accordance with resolution 1960 (2010) are important
elements of the peacekeeping agenda. Host
Governments need to be consulted, involved and
properly informed about their functioning. Moreover,
data collected during the work of those mechanisms
must be made available to national judicial systems.
At this point, allow me to mention a few concrete
cases where challenges to civilian protection are a
significant part of the overall efforts.
In Libya, strengthening security institutions and
their capacity by providing necessary training for
police and military forces is critical for protection of
civilians and the rule of law in the country. Ensuring
effective protection of the civilian population will be
essential for promoting inclusive dialogue and national
reconciliation and restoring peace and order in the
country.
One of the key tasks of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan is to assist the Government to
protect civilians in a volatile security environment
where it lacks the capacity to do so.
Civilians in Somalia continue to bear the burden
of the fighting between militants and the Transitional
Federal Government. The famine significantly
contributes to the worsening of the situation, forcing
many to seek refuge in Kenya and other neighbouring
countries. We urge the international community to
increase its efforts and provide much-needed
humanitarian assistance.
The Government of Syria needs to accelerate the
implementation of measures leading to a democratic

11-58543

We must particularly underline that conflicts
remain the major cause behind increasing numbers of
refugees and internally displaced persons. We are
deeply concerned about the unsafe and too often
impeded humanitarian access to populations affected
by conflict. We are also troubled by attacks against
humanitarian workers, which must be strongly
condemned. We also believe that the Security Council
should take a more consistent and comprehensive
approach to addressing humanitarian access constraints
and ensuring accountability for grave instances of
denial of access.
Accountability for human rights violations should
be given the utmost priority. The International Criminal
Court should have better interaction with the Security
Council, while international and national mechanisms
should complement that work. National judicial
systems are the cornerstone for addressing
accountability and impunity, but the relevant United
Nations bodies need to develop comprehensive and
innovative approaches to support their work.
Civilian protection issues developed over the last
decade must be further enhanced. The Council can play
a leadership role, but the Secretariat and United
Nations agencies need to clearly delineate their roles
and responsibilities and allocate sufficient resources to
fulfil them. Sanctions and other targeted measures
against the perpetrators of violations against civilians
are important for enhancing accountability.
We believe that commissions of inquiry and factfinding missions could be used as preventive tools and
measures for possibly decreasing tensions before the
escalation of a conflict. Governments should fully
cooperate with the fact-finding missions sent by
commissions of inquiry and allow them to investigate
all alleged violations of international humanitarian law.
The crucial elements for the establishment of those

13

S/PV.6650

mechanisms are adequate timing, the availability of
experts, priorities adapted to specific situations, as well
as follow-up activities.
Finally, the challenges facing the Council with
regard to the protection of civilians call for greater
international cooperation and better coordination
between the Council and other United Nations bodies
and agencies. To that end, additional efforts should be
made to prevent conflicts and to promote early warning
systems and effective responses to situations that
specifically threaten civilian populations. Although the
primary responsibility for the protection of civilians
lies with States and parties to armed conflicts, the
United Nations, with its systematic approach to the
protection of civilians, must be and is at the helm of
the global effort.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
extend the warmest welcome to His Excellency
Mr. Aníbal António Cavaco Silva, President of the
Republic of Portugal, and thank him for participating
in the work of the Council earlier today. I also thank
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, Ms. Catherine Bragg and
Mr. Philip Spoerri for their important briefings and
contributions to help us consider and analyse the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We would also like to thank the Permanent
Mission of Portugal for having convened this meeting
and organized, together with the Office for the
Coordinator of Humanitarian Affairs, last week’s
workshop, which furnished valuable elements for
addressing the topic at hand.
Colombia reiterates its commitment to respecting
and protecting civilians in armed conflict. In this
regard, our Government has made every possible
effort. The consolidation of the rule of law is the most
solid foundation for creating conditions to protect
individuals and guarantee the full enjoyment of their
personal rights.
The fact that the topic of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict has remained on the agenda
of the Security Council for more than a decade
suggests that there is a need for this executive organ of
the Organization to play a bigger role in protecting
civilian populations when they fall victim to violent
and systematic repression by their own authorities, as
was the case in Libya. Furthermore, these activities are
a valuable complement to contributions and
developments originating in other bodies, such as the

14

General Assembly, the Human Rights Council and the
Economic and Social Council.
The General Assembly in particular, through its
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
recognizes in its report A/65/19 that the mandates of
several United Nations peacekeeping missions
currently include a civilian protection component. That
document establishes the guidelines to be followed in
order to appropriately accomplish those tasks, in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations.
With respect to the adoption of mandates related
to the protection of civilians in situations on the
Council’s agenda, we stress the importance of taking
into consideration the strengthening of national
capacities. The report of the Special Committee of
Peacekeeping Operations itself stresses that the
protection of civilians is first and foremost the
responsibility of the host State. Therefore,
peacekeeping missions entrusted with that mandate
should carry out their work without undermining the
responsibility of the host Government to protect its
civilian population. The strength of the State as an
institution and support for the actions of national
authorities are the bases for guaranteeing the effective
protection of civilians in contexts of violence.
In the search for lasting peace and stability that
can make a long-term difference, the Security Council
should enhance its coordination with other bodies and
agencies of the system. In this context, it would be
wise to undertake sustained efforts and to adopt
comprehensive approaches that offer possibilities for
cooperation to meet problems that at times represent
highly complex challenges. The specific measures
adopted by the Security Council in situations submitted
for its consideration lead to precise actions that are
adapted to the context and circumstances of each
situation.
It goes without saying that these considerations
are all the more relevant when the Council considers
reports on situations other than those already on its
agenda. Colombia wishes to stress that, when
considering this point, the Council needs to maintain a
clear distinction between situations that are included
on its agenda and those that are not. In this sense, it is
advisable that, when addressing the protection of
civilians in specific situations, the Council act to
strengthen national institutions.

11-58543

S/PV.6650

Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of Ambassador Antonio de
Aguiar Patriota, Minister for External Relations of
Brazil, who is unable to participate in today’s meeting
as he had hoped, due to unforeseen circumstances that
required his presence in Brazil. I will now proceed to
read out his statement.
(spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the
delegation)
“I congratulate Your Excellency and the
Portuguese
delegation
on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month
of November and in particular for your initiative
in promoting this timely debate on the protection
of civilians.
(spoke in English)
“I would like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his very informative briefing. I
would also like to extend warm greetings to High
Commissioner Navanethem Pillay and thank her
for her presentation. Our appreciation also goes
to Ms. Catherine Bragg and to Mr. Philip Spoerri
for their briefings.
“On the occasion of today’s debate, I would
like to propose a reflection on how the
relationship between the maintenance of
international peace and security and the
protection of civilians has recently evolved and
how to build upon the existing conceptual
framework to deal with the many challenges
confronting us. My remarks are meant as a
constructive, conceptual contribution to help
develop our collective thinking on a very
important issue that will continue to be of
concern to this Council and to the international
community as a whole.
“No issue could be more deserving of the
attention of the Security Council than the need to
protect civilians in situations of armed conflict.
We are all well aware of the plight of refugees,
displaced persons and all the innocent victims of
war. I also take this opportunity to reiterate our
appreciation for the work carried out by the
International Committee of the Red Cross and all
other relief workers on the ground, who, often at
great personal sacrifice, dedicate their best efforts
to the protection of civilians.

11-58543

“At the outset, let us bear in mind two
different sides of the question of the protection of
civilians. On the one hand, there is the imperative
need to prevent violence against civilians in the
conduct of hostilities — I would even venture to
say to prevent violence against non-combatants in
general — and the need to ensure accountability.
On the other, there is the need to guarantee,
especially in situations of armed conflict, that
persons in need have access to humanitarian
assistance and emergency relief. Blocking access
to humanitarian aid can be just as lethal as
pulling a trigger.
“On all counts, the most important task, as
stressed in the various reports prepared by the
Secretary-General on this question, is that of
ensuring compliance with the rules of
international humanitarian law and human rights
law. That, of course, is easier said than done, but
we can derive some reassurance from the fact that
the issue is now high on our agenda, and this
meeting is eloquent proof of that.
“The Secretariat has produced a number of
studies that have increased our understanding of
this complex question, and presented us with a
number of useful recommendations that have
enriched the work of the United Nations aimed at
improving the situation of civilians in armed
conflicts.
“Brazil has a strong interest in the work of
the Security Council on the protection of
civilians. We have made significant progress
since 1999, when discussions on this issue began
to receive more focused attention. We support the
statement to be made by the representative of
Switzerland on behalf of the Group of Friends of
the Protection of Civilians.
“The plight of innocent civilians and the
need to prevent the impunity of perpetrators of
the most serious crimes is what led the United
Nations to create the International Criminal Court
(ICC), of which Brazil is currently a full member.
Supporting the work of the ICC is one of the most
effective ways to enhance accountability and to
deter future crimes.
“A few years back, in September 2005, an
important step was taken when the Outcome
Document (resolution 60/1) of the World Summit

15

S/PV.6650

was adopted. It established the responsibility of
States to protect their populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. Additionally, it mentions the
responsibility of the international community to
act collectively, through the United Nations,
should national authorities manifestly fail to
protect their populations. Indeed, no one can be
indifferent to the fate of those who are under the
threat of such heinous crimes.
“The recognition that there is a
responsibility to protect was a milestone. It
should be stressed that the same World Summit
declaration that established a consensus
formulation of the concept of the responsibility to
protect also clearly stated that that responsibility
must be exercised, first of all, through the use of
diplomatic, humanitarian and other peaceful
means, and that only in those cases in which
peaceful means prove to be inadequate should
coercive measures be contemplated. Along with
that process, it is essential to distinguish between
collective responsibility, which can be fully
exercised thorough non-coercive measures, and
collective security, which involves a case-by-case
political assessment by the Security Council.
“Before embarking upon military action, the
international community is expected to conduct a
comprehensive and judicious analysis of all
possible consequences. The use of force always
brings with it the risk of causing unintended
casualties and spreading violence and instability.
The fact that it is employed with the aim of
protecting civilians does not make the collateral
casualties or unintended destabilization less
tragic.
“That is why, in our view, it is necessary to
take an additional conceptual step in dealing with
the protection of civilians. I would like to take
this opportunity to offer a new perspective on the
question that, we believe, has become essential in
approaching our common objective.
“The point was made by President Dilma
Rousseff in her opening statement at this year’s
general debate at the General Assembly (see
A/66/PV.11), when she referred to an indisputable
and disturbing fact. The world today suffers the
painful consequences of military interventions

16

that have aggravated existing conflicts, allowed
terrorism to penetrate into places where it
previously did not exist, given rise to new cycles
of violence, and increased the vulnerability of
civilian populations. She added that much had
been said about the responsibility to protect, but
very little about the responsibility while
protecting.
“Because the United Nations can authorize
the use of force, it is under the obligation to fully
develop an awareness of the dangers involved in
such use and to set up mechanisms that can
provide an objective and detailed assessment of
such dangers, as well as ways and means of
preventing harm to civilians.
“Our collective point of departure should
resemble the Hippocratic principle of primum non
nocere — first, do no harm — with which doctors
are so well acquainted. That must be the motto of
those who are mandated to protect civilians. It
would also be most unfortunate, ultimately
unacceptable, if a United Nations mission
established with the aim of protecting civilians
were to cause greater harm than that that it was
enacted to prevent.
“But we must aim for a higher level of
responsibility. One casualty is one too many, no
matter how noble the intentions. The Brazilian
delegation will shortly circulate a concept paper.
It elaborates on the idea that the international
community, as it exercises its responsibility to
protect, must demonstrate a high level of
responsibility while protecting. Both concepts
should evolve together, based on an agreed set of
fundamental
principles,
parameters
and
procedures, of which I will mention a few.
“Prevention is always the best policy. It is
the emphasis on preventive diplomacy that
reduces the risk of armed conflict and the human
costs associated with it. The international
community must be rigorous in its efforts to
exhaust all peaceful means available in the
protection of civilians under threat of violence, in
line with the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations, as embodied in the
2005 Outcome Document. The use of force must
produce as little violence and instability as
possible. Under no circumstances can it generate

11-58543

S/PV.6650

more harm than it was authorized to prevent. In
the event that the use of force is contemplated,
action must be judicious, proportionate and
limited to the objectives established by the
Security Council. Enhanced Council procedures
are needed to monitor and assess the manner in
which
resolutions
are
interpreted
and
implemented to ensure responsibility while
protecting.
“We hope that United Nations members
contribute to elaborating the concept of
responsibility while protecting. We are convinced
that, if we succeed in that endeavour, we will
make the Council stronger and better equipped to
carry out its responsibilities under the Charter.
“The Security Council can no longer
postpone a serious discussion of such issues. We
are aware that it is not an easy task and may
require the adoption of new procedures, but we
can do no less.”
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank the Portuguese presidency for
having organized the Council’s open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict today. I also
want to warmly welcome President Cavaco Silva to the
Security Council and to thank him for his statement. I
would also like to thank the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and the representative of the
International Committee of the Red Cross for their
briefings.
The right to life is one of the fundamental rights
enshrined in the constitutions of a vast number of
United Nations Member States, including my own. It
is, in fact, the foundation of any social order.
Unfortunately, there are instances when that foundation
is disturbed, leading to the killing of civilians on a
large scale. Such instances leave a deep scar on our
collective consciousness. Living in a globalized world
today, the international community cannot but deal
with such cases.
At the same time, most cases where civilians are
at the greatest risk today do not involve nation States,
but belligerents who are not necessarily combatants
under international humanitarian law. That makes the
task of the international community, the Council in
particular, so much more difficult as it needs to act
within the established principles of international law. I

11-58543

would therefore like to thank the Portuguese
presidency for having organized this meeting, and hope
that today’s debate will contribute meaningfully
towards the United Nations response for the protection
of civilians. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his incisive statement.
Civilians have always suffered the most in war.
Notwithstanding the development of international
humanitarian law and Security Council mandates,
civilians continue to suffer today. Even more
unfortunate
is
the
fact
that
civilians,
or
non-belligerents, suffer a disproportionate share of
casualties compared to belligerents. It is they who bear
the brunt of violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations.
United Nations peacekeeping is one of the key
instruments available to the international community to
protect people from the scourge of war and
lawlessness. India has contributed, through ideas and
resources, to global efforts towards protecting
civilians. Our men on the ground are the ones who
translate the Council’s mandates into actions in
challenging circumstances.
India is proud to have been associated with
United Nations peacekeeping from its very inception.
As a country that has contributed more than 100,000
peacekeepers and to virtually every United Nations
peacekeeping operation in the past six decades, India is
steadfast in its commitment to protect civilians at the
international level. India brings to the table a quantum
of experience in actually protecting civilians in
peacekeeping missions that is unique in its relevance,
variety and depth.
It has been India’s consistent view that protection
of the population is first and foremost the
responsibility of each State. We recognize the
responsibility of all States to respect the fundamental
rights of their people, address their legitimate
aspirations and respond to their grievances through
administrative, political, economic and other measures.
At the same time, States also have the obligation to
protect their citizens from armed groups and militants.
While the right of people to protest peacefully is to be
respected, States cannot but take appropriate action
when heavily armed militant groups resort to violence
against State authority and infrastructure.
The Security Council has placed protection issues
squarely at the centre of the conflict resolution and

17

S/PV.6650

peacekeeping agenda by adopting a number of
resolutions and statements on protection of civilians
and on related issues of violence against women and
children in situations of armed conflict.
Protection of civilians, when applied as a basis
for Security Council action, needs to respect the
fundamental aspects of the United Nations Charter,
including the sovereignty and integrity of the Member
States. Any decision to intervene that is associated with
political motives distracts from the noble principles
and must be avoided. Also, the response of the Council
and the international community must be proportional
to the threat involved, use the appropriate methods and
make available adequate resources to any peacekeeping
mission involved.
In this context, it is pertinent to mention that we
find several Member States all too willing to expend
considerable resources for regime change in the name
of protection of civilians. However, they are unwilling
to provide minimal resources, like military helicopters,
to the United Nations peacekeeping missions, which
are mandated to protect civilians and designed to
strengthen capacity of State institutions as well.
We must also be clear that the United Nations has
a mandate to intervene only in situations where there is
a threat to international peace and security. Any
Council decision to intervene must, therefore, be based
on credible and verifiable information. This requires a
much greater information flow when the Council is
seized of a situation.
The Security Council must make up its mind on
what it means by protection of civilians. It must have
clarity about who is to be protected and what
constitutes a threat. It must also clarify what kind of
response it expects and who is to respond. For
example, it must be able to differentiate between
threats that require a military response and a rule-oflaw response. It should not ask force commanders or
their soldiers to assume policing responsibilities.
In this regard, I would like to draw attention to
the need for accountability. We believe that there
should be accountability of those who mandate. Their
responsibility does not end with the generation of
mandates. They should be held accountable if
unachievable mandates are generated for political
expediency or if adequate resources are not made
available.

18

Further, it is important that the principle of
protecting civilians must be applied in a uniform
manner by all parties to a conflict. The Council’s
recent actions have brought to the fore a considerable
sense of unease about the manner in which the
humanitarian imperative of protecting civilians has
been interpreted for actual action on the ground.
Monitoring of the manner in which the Council’s
mandates are interpreted has, therefore, assumed
importance. There are also instances when the Council
is expected to quickly criticize national Governments
for failing in their responsibility to protect civilians,
while little or no accountability is enforced on armed
groups indulging in violence.
As stated earlier, the protection of civilians is a
national responsibility and requires institutions, and
conditions in which the institutions can function. To
enable States to fulfil their responsibility to protect
their populations, national capacities need to be
strengthened, where needed. Peacekeepers, in spite of
their best efforts, cannot possibly protect everyone
from everything. Peacekeepers are primarily there to
assist and aid in the development of national
capacities.
In concluding, I would like to stress that force is
not the only way to protect civilians. It should only be
the measure of last resort and be used only when all
diplomatic and political efforts fail. The Security
Council must also be clear that its responsibility for
protecting civilians does not end with a military or
police response. Civilians require humanitarian
wherewithal for survival. The Council requires a more
integrated view. Multiple stakeholders are involved in
this process, not just the military.
The actions of the Council and international
community should facilitate engagement among
warring factions in a conflict situation in a nationally
owned and inclusive political process and not
complicate the situation by threats of sanctions, regime
change, et cetera. This inclusive approach to national
reconciliation, anchored in State sovereignty, is the
only way to move forward and ensure the protection of
civilians in an effective, pragmatic and enduring
manner.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the President of the Portuguese Republic
and the Secretary-General for having participated in

11-58543

S/PV.6650

this debate. I also thank all other speakers for their
presentations.
I associate myself with the statement that will be
made on behalf of the European Union.
The protection of civilians is at the heart of the
mandate of United Nations peacekeeping operations. In
that framework our Organization, on a daily basis,
must fulfil that mission. It is up to us to give it the
means and to help it deal with this challenge.
The responsibility to protect civilians belongs
first, we all know, to national Governments. But when
they do not fulfil that duty, and when serious violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights —
war crimes, crimes against humanity — are planned or
committed, it is then the duty of the Security Council
to intervene to protect civilian populations. There is no
other choice when these atrocities are committed by
Governments against their own populations.
When civilians die, to think about how to protect
them is good, but to protect them is much better. That
is why in the case of Libya the Council first adopted a
wide range of sanctions. Later it authorized the
coalition forces to protect civilians being bombed on
the order of their own leaders. By permitting strikes on
Qadhafi’s forces at the entrance to Benghazi, the
Security Council was able to prevent a massacre.
France is proud that it did not fail to meet that
rendezvous with history. To abstain would have been to
turn our eyes away from the suffering of the Libyan
people. To abstain would have been to join the halfhearted who deplore evil but do nothing to reduce it.
Today it is in Syria that we must protect civilians.
No one here can deny the recourse to force there. The
tragic situation in which the Syrian people have found
themselves since February — in which there have
already been 3,500 deaths and which is characterized
by brutality and intolerable cruelty — creates an
obligation for the international community to act to
make these atrocities stop and to prosecute the
perpetrators of these crimes.
However, the Council has abdicated its
responsibilities. Some have vetoed even limited action
on the part of the Council. Others chose to abstain —
in other words, to show their indifference. While the
Syrian Government continues to shoot at its
population, besiege it, arbitrarily arrest thousands of
people and engage in forced disappearances and

11-58543

torture, the Security Council has not played its role
with regard to the protection of civilians. It is a serious
failing by the Council, whether in humanitarian or
political terms.
Today the Syrian Government must implement
the plan of the Arab League, but it must also cooperate
with the commission of inquiry established by the
Human Rights Council. We await their report; we must
draw from it all the consequences. France will continue
to work with determination so that the Council —
which has been able to see the cost of its inaction —
finally plays its role.
We spoke here yesterday about the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We could mention many other
countries where the security of the civilian population
should constitute a major concern for the Security
Council — the Sudan, for example, where violence
continues against civilians in Darfur, Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile. The Security Council, which
was able to take bold measures in 2005, should act in
that respect.
I should like also to revert to the issue of the fight
against impunity for those responsible for atrocities. In
2005, the Security Council referred the atrocities
committed in Darfur to the International Criminal
Court (ICC). This year, it unanimously referred to it
the acts of violence committed in Libya. It is clear that
in the absence of justice, there cannot be lasting peace,
a reweaving of the social fabric or reconciliation
among communities.
To choose between justice and peace is to choose
the short term over the long term. Thus States must
bring to justice and punish those responsible for
violating international humanitarian law and human
rights law, which requires impartial and independent
investigations. However, in cases where the national
authorities are not themselves able to carry out such
investigations or refuse to do so, the international
community must act to support them, or in their stead.
Thus in situations where serious violations of human
rights or of international humanitarian law are
suspected to have occurred, an international
commission of inquiry, such as the one that exists for
Syria today, makes it possible, by gathering evidence
and testimony, to open the way for national or
international judicial proceedings. The Security
Council must not hesitate to mandate such
commissions and must follow up on their conclusions.

19

S/PV.6650

In addition, France calls for full cooperation with
the ICC. The Court, by alerting us, through its
preliminary inquiries, to the imminent commission of
massive crimes, by ensuring that the perpetrators of
serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law are brought to justice, and even by
dissuading perpetrators from committing fresh acts of
violence, plays a role in the protection of civilians.
Finally, I should like to reiterate our support for
Ms. Wahlström and Ms. Coomaraswamy and commend
their commitment and the high quality of their work. In
that respect, the Security Council must systematically
consider including sexual violence as grounds for
sanctions when establishing or reviewing the mandates
of sanctions committees.
With regard to children, experience has shown
that bringing pressure to bear yields results. I would
recall that the Council, in coming months, will be
working on this issue, and we must no longer hesitate
to assume our responsibilities and adopt strong,
targeted sanctions against those responsible for acts of
violence against children.
My country has suffered too much from war to
lightly involve ourselves in military action, but there
are exceptional times in history where respect for
international law gives us a clear choice between, one
the one hand, the comfort of words and a good
conscience and, on the other, the difficult decision to
assume our responsibilities. That is what France did in
Libya. It did so with seriousness and determination,
and the joy of the Libyan people today is both its
reward and justification.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I should
like to thank President Cavaco Silva for presiding over
this meeting of the Council. I should equally like to
thank the Secretary-General, High Commissioner
Pillay, Assistant Secretary-General Bragg and
International Committee of the Red Cross Director
Spoerri for their briefings and for their dedication to
the protection of civilians.
Protection of civilians is at the heart of what we
should be doing in the Council. In the past year, we
have made significant progress in operationalizing
norms on the protection of civilians. The Council
played a critical role in protecting the people of Côte
d’Ivoire in the aftermath of the elections there. When
Muammar Al-Qadhafi moved to make good on his
promises to massacre civilians in his own country, the

20

Council acted. The United States is proud to have taken
part in the NATO-led coalition that was authorized,
without any opposition, by the Council under
resolution 1973 (2011). This was necessary and
appropriate, given that Al-Qadhafi’s forces continued
to unleash brutal attacks on civilians and civilianpopulated areas and hindered the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. Thus, in accordance with
resolution 1973 (2011), NATO and its partners
protected civilians for as long as necessary.
Of course, every situation is different, and every
solution will be different. But the need to act in each
instance remains. The situation most immediately
confronting the Council is in Syria. The United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights has warned that
the Syrian Government’s appalling actions might
amount to crimes against humanity. Her Office now
places the likely death toll at least 3,500. The Al-Assad
regime’s crimes are condemned more widely every day.
The Gulf Cooperation Council has demanded an end to
what it called Al-Assad’s “killing machine”. The Arab
League has worked hard to bring a halt to the violence,
but thus far to no avail.
Yet the Council has not adopted a single
resolution, even to condemn the Al-Assad regime’s
brutal attacks on civilians. But let there be no doubt:
the crisis in Syria will stay before the Security Council,
and we will not rest until the Council rises to meet its
responsibilities.
The Council has also failed to act, or even to
speak, in defence of the thousands of innocent civilians
in the Sudan’s Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile States,
where a brutal military campaign by the Government
has again resulted in horrific loss of life and a dire
humanitarian crisis. Our silence is deafening and
inexcusable.
Overall, the United Nations and the Council face
challenges of both will and capacity. We believe that,
to build our capacity to protect civilians, the United
Nations should advance on five fronts.
First, we must strengthen early-warning systems
to detect and draw attention to threats against civilians,
especially where the United Nations already has a
significant presence on the ground. Humanitarian
workers are often the first to sound the alarm bell.
United Nations peacekeeping personnel have an
obligation to do so as well. We have seen some recent
promising examples of early-warning and prevention

11-58543

S/PV.6650

strategies in peacekeeping missions. For example, the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, with the
support of the United Nations country team, mobilized
in response to escalating tensions in Jonglei State,
including consultations with community leaders and
Government authorities. This early-warning system
may
well
have
helped
prevent
retaliatory
intercommunal violence.
We encourage such early-warning activity in
other missions as part of an overall mission-wide
strategy for the protection of civilians. Such strategies
can succeed only if they rely on strengthening mission
personnel’s understanding of and communications with
the host communities. A mission-wide strategy also
needs to provide peacekeepers with the necessary
equipment and training, as well as ensure their resolve
to use all means at their disposal, including force
where necessary and so mandated.
My Government welcomes the development by
the United Nations of training materials focused on
sexual and gender-based violence, as well as other
tools to help missions improve their protection
strategies. The United States helps the United Nations
to survey current practices and has initiated a
workshop for missions with civilian-protection
mandates.
Secondly, where prevention has failed, we must
bring the evidence of atrocities to light. That is easier
to do when human rights investigators are already on
the ground as part of a peace operation or human rights
presence. But even where such missions are not
present, there are several options available that we can
rely upon, such as fact-finding missions, special
rapporteurs and commissions of inquiry. The
membership must be ready to take action on such
information in this Chamber, in the Human Rights
Council and in the General Assembly.

for atrocities to justice so that all people can live under
the protection of law. We have seen first-hand the
consequences when those who direct violence against
civilians are not held to account, as in the case of
Walikale in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
where over 350 civilians were raped but the
prosecution by Congolese authorities of alleged
perpetrators is still pending 15 months later. Since
then, soldiers have continued to commit mass rapes in
North and South Kivu, and the number of rapes
committed by civilians has increased as well.
Finally, in order to see justice through from
beginning to end at the international and national
levels, we must ensure protection for victims,
witnesses and judicial officers. For example, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United States is
supporting the witness protection project of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, aimed at highprofile and sensitive cases against perpetrators of rape,
as well as providing support for the Mission’s
prosecution support cells.
The United Nations has learned valuable lessons
in all of these areas in recent years, and the United
States is studying them carefully right now within the
context of the presidential study directive on mass
atrocities, which President Obama issued in August.
We look forward to consulting with our fellow Council
members and partners throughout the United Nations
system as we continue our work on it.
In conclusion, I should like to commend again the
brave work of the United Nations and the tens of
thousands of local and international United Nations
staff, from peacekeepers to humanitarian workers and
human rights monitors, who risk their lives daily to
protect civilians in harm’s way. We must never take
them for granted or underestimate the challenges they
face in defence of our shared values and international
peace and security.

Thirdly, the Security Council can impose targeted
sanctions, such as asset freezes and travel bans, on
individuals responsible for ordering and committing
violence against civilians. Full and effective sanctions
implementation can be an extremely useful tool for
limiting the ability of these individuals to prey on
vulnerable populations.

Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We are pleased to
see His Excellency President Cavaco Silva preside
over this debate. My delegation wishes to express its
appreciation to Portugal for facilitating the discussion
on the crucial topic of the protection of civilians.

Fourthly, we must support societies that have
been ravaged by atrocities in strengthening their
domestic accountability and, when necessary, enabling
international courts to bring those leaders responsible

We thank the Secretary-General, United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights Navanethem
Pillay, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator

11-58543

21

S/PV.6650

Catherine Bragg, and Mr. Philip Spoerri, Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, for their statements.
South Africa remains unwavering in its
commitment to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. In this regard, we welcome this debate, with a
particular focus on strengthening accountability
mechanisms
for
violations
of
international
humanitarian law. The protection of the lives of
ordinary civilians, who are all too often the innocent
victims of instability and strife in conflict zones, is
paramount. International law clearly provides that the
primary responsibility to protect civilians rests with the
State. In this regard, we fully support the
recommendations contained in the 2010 report of the
Secretary-General
(S/2010/579)
regarding
the
strengthening of accountability measures such as
national judicial institutions, and the signing and
ratification of the Rome Statute. These actions should
be encouraged.
Additionally, resolution 1894 (2009) offers
practical recommendations and actions that the Council
could employ to ensure accountability. These include
the possibility of using the International Humanitarian
Fact-Finding Commission to investigate allegations of
grave breaches and serious violations of international
humanitarian law, and of the Secretary-General
including in his reports comprehensive and detailed
information relating to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
We fully support international efforts to ensure
that the normative and legal framework developed to
defend the weak and vulnerable trapped in armed
conflict is strengthened and further enhanced. The
protection of civilians is, by its very nature, politically
sensitive yet a critical and vital task. We must ensure at
the same time that such efforts are not abused to
further objectives that fall outside the scope of this
noble and moral endeavour and sensitive responsibility.
The prevention of conflict and, by extension, the
protection of civilians in armed conflict embody the
very objective for which the United Nations was
established. Preventing conflict and protecting civilians
constitute important commitments that we should all
make and collectively endeavour to achieve. Recent
positive developments in the Security Council have, in
some ways, advanced that goal. We wish to highlight in
particular the recent advances in fostering the principle

22

of accountability in two important areas of the
Council’s work, notably in protecting women and
children. Here, we wish to reference the adoption on
28 October of a presidential statement in which the
Council noted
“that the fight against impunity for the most
serious
crimes
of
international
concern
committed against women and girls has been
strengthened through the work of the
International Criminal Court, ad hoc and mixed
tribunals, as well as specialized chambers in
national tribunals” and reiterated “its intention to
enhance its efforts to fight impunity and uphold
accountability for serious crimes against women
and girls” (S/PRST/2011/20, p. 2).
With regard to children and armed conflict, we
welcome the adoption of resolution 1998 (2011), in
which the Council expanded the listing criteria for the
Secretary-General’s reports to include parties to
conflict that attack or threaten schools and hospitals.
As we celebrate these important achievements,
South Africa wishes to express publicly its concerns
with the manner in which efforts employed by the
Security Council to protect civilians have been
exploited in the recent past. In particular, my
delegation has expressed its condemnation of recent
NATO activities in Libya, which went far beyond the
letter and spirit of resolution 1973 (2011). Abusing the
authorization granted by the Council to advance a
political regime-change agenda does not bode well for
the future action of the Council in advancing the
protection of civilians agenda. That could lead to a
permanent state of paralysis within the Council in
addressing similar situations in the future. Such actions
could undermine the Council’s credibility in protecting
civilians.
Regime change and the arming and harming of
civilians cannot be justified in the name of protecting
civilians, and those entrusted with such responsibilities
must uphold them while protecting civilians, as clearly
stated by the representative of Brazil. Those who
deliberately go beyond Council decisions and
international legality must bear the full responsibility
for this impasse. In that regard, we have taken note of
the progress report delivered by the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court on 2 November (see
S/PV.6647), in which he expressed the willingness of
his Office to conduct comprehensive investigations

11-58543

S/PV.6650

into further alleged possible crimes, committed by
whomsoever, in Libya. Ensuring justice will go a long
way towards ensuring accountability.
United Nations peacekeeping operations are
increasingly tasked with mandates for protecting
civilians under imminent threat. Mandated protection
of civilians peacekeeping tasks are to be implemented
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter and the guiding principles of peacekeeping
operations. Peacekeeping missions with such a
mandate must carry out their tasks without prejudice to
the sovereignty of host Governments and their primary
responsibility in that regard. The implementation of
such mandates should be supported by a
comprehensive
peace
process
involving
all
stakeholders, underpinned by national ownership and
the support of the international community.
My delegation expresses its concern over the
impartiality of United Nations forces being
compromised when the Organization is seen as taking
sides in a conflict. United Nations peacekeeping
operations are increasingly tasked with mandates for
protecting civilians under imminent threat. However,
that role could be compromised if the United Nations
were perceived to be biased and were found to be
unable to carry out its protection mandate due to a lack
of the requisite resources and capabilities.
The protection of civilians as an important
objective will only be sustainable if States emerging
from conflict have the capacity to do so in the longrun. The objective of peacekeeping should always be to
assist countries to end conflicts by empowering them
through security sector reform, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and the training of
effective and professional national security forces so
that they can assume eventual responsibility over their
territory, including for the protection of civilians. Such
a process would enable peacekeepers to have a clear
exit strategy while national institutional mechanisms
for protecting civilians are put in place.
Progress in advancing the protection of civilians
will also depend upon the consistency with which the
Council pursues that goal. Selectivity gravely limits the
credibility of the Council in advancing protection of
civilians mandates and seeking accountability. The
Council cannot be seen as placing the value of some
civilians above that of others. The proactive action we
witnessed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo

11-58543

and Côte d’Ivoire also has to be applied in other places
on the Council’s agenda, such as in Afghanistan, Iraq,
Palestine and Western Sahara, where the plight of
civilians is being ignored without accountability.
We wish to underline that it remains the
responsibility of States to protect civilians within their
borders. Armed opposition groups also bear
responsibility for ensuring that unarmed civilians are
protected. Failure by both State and non-State actors to
uphold that responsibility should not go unpunished.
Accountability must, first and foremost, be sought at
the national level. It remains the sovereign
responsibility of States to determine what their judicial
mechanisms are in ensuring accountability. Failing
that, the international community has a collective
responsibility to act with the utmost adherence to
international law, in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter and as prescribed in the 2005
outcome document and the Constitutive Act of the
African Union.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): An analysis of the situation with regard to
the protection of civilians in various hotspots and of
our experience in implementing Security Council
resolutions that include this component lead us to the
discomfiting conclusion that, even with a serious
international legal basis and increasing efforts by the
international community, civilians continue to suffer
and to become casualties of conflict.
We are particularly concerned about the fact that
women, children and older persons account for the
majority of civilian casualties — in other words, those
who are normally deemed to be the most vulnerable
groups in a population. It therefore follows that the
most effective way to address the protection of
civilians is by not allowing armed conflict itself to
occur or very promptly ceasing confrontation where it
exists. Otherwise, an approach that exacerbates conflict
inevitably leads to new suffering for civilian
populations.
We vigorously condemn both premeditated
attacks on civilians and their demise as the result of the
indiscriminate or disproportionate use of force, which
is a gross violation of international humanitarian law.
All parties to an armed conflict, including international
troops, must promote the peaceful resolution of
conflicts and bear the corresponding obligations under
international humanitarian law. Those guilty of

23

S/PV.6650

violations, State and non-State actors alike, must not
evade responsibility for crimes committed. In our view,
the Brazilian conception of the responsibility to protect
is very interesting. We will participate constructively in
developing that idea.
The Russian Federation believes that the
international community’s adoption of any reactive
measures, especially those involving the use of force,
are possible only if they are sanctioned by the Security
Council and if they comply strictly with the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations. It is therefore
important to consider the economic, social, historical,
religious, cultural and other specificities of countries
and regions, including the nature of each conflict, its
underlying causes and ways of resolving it. Efforts to
protect civilians must be based on a clearly established
Security Council mandate, which must be strictly
complied with by all who undertake to discharge the
corresponding duties. Attempts to manipulate Council
mandates are unacceptable, even when proclaiming the
noblest of goals. Not only do such acts discredit the
very purpose of protecting civilians. Above all, such a
policy undermines the prestige of those who carry it
out. It also places the Security Council in an
ambiguous position and undermines the potential for
joint action by the international community in similar
situations.
Let us not be under any misconceptions when it
comes to so-called high-precision weapons in the
context of the protection of civilians. They are painless
only for those who fire them. On the ground, they
bring about destruction and death, including to
civilians and civilian infrastructure. The events of the
very recent past require an honest analysis and in-depth
and honest conclusions. Only that will fully restore the
capacity of the international community and the
Security Council to expeditiously and effectively react
to emerging conflicts, including in the context of the
challenge to protect civilians.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like once again to congratulate Portugal on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I also thank President Cavaco Silva for
his presence at today’s open debate. I also wish to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
statement. And I listened attentively to the statements
by Ms. Pillay, High Commissioner for Human Rights,
by Ms. Bragg, Assistant Secretary-General for

24

Humanitarian Affairs, and by Mr. Spoerri, of the
International Committee of the Red Cross.
Over the past few years, the Security Council has
held many open debates on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. Broad consensus has been achieved,
but there are still differing views on some issues. In
particular, the recent practice of the Security Council
has triggered a new round of debate and reflection in
the international community. This meeting, which is
being held at the initiative of Portugal, is no doubt very
timely and important. For that, I wish to express my
great appreciation. It is imperative for the Security
Council to engage in a thorough consideration and
comprehensive debate on the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. It is also necessary to take
seriously the views of non-members of the Council and
to act in a manner that better reflects the will of all
States Members of the United Nations.
The protection of civilians is, first and foremost,
the responsibility of the relevant Government and
parties to a conflict. Civilians make up the majority of
the victims of war, and they are the most directly
affected. Violence against civilians in armed conflict is
unacceptable. Human life is the most precious thing.
Innocent civilians in armed conflicts, especially
women and children, must be protected effectively.
Governments bear the primary responsibility in that
regard. Other parties involved in a conflict, including
those who intervene, whether domestic or foreign
forces, are also duty-bound to protect civilians and
must abide by international humanitarian law and other
relevant international law. They must fulfil their
obligations with regard to protecting civilians.
Secondly, action to protect civilians must comply
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, especially the principles of
non-interference in countries’ internal affairs and of
respect for the sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of States. Such action must be authorized by
the Security Council and be undertaken in an orderly
manner under the framework of the United Nations. It
should also focus on pressing for the early conclusion
of a ceasefire, resolving conflicts through dialogue,
negotiation and other political means, and supporting
the good offices and mediation efforts of relevant
parties, including those of regional organizations and
the Secretary-General, rather than the other way
around.

11-58543

S/PV.6650

Thirdly, the protection of civilians through the
use of force should be authorized with extreme caution.
China has always advocated the peaceful settlement of
conflicts. However advanced weapons may be and
however precise strikes may be, civilian casualties are
inevitable.
Experience has shown that Security Council
action to protect civilians requires serious and careful
discussion. There should be strict provisions on the
mandate, implementing parties and implementing
conditions. If many questions remain to be clarified,
the Security Council should not rush to take action
until those questions are answered.
Fourthly, Security Council resolutions should be
fully and strictly implemented. Resolutions must be
implemented in full and to the letter. No party should
wilfully misinterpret resolutions, let alone take action
that goes beyond the mandate given by the Security
Council. In such cases, the principle of protection of
civilians is distorted to mean that force can be used on
a large scale, that infrastructure and residential areas
may be bombarded and that casualties among women
and children are acceptable. Those are all legitimate
concerns of the international community, and the
questions they raise demand answers.
The protection of civilians falls within the realm
of humanitarianism. There should be no political
motives or purposes involved, including regime
change. For that reason, how to strictly and effectively
monitor the implementation of Security Council
resolutions has become an important and urgent issue.
China welcomes and will carefully study the concept
paper proposed by Brazil and actively supports
discussions considering that concept paper.
Fifthly, it is imperative to abandon the practice of
selectivity and double-standards. Many Member States
have consistently called on the Security Council to
adhere to the principle of fairness and equity and to
attach equal importance to all issues on its agenda
involving the protection of civilians — including the
situations in the Gaza Strip, Somalia, Afghanistan and
Iraq. China endorses that view. Selectivity and doublestandards only undermine the role and authority of the
Security Council.
Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): First of
all, we welcome the fact that His Excellency
Mr. Aníbal António Cavaco Silva, President of the
Portuguese Republic, was able to preside over the

11-58543

earlier portion of this meeting. His presence at today’s
debate testifies to the importance that Portugal attaches
to the issue of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, and we are grateful for that. I would also like
to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
leadership on this subject and for his important
statement. I also thank High Commissioner Pillay,
Assistant Secretary-General Bragg and Mr. Philip
Spoerri for their statements.
As the Secretary-General has reiterated in his
reports on the subject, the protection of civilians
against human rights violations is one of the five
fundamental pillars of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, whereby we strive to improve the
situation on the ground and to enforce international
law. The multidimensional task of protecting civilians
encompasses all of the Security Council’s areas of
jurisdiction.
Gabon is party to the various treaties and
conventions on human rights law and humanitarian
law, and today I will reiterate my country’s position on
the issue. We believe that responsibility for the
protection of civilians, both in peacetime and in armed
conflict, falls primarily to States themselves. Every
State must scrupulously train security personnel and
members of its judiciary institutions with regard to that
responsibility.
In times of armed conflict, all parties, including
non-State armed groups, have the obligation to protect
civilian populations. In our view, every indiscriminate
attack against civilians in the course of a conflict
constitutes a violation of human rights and
international humanitarian law. When all parties to an
armed conflict neglect to protect civilians, then it falls
to the Security Council and the international
community to fill the gap in a systematic way through
relevant dialogue and consultations.
We can be proud of the important normative
framework that the Council and the international
community have developed over the past decade
around the responsibility of States in protecting
civilians, especially through resolutions 1674 (2006),
1888 (2009), 1894 (2009), 1906 (2009), 1970 (2011)
and 1973 (2011). However it must be said that, despite
those efforts on the part of the Security Council and the
international community, civilian populations continue
to suffer attacks in armed conflict. Given that reality,
what is at stake for the Council is to use all means to

25

S/PV.6650

make our normative framework more effective at
preventing violence and to bring to justice those who
violate human rights.
In that context, we must also give equal focus
both to essential political action on the underlying
causes of conflict and to promoting and enforcing the
rule of law. We must just as diligently pursue efforts to
put an end to impunity for those guilty of war crimes,
crimes against humanity and the crime of genocide
against civilian populations. Doing everything possible
to ensure that the perpetrators of such crimes are
arrested and tried has more than a deterrent function. It
is also a matter of enacting justice for the victims.
The international community has at its disposal
various mechanisms by which to conduct independent,
reliable fact-finding investigations. The Council’s
experience in Darfur, Guinea and Côte d’Ivoire has
been a rich learning experience and suggests new
means to fight impunity. In that context, States stand to
gain from taking greater advantage of the expertise of
the
International
Humanitarian
Fact-Finding
Commission. We must also note the important work of
international criminal tribunals, mixed tribunals and
traditional justice mechanisms, the admirable work of
the Human Rights Council and the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights in facilitating factfinding in various crises, the significant contributions
of peacekeeping missions in gathering information on
grave violations, especially those against women and
children. I also underline the referrals on the part of
States to the International Criminal Court to investigate
and prosecute the perpetrators of the most serious
crimes and the Security Council’s referral of cases to
the Court, under article 16 of the Rome Statute.
Still, for our work to achieve lasting results, it is
essential for States themselves take on the
responsibility of addressing human rights violations.
On that subject, I commend the solutions developed
locally by some States to foment both accountability
and reconciliation. Supporting such efforts to
strengthen national systems must therefore become a
fundamental element of the international cooperation
essential in this matter.
That common effort will benefit from greater
cooperation among the United Nations, regional
organizations such as the African Union and
humanitarian organizations such as the International

26

Committee of the Red Cross. That will surely lead to
greater effectiveness on the ground.
Lastly, we must listen to the concerns of
humanitarian organizations at work in the field, and
take in the information they provide. Their knowledge
can serve to alert us to and mitigate the threat to
civilian populations of developments such as the use of
blast weapons.
In conclusion, Gabon’s position is based on the
importance of protecting civilians in conflict situations,
and we would like to reiterate the necessity of
establishing the responsibility of the perpetrators of the
most serious violations of international law as an
essential component of efforts to end impunity and
bring justice to the victims. Needless to say, we
support the Secretary-General’s call to the Council to
continue to vigilantly monitor the situation of civilians
in armed conflict.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): Let me join others in
welcoming President Silva to the Council and thanking
him for his statement. The Nigerian delegation is
grateful to Portugal for bringing us together to address
an important and integral component of our common
efforts to maintain international peace and security.
Increasingly, the effectiveness of the United Nations,
and of the Security Council in particular, is measured
against its ability to protect civilians. We thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, High Commissioner
for Human Rights Navanethem Pillay, AssistantSecretary-General Catherine Bragg and Mr. Philip
Spoerri of the International Committee of the Red
Cross for their insightful statements, which have
broadened our understanding of the achievements and
the continued challenges we face in our collective
efforts to protect civilians.
In the last 10 months, the ability of the Council to
adequately protect civilians in conflict situations has
been severely tested over and over again. The
Council’s scorecard shows mixed results. Through
carefully calibrated interventions in Côte d’Ivoire and
Libya, full-scale civil wars have been averted, relative
stability restored and many lives saved. However, for
civilians in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Gaza,
Syria and Western Sahara — to name but a few
situations — whose lives have been overturned by
conflict, our response has been small.
In such circumstances, we welcome the
invaluable preventive diplomacy efforts of actors such

11-58543

S/PV.6650

as the Department of Political Affairs, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and other interlocutors, who have
unquestionably provided alternative routes to conflict
resolution. Our valiant peacekeepers, who act as
beacons for peace, have also played an important role
in civilian protection. Those remarkable efforts in the
field can be buttressed by a renewed commitment on
the part of the Security Council to ensuring
accountability for violations of humanitarian law.

effect on other potential wrongdoers, thereby
protecting civilians, they can also restore a nation’s
faith in its leadership. Effective accountability
mechanisms can create space for examining the root
causes of conflict, leading to long-term solutions. The
role of the Human Rights Council’s Commission of
Inquiry on Libya should not be understated. The
Commission’s work was central to decisions taken here
in the Council, leading ultimately to the emergence of
a new, free Libya.

We focus on the accountability issue because we
in Nigeria have witnessed at first hand what can be lost
when wrongs go undetected and unpunished. Nothing
spreads fear like impunity. Where there is an
accountability mechanism gap, there can be no
recourse for the father whose crop has been razed to
the ground, for the grandmother whose compound has
been destroyed, or for the child whose school has been
occupied by rebel forces. Worse still, where there is
impunity the physical integrity of civilians is no longer
inviolable. The lesson we draw from such situations is
that systematic monitoring of and reporting on the
situation of conflict-affected civilians, in accordance
with resolution 1894 (2009), is still necessary in
numerous conflict and post-conflict situations on the
Council’s agenda.

Even so, our credibility depends on our
commitment
to
applying
the
principles
of
accountability consistently and with all due vigilance.
No argument in favour of standing by while civilians
are attacked can be sustained. Indeed, we are facing
numerous delicate situations where levels of violence
risk tipping into civil war, and we are duty-bound to
speak out. We must recognize that material challenges
remain in Southern Kordofan and the Blue Nile, as
well as in Syria. We take this opportunity to encourage
the Government of Syria to abide by the peace plan
proposed by the Arab League. Once swords are
sheathed, genuine dialogue for peace can begin.

In the last open debate on this subject, in May of
this year (see S/PV.6531), we observed that unless a
coordinated, comprehensive approach, implemented
system-wide, is adopted, our understanding of threats
to civilians will remain unclear, and civilians will
continue to suffer. Resolution 1998 (2011) on children
and armed conflict presents an opportunity for us to
make good on our pledge to develop and apply listing
criteria that target parties to armed conflicts who
violate international law. Monitoring in that way will
not only help all stakeholders to understand the
dangers that civilians face, such as the use of
explosives and heavy weaponry in populated areas, and
sexual violence as a weapon of war; it will also help us
better target our investigative resources.
We can also assist national authorities in the area
of accountability. Through security sector reform
efforts in Guinea, the Government is progressively
creating a security environment in which disciplinary
measures and human rights standards are upheld. Our
role in such contexts is to empower Governments to
take the lead in demonstrating genuine accountability
to civilians. Not only do these acts have a deterrent

11-58543

In championing the protection of civilians, we
deliver a message of hope and a signal of the strength
of our collective will. It is within our capabilities to
shield the vulnerable from the ravages of conflict and
other breaches of peace and security. If we continue to
act in concert, over time, our responsibility to protect
will surely be met.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me begin by thanking
Portugal for organizing this important debate; I
welcome the presence of the President of Portugal at
the opening of today’s meeting. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Pillay, as
well as Assistant-Secretary-General Catherine Bragg of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and Mr. Philip Spoerri, the Director for International
Law and Cooperation of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, for their statements and for their long
and strong commitment to the protection of civilians.
Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the European Union later in this debate.
This year’s developments in Libya, Côte d’Ivoire,
the Sudan, Somalia and Syria, to name a few, have
once again demonstrated the deadly effects of
repression and armed conflict on civilians. The

27

S/PV.6650

challenge confronting the international community, and
in particular the Security Council, remains: how can
we better prevent or stop violence against civilians?
This is a question that is of course closely linked to the
concept of the responsibility to protect. The Council
has only recently reaffirmed that it is the responsibility
of the authorities concerned to protect their own
populations. Germany firmly supports the principle of
the responsibility to protect, including the
responsibility of the international community, through
the Council, to take appropriate action should the
authorities concerned fail in their duty to protect
civilians. Let me add that now is not the time for us to
begin to step back from, or compromise on, the
commitments that all of us have undertaken in
endorsing the principle of the responsibility to protect.
Notable progress has been made since our last
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
held in May (S/PV.6531). On a normative level, the
Security Council adopted resolution 1998 (2011) in
July, which ensures that information on attacks on
schools and hospitals are included in the SecretaryGeneral’s annual report on children and armed conflict.
On the implementation side, we welcome the new
monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on
conflict-related sexual violence requested under
resolution 1960 (2010), which are now operational.
We also very much welcome the recent progress
made by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
on the completion of new training modules on
protection issues for peacekeeping personnel, and we
look forward to their rollout in the near future. In that
context, it is also of special importance to engage local
communities, including and especially women, in
discussions on protection requirements by taking
gender sensitivities into account when planning and
carrying out peacekeeping mandates.
These are positive developments. However,
enormous challenges remain. One of the major
challenges is the question of accountability. How can
we ensure accountability for violations of international
law committed both by individual perpetrators and for
parties to conflict? Ending impunity for violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law has to
be part of any approach to sustainable peace, justice,
truth and national reconciliation. As outlined in the
landmark resolution 1894 (2009), countries must first
and foremost take measures at the national level to
ensure accountability for such serious crimes, taking

28

into consideration the full range of justice and
reconciliation mechanisms, such as national criminal
courts and truth and reconciliation commissions.
Where that cannot be done at the national level, the
international community must step in.
The Security Council continues to play an
important role in that regard, as illustrated by its
referral of the situation in Libya to the International
Criminal Court last February, which testifies to the
determination of the international community not to let
the commission of atrocities go unpunished. Germany
fully supports the important complementary work of
the International Criminal Court.
In its resolution 1894 (2009), the Council
considered the possibility of using the International
Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission, established
under article 90 of the First Protocol Additional to the
Geneva Conventions, in order to gather information on
alleged violations of applicable law relating to the
protection of civilians. We would like to encourage the
Council and other parties concerned to make use of the
Commission, as appropriate.
To conclude, allow me to touch very briefly upon
just a few situations of particular concern to us. In the
Sudan, the humanitarian situation in Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile states remains alarming. The
civilian population continues to suffer. Tens of
thousands have been displaced. Since humanitarian
access continues to be denied, the Council does not
even have detailed information on the number of
casualties, the displaced and those in need. We feel that
the Council should urgently press for an end to the
hostilities and request humanitarian access.
In the civil war that continues to devastate
Somalia and that has recently seen an escalation in the
fighting and an increasing number of parties to the
conflict, the Council must not lose sight of the
situation of civilians. The civilian population bears the
brunt of the war, as it does in many modern armed
conflicts. We continue to call on all actors to minimize
civilian casualties.
Looking at Syria, during the open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict held in May
(S/PV.6531), the Assistant Secretary-General for
Human Rights voiced his appeal that we prevent the
violent suppression of mass protests from developing
into civil war. That was six months ago. Meanwhile,
the situation in Syria has deteriorated. The Syrian

11-58543

S/PV.6650

regime is relying on repression. Unarmed civilians are
continuously being killed.

and a last resort in efforts to confront an imminent
threat.

The United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem Pillay, reminded us
today of her deep concern about the situation, stating
that the death toll in Syria now exceeds 3,500. As the
German Foreign Minister reiterated yesterday, we
cannot allow President Assad to play for time.
Germany welcomes the more robust approach of the
League of Arab States, and we urge the Security
Council to send a strong message. The international
community must stand firm and united in calling for an
end to the bloodshed in Syria.

Lebanon believes that accountability is essential
to ensuring reconciliation among all members of a
society once a conflict ends. We therefore support
efforts to establish the truth in Libya and to punish the
perpetrators of serious violations of international
humanitarian law and the human rights of the Libyan
people. Justice must be done, not only for the sake of
the victims and to help the country leave its culture of
impunity behind, but also to deter future such
violations.

Mr. Assaf (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to thank His Excellency the President of
Portugal for presiding over this meeting. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Spoerri,
Ms. Bragg and Ms. Pillay for their respective briefings.
In modern conflicts, all parties in the opposing
camp are seen as the enemy. Therefore, each and every
civilian is directly propelled to the front lines and
threatened with injury or death in a conflict not of his
or her choosing. Protecting civilians against such
dangers is a considerable challenge that individual
States and the international community as a whole
must strive to meet by making the necessary efforts.
The international community has made
substantial progress in the protection of civilians, in
particular by establishing regulatory frameworks. In
practice, however, numerous challenges remain.
Though it is true that effective protection requires a
comprehensive strategy in cooperation with the main
humanitarian actors, the concerned State itself bears
the primary responsibility for protecting civilians. The
State also assumes the main responsibility in ensuring
accountability for serious violations of international
humanitarian law. The international community and the
United Nations must therefore pursue their efforts to
build local capacities so as to help national authorities
to fulfil their relevant obligations to the best of their
ability.
The Security Council has a range of known tools
at its disposal in order to do the job, but it must select
them judiciously, carefully and on a case-by-case basis,
using timely, objective and reliable information.
Indeed, that is what enabled the Council to act quickly
to protect civilians in Libya through its adoption of
resolution 1973 (2011), which was truly exceptional

11-58543

We suggest that international and regional
organizations be given the opportunity to play an
active role in preventing conflicts whenever possible.
That may be the most effective tool for protecting
civilians. It can be done in a number of ways, including
mediation, negotiation and preventive diplomacy.
The fact remains that lasting protection of
civilians can be brought about only by dealing not just
with the symptoms of a conflict, but also with the
underlying reasons for or causes of a conflict. That is
done by supporting national efforts for inclusive
dialogue concerning reconciliation and reintegration.
We also need to concentrate on the assistance to be
provided to States emerging from conflict to help them
reconstruct their security and judicial institutions, as
that can have a positive impact on the rule of law and
the promotion of a culture of protection.
In September, Lebanon hosted the Second
Meeting of States Parties to the Convention on Cluster
Munitions, under the banner “Together for a safer life”.
The holding of the Meeting in a country that has been
affected by these weapons, as Lebanon has been,
enables us to highlight the exorbitant humanitarian cost
of cluster munitions to civilians. This cluster munitions
gathering was a space for more than 140 States to
meet. They all participated in the preparation of the
Beirut Declaration, which will contribute to promoting
responsibility and will make heard the voices of the
victims of these destructive weapons used by Israel
against Lebanon in its destructive war of 2006.
In that regard, we reiterate the need to compel
Israel to compensate Lebanon for the losses caused by
these weapons. To date they remain a kind of sword of
Damocles hanging over Lebanese civilians in their
fields and in the daily lives of their children.

29

S/PV.6650

The President: Before giving the floor to the
next speaker, I would ask that all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.

We call upon all parties to armed conflicts to redouble
their efforts to comply with their legal obligations
through, inter alia, prohibiting the targeting of civilian
populations and civilian property and stressing their
responsibility to ensure general protection against
dangers arising from military operations to civilian
installations, hospitals and relief materials and the
means to transport and distribute such relief materials.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Egypt.

The Movement reiterates its condemnation of the
increasing attacks on the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel and urges the Governments of
States Members of the United Nations to ensure respect
for the protection of the personnel of humanitarian
organizations, in conformity with the relevant
provisions of international law. In the meantime, we
reaffirm that humanitarian assistance personnel should
respect international humanitarian law and the laws of
the countries where they operate, the guiding principles
of humanitarian assistance set out in the annex to
General
Assembly
resolution
46/182,
and
non-interference in the cultural, religious and other
values of the population in the countries where they
operate.

Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the pleasure of
addressing the Security Council today on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM). I start by expressing
the Movement’s appreciation to the Portuguese
presidency for organizing this debate and to President
Cavaco Silva for presiding. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General, the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, and the Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their statements to the
Council today.
It is obvious from current world events that
despite all efforts by the United Nations, including the
Security Council, civilians are still suffering in massive
numbers around the globe. The measures adopted so
far fall short of addressing the wider implications of
attacks against civilians and their impact on
international peace and security, as well as their
humanitarian impacts.
The last report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/579), submitted in November 2010 pursuant to
resolution 1894 (2009), also highlights ongoing and
emerging concerns regarding the state of protection of
civilians. These include the proliferation and
fragmentation of non-State armed groups, the
displacement of civilians within and across borders, the
continued violence and hardship that women and
children face during armed conflict, and the continued
existence of a culture of impunity.
In this regard, the Non-Aligned Movement
believes that due priority should continue to be given
to the promotion of knowledge of, respect for and
observance by States of their obligations assumed
under the Charter of the United Nations, international
law, international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, in particular those of the four
Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their 1977 Protocols.

30

Furthermore, the Non-Aligned Movement
emphasizes that respect for the principles of the
sovereign equality, political independence and
territorial integrity of all States and of non-intervention
must be upheld. Consent of the country is imperative
for granting access to humanitarian assistance to its
territory and for its continued operations at all times.
In a peacekeeping context, NAM stresses that
protection of civilians under imminent threat of
physical violence remains the primary responsibility of
each country hosting any peacekeeping operation. It
stresses further that peacekeeping missions with this
mandate should conduct their tasks without prejudice
to the primary responsibility of the host Government to
protect civilians. Efforts of the United Nations come in
support of and not in substitution for those of the
national authorities. In this regard, NAM stresses that
the successful conduct of tasks relating to the
protection of civilians wherever a United Nations
mandate exists requires the integration of efforts at all
levels and a holistic approach that encompasses the
provision of timely and adequate resources, logistical
support and the required training, as well as clearly
defined and achievable mandates. The principle of the
consent of the host State as a founding principle of
peacekeeping must also be fully respected.

11-58543

S/PV.6650

The development of strategies for the protection
of civilians in peacekeeping missions where it is
mandated is significant. The Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations should continue to discuss
the best ways to overcome the challenges that remain.
These challenges include the operationalization of such
strategies in action on the ground, the gap in resources
needed to carry out this complex mandate task, and the
legal aspects of categorizing civilians in combat
situations in accordance with international law.
Let me conclude by reiterating the firm belief of
the Non-Aligned Movement in the importance of the
protection of civilians in conflict situations,
establishing
accountability
for
violations
of
international humanitarian law and putting an end to
impunity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Guerber (Switzerland): I am pleased to take
the floor on behalf of the group of friends on the
protection of civilians, which comprises Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, France, Germany,
Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Norway, Portugal, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay and Switzerland. The group of friends sees
open debates as welcome opportunities to discuss key
issues, while encouraging the Council to strengthen its
action. Among the five pillars identified by the
Secretary-General in his last two reports on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (see
S/2009/277; S/2010/579), accountability for violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights
law, whether committed by individual perpetrators or
by the parties to a conflict, deserves particular attention
and would benefit from the Council’s sustained focus.
The group stands ready to assist in contributing to the
formulation of recommendations in that regard.
The group of friends underlines that the Security
Council has an important role to play in ensuring
compliance with international humanitarian law and
human rights law. In that regard, the Security Council
has set important precedents in terms of ensuring
individual criminal accountability for violations by
requesting
the
establishment
of
fact-finding
mechanisms to inquire into alleged violations, by
supporting and encouraging States to prosecute
individuals alleged to have committed serious

11-58543

international crimes and by referring situations to the
International Criminal Court.
We encourage the Council to continue on that
course, while making use of lessons learned both from
its own experiences and from those of other bodies of
the United Nations system, from civil society and from
national, international and hybrid accountability
mechanisms, such as mixed courts. Improved
interactions can contribute to strengthening capacities
at the national level, which is where the primary
responsibility for ensuring accountability lies.
Appropriate follow-up by the Council on the
results of fact-finding mechanisms is important for
ensuring that expectations among affected populations
and victims are met. The Council should lead by
example so as to ensure a coherent approach in
ascertaining facts and take the action necessary on the
basis of greater standardized criteria. We welcome the
intention of the Secretary-General to undertake a
review of existing in-house processes and experiences
in launching and supporting inquiries, which would be
a welcome step in helping the Council to ensure such
coherence.
A related key element of accountability lies in the
reliability of data collected on violations, which could
provide a further opportunity for greater coherence, not
only to help strengthen accountability, but also to
respond to specific challenges relating to the effective
protection of civilians.
In tackling the complexities posed by
accountability mechanisms, one should not forget the
important question of reparations for violations. There
is a wealth of national and international practice in that
field, on which we can build in order to ensure the full
protection of civilians.
Reparations are not limited to financial
compensation but include measures such as
rehabilitation for victims, including medical and
psycho-social support, as well as public apologies,
commemorations and tributes. Reparations to the
victims of violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law should be made by those
responsible. For instance, in 2005, the General
Assembly adopted a set of Basic Principles and
Guidelines on the Right to a Remedy and Reparation
for Victims of Gross Violations of International Human
Rights Law and Serious Violations of International

31

S/PV.6650

Humanitarian
60/147).

Law (General Assembly

resolution

that context, we would like to thank Portugal for
organizing a workshop on that key question.

To conclude, I would like to reaffirm, on behalf
of the group, that accountability is an essential building
block for sustainable peace, the rule of law and for the
effective protection of civilians. It is our firm belief
that the Council has a duty to uphold and promote the
wealth of practices and policies developed. Our Group
will continue to do its utmost to ensure that the
protection agenda is backed by concrete action.

The Security Council can and must play a leading
role in efforts to combat impunity with the help of a
suitable combination of mechanisms for fact-finding,
justice, reparation and reforms aimed at preventing any
recurrence of such violations. The recent creation by
the Human Rights Council of a mandate for a Special
Rapporteur on the promotion of truth, justice,
reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence is tangible
proof of the international community’s support for such
an approach.

(spoke in French)
I now take the floor in my national capacity. A
more detailed version of my statement can be found in
the distributed written version. In the course of the
present year, the Security Council has shown that it can
take decisive action to protect civilians. However, to
ensure the political viability of its actions in the long
term, the Council must ensure the coherence and
non-selectivity of its efforts to protect civilians.
Switzerland is extremely concerned by the threats
to civilians in Syria and strongly condemns the human
rights violations taking place there. We are concerned
in particular about the brutal behaviour of security
forces towards non-violent demonstrators and civilians
who have not participated in demonstrations. The
situation of civilians in Yemen is another continuing
source of concern. We would like to underline the fact
that ensuring that those guilty of human rights
violations are held to account remains the
responsibility of the Security Council.
The report of the Secretary-General’s Panel of
Experts on Accountability in Sri Lanka brought to light
a number of problem areas for which a suitable followup is indispensable. Such situations raise questions of
crucial importance for the international community:
what can we do to ensure that serious human rights
violations meet with a suitable response? How should
the international community react if no appropriate
response is forthcoming? The credibility of our efforts
will be measured by our ability to protect civilians in
the most adverse conditions.
I would also like to recall the importance of
addressing the question of the accountability of the
parties to a conflict. Accountability is one of the key
aspects of the protection of civilians, and transitional
justice is of crucial importance for lasting peace. In

32

To remain effective, fact-finding mechanisms
must be used consistently and frequently. Existing
mechanisms, such as the International Humanitarian
Fact-Finding Commission and the experts deployed by
Justice Rapid Response, can also be brought into play.
In a case where a State is either unable or
unwilling to act and where the Council has made use of
its ability to refer situations to the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Switzerland wishes to
stress the fact that in such cases it is the responsibility
of the Security Council to ensure that the States
concerned meet their obligations, particularly with
regard to existing arrest warrants. It is indispensable
for fact-finding mechanisms and efforts to establish
individual criminal accountability to be accompanied
by reparation and appropriate reforms of national
institutions, if they are to achieve their objectives.
This is indeed absolutely necessary if we wish to
ensure that a culture of combating impunity and the
rule of law can take hold at the national, regional and
international levels. It is in that spirit that we call upon
the Council to systematically include in the mandates
of peacekeeping operations the tasks of strengthening
the rule of law and monitoring respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights norms.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Australia.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Thank you for
convening the debate today, and of course, for
Portugal’s own very strong commitment to the
protection of civilians agenda, which is intrinsic to
both the purpose and the identity of the United
Nations.
In the interest of time, as you have requested,
Mr. President, I will abbreviate my spoken comments.

11-58543

S/PV.6650

I of course endorse the statement that has just
been delivered by the representative of Switzerland on
behalf of the Group of Friends.
Obviously, justice is best achieved at the national
level, as I think everybody in the debate has recognized
so far. Individual States must fulfil their own
responsibilities to investigate and prosecute those
responsible for serious international crimes.
The international community’s role must be to
assist States to do that, especially by working to
enhance the capacity of national rule of law
institutions. Strengthening security and judicial
institutions — the entire system, and not just the
capacity to investigate and prosecute — is not only key
to accountability and deterrence; as highlighted in the
World Bank’s World Development Report 2011, it is
also critical to breaking cycles of violence and
instability. United Nations peacekeeping and special
political missions themselves can play a very key role
in strengthening local capacities.
Fostering accountability in a State is not just
about institutions. It is also about communities and
about building community engagement in the rule of
law. That strengthens local ownership and supports a
culture of long-term protection. Communities need to
be aware of mechanisms available to them, and victims
need to be aware of their rights. Equally important is
ensuring that community views and concerns are fed
into the process. Experience has shown that listening to
communities strengthens the effectiveness of rule of
law work. That has been Australia’s own experience in
recent peacekeeping missions we have led in Solomon
Islands and Timor-Leste.
Unfortunately, as we know, there are cases in
which States are unwilling or unable to act. In such
cases, the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
ad-hoc international courts and tribunals have a vital
role to play. The challenge for ad-hoc international
tribunals is to ensure that they leave a real legacy of
strengthened national legal capacity behind them.
Appropriate action must be informed by the facts. The
Secretary-General has recommended, and we agree,
that the Council should systematically request reports
on violations and consider mandating commissions of
inquiry to examine alleged violations.
While we tend to focus on fact-finding
mechanisms deployed during or after a conflict, it is
also important for the Council to consider requesting

11-58543

such mechanisms in emerging situations of concern, to
complement other prevention tools. It is important to
maximize the speed with which they can deploy. In that
regard, the following three aspects are crucial.
The first is deployable expertise. We hope that
the follow up to the review of civilian capacities will
play an important role in this respect.
The second aspect concerns methodology. While
fact-finding mechanisms need to be situation-specific
and have sufficient flexibility, more work could be
done to standardize fact-finding methods, particularly
in relation to empirical research and field investigation.
Finally, the inevitable issue is that of resources.
Proper financing is obviously key to speed of
deployment, as well as to effectiveness and
independence. It is important that the results of factfinding missions are properly considered and followed
up, including, if appropriate, by referral to the ICC.
In conclusion, it is paramount that the Council act
when there is clear evidence of violations of
international law. Victims and affected communities
must be confident that when their own State fails in its
responsibilities, because it is either unwilling or
unable, the Council will act as guardian of their
interests, wherever they happen to live. The Council’s
unanimous referral of the situation in Libya to the ICC
signalled a recognition of its important role in ensuring
accountability for serious violations.
Finally, Australia recognizes that in our
lifetime — indeed, over the past 10 years — there have
been great strides in relation to individual
accountability: the establishment of ad-hoc tribunals,
the establishment of the ICC and the recognition by
States of the duty to investigate and prosecute crimes
occurring in their territory. But we still have a very
long way to go. Only by establishing accountability as
the norm and not the exception will we be able to fulfil
the promise of the rule of law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): We are pleased to participate in this
important debate. I would like to thank President
Cavaco Silva of Portugal for being here this morning. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General, the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Assistant
Secretary-General of the Office for the Coordination of

33

S/PV.6650

Humanitarian Affairs and the Director from the
International Committee of the Red Cross.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Egypt on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. In addition
we would like to make the following points in our
national capacity.
Guatemala,
like
other
troop-contributing
countries, struggles with the dilemma of limiting our
presence in a country to keeping the peace, without
exposing our troops to offensive actions that place
them in harm’s way, while at the same time supporting
humanitarian efforts to protect the civilian population
as part of a broader mandate to restore stability and
normality in the daily lives of inhabitants.
From a wider standpoint, we welcome the
continued willingness of the Council to address the
needs of civilians with regard to their protection in
armed conflict. It is crucial to redouble our efforts to
overcome the five core challenges identified by the
Secretary-General in 2009. The fact is that, despite the
numerous reports, resolutions, wealth of experience
and lessons learned accumulated in the past decade,
civilians still account for the vast majority of
casualties, and the risks they bear have only
intensified. Moreover, it is the most vulnerable
civilians — children and women — who are the most
exposed to risks.
There is much more to say on this theme, but
today we would like to focus on the challenges to
implementation in the field and on the lessons learned.
We encourage more progress with regard to the
conceptual and operational aspects of the protection of
civilians in the framework of peacekeeping operations.
We also acknowledge that much progress has been
made in achieving greater consistency in the
implementation of mandates, in the identification of
problems and existing limitations and in seeking
solutions.
The allocation of sufficient resources for
protection activities and initiatives is crucial, and
enhances the capacity of peacekeeping operations to
protect civilians. Similarly, support should also be
given to self-protection initiatives by civilian
populations, which not only involve the main
stakeholders but also solidify the foundations for their
long-term
recovery
and
development.
Their

34

participation is crucial in helping to salvage what
remains of their communities by promoting the
reconstruction of the social fabric and by supporting
the reintegration of displaced persons. That also
includes strengthening the leadership role that women
take on during reconciliation processes. Women are
agents of change in cases such as that of Guatemala,
where they are able to create spaces for conflict
prevention, mediation and resolution, as well as for
peacebuilding.
We are concerned about the asymmetric nature of
existing conflicts, in which there is a steady rise in
breaches of international law and non-observance of
the principles of distinction and proportionality by the
parties to armed conflicts. That situation is exacerbated
by the proliferation and fragmentation of non-State
armed groups that resort to strategies that flagrantly
contravene international law, as well as by the new
technology to which such groups have ready access,
including long-range artillery and missiles, which leads
to wider conflict zones and exposes civilians to even
more attacks. It is therefore important to recognize that
conventional measures are not sufficient to address
core challenges and emerging dangers.
I would like to raise one additional point that has
natural links to the protection of civilians and that
cannot be left out of today’s debate. Our delegation is
among those that consider paragraphs 138 and 139 of
the 2005 World Summit Outcome Document (General
Assembly resolution 60/1) to be one of the singular
achievements of that meeting. We believe that the
evolution in the doctrine of international humanitarian
law in recent years was a major advance. The primary
responsibility to protect civilians falls on States but
they, in turn, are obligated to seek international
assistance when they are unable to provide it. In other
words, sovereignty equals responsibility and
responsibility equals accountability.
In the coming years, both the Security Council
and the General Assembly will have a prominent role
to play in making this concept operational, which
provides an opportunity to continue to improve the
assistance architecture of the United Nations. Together,
we must ensure that populations at risk have access at
all times to the best possible protection, that
perpetrators of abuses face the consequences of their
actions, and that the enhancement, monitoring and
strengthening of capabilities have tangible results. The
Council and the entire international community will be

11-58543

S/PV.6650

judged according to their capacity to protect the most
vulnerable.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. I

11-58543

intend, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m

35
