’
1 ’

UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST
I

YEAR

19111”

MEETING:

20 APRIL 1976

NEW YORK

: ,

CONTENTS
Page

agenda (S/Agenda/191 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Timor:
Report of the Secretary-General in pursuance of Security Council resolution 384 (1975) (S/12011) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

.

SIPV.1911

.

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined .with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to.a United
_
Nations document.
_I
;
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ .1.) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfJicial Records of the Security Council.LThe date.
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a .
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system,’ which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1%5, became fully operative
on that date.

1911th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 20 April 1976, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

Mr. HUANG Hua (China).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, Francei Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional’aj$ida-

2. The situation in Timor:
Report of the Secretary-General in pursuance of
Security Council resolution 384 (1975) (St1201 1)
was called to order at 1I .2S a.m.
Adoption

3. In view of the limited number of places available
at the Council table, I invite5 the representative of
Malaysia to take the place reserved for him at the
side of the Council chamber, on the usual understanding that he will be invited to take a place at the
Council table when it is his turn tii address the Council.

(S/Agenda/lJ)ll)

1. Adoption of the agenda

The meeting

the representative of Malaysia to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Timor:
Report of the Secretary-General
in pursuance of
Security Council resolution 384 (1975) (S/12011)
1. The PRESIDENT (translation
from Chinese):
In accordance with the decisions taken earlier [1908th
and 2910th meetings], I shall now invite the representatives of Australia, Guinea-Bissau, Indonesia, the
Philippines, Portugal and Saudi Arabia to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, iI&-. Anwar Sarii
(Indonesia)
and Mr. Gaiva’o Teles (Portugal)
took
places at the Council table and Mr. Harry (Australia), Mr. Fernandes (Guinea-Bissau),
Mr. Yango
(Philippines)
and Mr. Baroody (Saudi Arabia) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese): In
addition, I should like to inform the members of the
Council that a letter has been addressed to the President by the representative of Malaysia which contains
a request to be invited to participate in the.discussion
of the question in accordance with- the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules
of procedure. Accordingly, pursuant to the usual
practice, I propose, if I hear no objection, to invite

At the invitation
of the ‘Pr&ident,
Mr. Singh
(Malaysia) took the place reserved for him at the side
of the Council chamber.

4. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese):
The first speaker is the representative of GuineaBissau. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement:
5. Mr. FERNANDES (Guinea-Bissau): I should like
first to express my delegation’s satisfaction at seeing
you, Mr. President, sitting in the chair and presiding
over. these meetings, which we think are very important. We are sure that under your guidance ‘and
with the benefit of your counsel we shall be able to
find a solution to this very sad drama taking place in
Asia, on a small island called Timor.
6. In implementation of resolution 384 (1975),
adopted by the Council last December, the SecretaryGeneral dispatched his Special Representative,
Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi, to East Timor for the
purpose of inquiring into the situation prevailing in
that part of the world. Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi
submitted a report on his mission [S/12011, annex].
That report does not entirely satisfy my delegation.
I do take this occasion to commend Mr. Winspeare
Guicciardi for the efforts he has made and the work
he has done. Nevertheless, we can say categorically
that his report is a partial failure. Why is that so?
7. The Special Representative said he was unable to
contact elements of FRETILIN [Frente Revoluciondria Timor Leste Zndependente] on the spot, nor
was he allowed by the Government of Indonesia to
circulate freely so that he could talk to all the parties
concerned. Apparently, if he had wanted to move
around and contact elements of FRETILIN, he would
have had to give advance notice to the Government of
Jndonesia and to pinpoint the’place where the meeting
would have taken place. Thus, it can be seen that in

those circumstances the mission was bound to be a
partial failure.

very much, one can see our concern. Indonesia has an
interest in the area and, we believe, would have a
role to play. But the method-it is using is a very sorry
one indeed.

8. Further, the only news one gets about the situation
in Timor comes either from broadcasts by a FRETILIN
radio station somewhere on the island or from the
Government in Djarkata. In the circumstances,
I think the Council does not and cannot have enough
elements to make a decision on what to do.

13. The intervention by Indonesian armed forces in
Timor was condemned by the General Assembly in
resolution 3485 (XXX) and by this very Council in its
resolution 384 (1975). Unfortunately, Indonesia has
thus far failed to comply with the demand contained
in those resolutions to withdraw its armed forces from
East Timor. How can we.fail$o voiceour apprehension
regarding that refusal? Why-does Indonesia persist in
a position that is contrary to .the Council’s resolution?
At this point I can only make an appeal, which-I hope
will not fall on deaf ears, to+Indonesia, which should
and must unconditionally withdraw its troops from
that part of the island which they are occupying.

9. To compensate ~for the failure of Mr. Winspeare
Guicciardi’s mission, *we had a chance to listen to a
witness, Mr. Syddell [1909th meeting], whose statement certainly carries credibility by virtue of his status.
Mr. Syddell is an Australian who has in the last
30 years made many trips to East Timor and apparently
has some kind of business in that area. He told us
that he had taken the trouble to ask his family, in
particular his wife, for money to pay for his trip to
New York to defend before the Council the interests
of a people which, according to Mr. Syddell, has only
a handful of persons able to read and write, a people
which has not produced one professional and,does not
even know where the United Nations is, a people
which, according to him, should not aspire to independence. This conception is, we believe, a very
racist one. The ugliness of his statement can only be
compared with the.drama prevailing in Timor.

14. I think that Portugal;: Australia, FRETILIN,
KOTA, UDT and others should together be able to
find a solution to this conflict. We think that if there
is a will there must be a way of solving it. Indonesia
is a country made up of thousands of islands, of
which Timor is only one, so there must be a way.
Violence should not be the rule in relations between
countries.
15. My delegation, country and Government would
be very happy to see Indonesia offer its hand to East
Timor, help it to take the first steps and guide it in
this troubled world. But instead we see cannon,
guns, naked force, half-truths and innuendoes;andthat
is not the way to build a nation. Indonesia certainly
cannot prevail as a nation if it continues to disregard
completely the sovereignty and interests of other
nations.

10. Of the events in Timor, we are sure only that all
the parties agree- FRETILIN, KOTA [Kfibur Oan
Timor Aswain], UDT [Uniao Democrcitica de Timor],
Indonesia and the others-that thousands have already
fallen victim in this conflict, a conflict which has
replaced one of the most beautiful pages in the history
of FRETILIN itself and that of Timor. We are now
witnessing a drama in which thousands of people have
died only because they aspired to become independent.

16. We believe -that the people of East Timor wiI1
be able to find a just solution to their problems, and
we believe, that Indonesia should be playing a part in
it. But, again, I must say that the way it is going
about it is a causeof much concern to my Government.

11. Now let me ask who is responsible for the
violence-a minority of lunatics who blindly defy the
will of an entire people, assisted by a-powerful foreign
army which is supported by air and naval forces?
How then can we understand the capacity for survival
of this minority which apparently is fanning a conflict
that has lasted for four months and that has resulted
in the loss of thousand of lives?

17. At this stage we express the hope that the
mandate assigned to the Secretary-General in resolution 384 (1975) will be extended so that the conflict
can be presented in an unambiguous way, in its
true light. The efforts of the international community
should be oriented towards a legitimate solution of
this problem.

12. My Government regrets very much indeed the sad
events in Timor. The conflict itself and the conditions
under which it has been perpetrated have been of
concern to my Government because the same history,
-the same half-truths and the same innuendoes that
Indonesia is now throwing at’ the Council have been
thrown at us-Guinea-Bissau, Cape Verde, Angola
and Mozambique-by Portugal. Certainly things
have changed in Portugal, and the relationship we
have with Portugal today is not the same as we had
before. I am very proud to say that. My concern at this
point is that there was no need for such violence
or for that kind of affair, and since it came from a
country like Indonesia which we admire and appreciate

18. The Council cannot impose a solution, but it can
define the nature of, the drama in which thousands of
victims have fallen for a concrete-cause. Let all efforts
be deployed so that the international community can
know why people have been killed in Timor. Is it for
the ideal of independence that they have been made
victims ofintervention, or is it for the ideal ofintegration that they sire the victimsof a national minority7
I have asked that question so that.Indonesia can think
::.*a
about. it.
2

cannot be underestimated, considering that during the
long occupation by Portuguese colonial power no
effort was made to develop any indigenous political
system in the Territory. These efforts also indicate that
the Provisional Government is serious about its own
responsibilities and that it enjoys the support and confidence of the people of the Territory.

19. The PRESIDENT (tmmlution
from Chinese):
The next speaker is the representative of Malaysia,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
20. Mr. SINGH (Malaysia): Mr. President, on behalf
of my delegation1 should lie to thank you and, through
you, the other members of the Council for enabling
us to participate in your proceedings on the question
of Timor. Before I begin;‘1 should like to say how
happy we are to see suchia’distinguished and respectable figure as yourself in the chair and to express the
hope that under your wise and able guidance the
Council will conclude its work successfully.
a...
21. Our delegation participated in the Council’s
deliberations when it met ;last year to consider the
question of Timor for the first rime. At that time we
were faced with a situation which was markedly different from the one existing in Timor today.‘The scene
then was one of disorder and chaos, with widespread
killings, in the face of the complete breakdown of law
and order. That sad and tragic situation was brought
about by the hasty retreat of the Porguguese colonial
authority from the Territory in- contravention of its
responsibilities and obligations as the administering
‘Power in East Timor. In the vacuum thus created,
the rival political parties continued warring among
themselves, unable to agree on the future of the Territory. FRETILIN had declared independence unilaterally while the’other four political parties-UDT,
APODETI [Associagdo Popular Democrdtica Timorense], KOTA and Trabalhista-followed
with their
own declaration of complete integration with Indonesia. This latter group of parties then called upon
Indonesia to help to bring about peace and restore
law and order. It was at this juncture that the Council
became seized of the matter.

23. Resolution 384 (1975) had three main elements,
namely, Indonesian presence in East Timor, the
question of self-determination for the people, and the
mission of the Special Representative of SecretaryGeneral to the Territory.
24. As far as Indonesian presence is concerned, it is
the view of the Malaysian Government that the
presence of Indonesian volunteers was at the specific
request of the Provisional Government, which was
acting in its own best interests. We have already heard
from Mr. Goncalves that, with the return to normality
in East Timor, the withdrawal of armed volunteers
will be completed shortly. This was endorsed by the
representative of Indonesia, who informed the Council
that the armed volunteers began leaving the Territory
in February 1976.
25. On the question of self-determination, we are
pleased to note that the Provisional Government is
committed to that principle and has agreed to invite
the United Nations to witness the implementation
of its decision. The Indonesian Government, for its
part, continues to insist that the solution to the question
of Timor must be sought on the basis of the wishes
of the people of the Territory. It has categorically
stated that it does not plan to take any action until
the decision by the Provisional Government is ratified
by the people’s assembly of East Timor. This should
therefore calm the fears of those who feel that the
future of the Territory will be decided without any
reference to the wishes of the people. As to the form
and manner of the act of self-determination, this, as we
all know, varies from place to place, depending upon
the particular circumstances existing in various territories. In the case of East Timor, given the fact that
over 90 per cent of the people are illiterate and given the
difftculties of communications, the Malaysian Govemment accepts and supports the manner in which the
people of East Timor have exercised their right to selfdetermination. When the people’s assembly meets to
ratify the decision of the Provisional Government,
we hope that the United Nations will be able to witness
the occasion and verify whether the act reflects the
true wishes of the majority of the people and is in
conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations and the relevant resolutions of
the Organization. We also hope that the suggestion
put forward by Mr. Goncalves for a meeting between
the representatives of the Secretary-General and of the
Provisional Government to discuss the type of role
the United Nations would play in the electoral process
will be taken up.

22. Today the situation is such that most of the
FRETILIN leadership has left the Territory, and the
party itself is no longer a political force there. While
FRETILIN continues to make statements and assertions on behalf of the people of Timor, it is the view
of the Malaysian Government that FRETILIN does
not have the support of the people of the Territory.
The other political parties dissolved themselves on
31 January 1976 and formed the National Front,
with a Provisional Government. The representative
of the Provisional Government, Mr. Guilherme
‘Goncalves, informed the Council [1908th meeting]
that life was rapidly returning to normal. He also
informed us that local government in all 13 districts
had been reactivated. A deliberative council consisting
of political, civic and religious leaders has been
established to assist the Provisional Government. In
addition, an advisory council has also been created to
provide technical and administrative advice to the
Provisional Government. We have also been told that
preparations for the establishment of a people’s
assembly will be completed in two or three months.
Such an achievement by the Provisional Government
3

26. Coming to the report of the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative, I should like to join the other
delegations in expressing our satisfaction with it.
Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi has carried out his mission
with the impartiality that was expected of him. It is
indeed unfortunate that at the time he visited East
Timor the situation was, in his own words, still
evolving. Certain comments have been made about the
fact that the Special Representative was unable to
meet all parties and to visit all areas he wanted.
However, it must be understood that no one side can
be blamed for this. Indeed, in this respect, Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi mentioned that neither side was
able to facilitate his visits to all areas of interest. The
bad weather prevailing at that time and the security
situation have also to be taken into account. In the view
of my Government, another visit by the Special
Representative is called for, so that he can accurately
apprise the Council of the situation as it exists. The
Provisional Government, we note, has already agreed
to extend an invitation to the Secretary-General and
has assured him of its full co-operation.

true wishes of the majority of the people of East
Timor.
29. Secondly, on the question of Indonesian presence
in East Timor, my delegation wishes to recall and, at
the same time, invite the Council’s attention to, the fact
that the volunteers were there at the specific request
of the four principal parties, which subsequently
constituted the Provisional Government, in order to
help them end the bloodshed and restore law and
order in East Timor. The Council has been informed by
the representative of the Provisional Government that
as a result of the return to normal in East Timor,
those volunteers have been withdrawn, a fact which
has been confirmed by the representative of Indonesia.
My Government welcomes this as a further development towards facilitating the process of self-determination for the people of East Timor.
30. Thirdly, we hope that the Council will renew the
Secretary-General’s mandate to send another mission
to the Territory to build upon the information already
gathered by the first mission and to verify the assertions and claims made by the various parties during the
Council’s proceedings. Perhaps the SecretaryGeneral may wish to consider sending Mr. Winspeare
Guicciardi again, since he is already familiar with the
area and the problems.

27. In conclusion, I should like to commend the
following views of my Government to the consideration
of the Council.
28. First, the Malaysian Government is pleased to
note that the Provisional Government is committed to
the principle of self-determination and has agreed to
invite the United Nations to witness the implementation of its decision. We are also pleased to note that
Indonesia not only continues to support this principle
but also welcomes United Nations participation in the
exercise of it. It is our hope that the United Nations
will be able to witness the occasion and to verify the

31. We in Malaysia feel that the people of East Timor
have experienced enough hardship, pain and suffering
and sincerely hope that all efforts will be made to
heal the wounds of war and to assist the people and
Government of East Timor in their task of reconciliation, rehabilitation and reconstruction.
The meeting

4

rose at 11.55 a.m.

1.

.

:

:

‘,’

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITRD NATIONS PUBLICA’IIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaims du
monde entier. Informez-vous aupr&s de votre librain ou adressez-vous a : Nations Unies. Section
des ventes. New York ou Gentve.
KAK

HOJfYPHTh

3HH8X

”

LreHTCTBKX

natuebr KH~XKHOM
Haq%iR.

HSAAHNfZ

Oprann3anun

HJnaRasI

Cexsnn

OPl-AHHBAUHM

OlYbenunewablx
10 BCex
Q&tOHax

OIYGEAHHEHHMX

HasuR MOnorO KynUTb
SW&I&.

HaBOAHTe

HAUHtI
B

CllpaBKH

srarasnne xaa nnuurre no anpecy : Oprann3asnn
no nponluge nsnanxR, EIb)o-FiopK
Km XCeneKa.

COMO CONSECUIR PUBLICACIONES

KXHXHbIX
06

mara-

KIJABHHRX

06’bexnneuxbtx

B

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Nations Unidas e&n en venta en librerias y cams distribuidoras en
todas partes de1 mundo. Cons&e a su librero o dirljase a : Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litbo in United Nstions, New York

00150

83-60801-August

1984-2.200
