S/PV.8767

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8767th meeting

Tuesday, 13 October 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia/Ms. Evstigneeva . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Kridelka
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Sautter
Mr. Djani
Mr. Aougi
Ms. Gonsalves
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Ben Lagha
Mr. Roscoe
Mr. Turner
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in the Great Lakes region
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region (S/2020/951)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-26566 (E)
*2026566*

S/PV.8767

The situation in the Great Lakes region

global crisis. May they find herein the expression of my
wholehearted support.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

At the same time, I would like to acknowledge
the commitment of the Governments of the region to
continuing their efforts to improve political, economic
and security cooperation, in line with the commitments
under the Framework agreement and the 2006 Pact
on Security, Stability and Development in the Great
Lakes Region.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Great Lakes region
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region
(S/2020/951)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Huang Xia,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, to participate in this meeting. Mr. Huang
Xia is joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2020/951, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
I now give the floor to Mr. Huang Xia.
Mr. Huang Xia (spoke in French): I am pleased
to brief the Security Council on the most recent
report (S/2020/951) of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region.
At this time of the ongoing coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, allow me to again begin with a
thought for the victims of that health crisis, in particular
women and young people, who are paying a heavy price
both in the region and elsewhere. As members may
expect, throughout the past period the countries of the
region have spared no effort in trying to contain the
spread of the pandemic and to respond to its negative
economic and social consequences. The Governments
and the peoples of the region have continued to show
resilience and determination in their fight against this
2/17

13/10/2020

As I address the Council, the Chiefs of Staff of the
armed forces of States members of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) are
meeting in preparation for a meeting of the Defence
Ministers to follow up on the implementation of the
decisions taken by the Heads of State at the 2017
Brazzaville summit.
The situation in the region over the past months
has remained stable overall with encouraging progress
despite the ongoing challenges. On the political front,
I welcome the peaceful transfer of power in Burundi
following the May general elections and the prospects
for greater regional stability, as illustrated by the return
of Burundian refugees from Rwanda and Tanzania, as
well as the visit by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to Bujumbura on
4 and 5 October.
I also welcome the organization, on 7 October,
by President Tshilombo Tshisekedi of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo of a mini-summit gathering
his Angolan, Ugandan and Rwandan counterparts
to discuss important issues relating to security and
economic cooperation. That initiative demonstrates
the sustained commitment among leaders of the region
towards joint efforts, which I hope it will be possible to
strengthen during the upcoming meeting of Regional
Oversight Mechanism for the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region.
I also welcome the fact that the countries of the
region are availing themselves of diplomatic means
and regional mechanisms to resolve their differences
peacefully, as seen in the resolution of the border
dispute between the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Zambia. The commitment of Rwanda and Uganda
to proceed in the process of normalizing their relations
through the good offices of Angola and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is another positive example.
20-26566

13/10/2020

The situation in the Great Lakes region

In terms of the security and humanitarian
situations, the situation nevertheless continues to be
cause for concern. In the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, as recalled in the latest report by my
colleague, Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) Leila Zerrougui, which is before
the Council today, sporadic cross-border incidents and
the activities of armed groups operating in the east
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo continue
to cause of intolerable humanitarian suffering. The
impunity enjoyed by those responsible for those crimes
traumatizes the population and negatively affects
relations between those countries.
We must therefore step up our efforts to fight
impunity. For my part, I intend to continue my advocacy
among the countries of the region for them to strengthen
their fight against impunity, in particular by effectively
implementing the Nairobi Declaration on Justice and
Good Governance.
Let me to say something about the initiatives I
have carried out since I last addressed the Council on
22 April, in particular on cooperation with the African
Union and the ICGLR with a view to advancing the
implementation of the Framework agreement centred
around the five priorities that I had identified.
With regard to the mobilization of the international
community in favour of the countries of the
region — my top priority — we asked the Peacebuilding
Commission and international financial institutions to
provide continuous support to the region, given the
devastating consequences of the pandemic. While, to
date, significant resources have been mobilized for
the countries of the region, the International Monetary
Fund considers them insufficient for launching an
ambitious recovery. I reiterate the importance of greater
support from international partners for countries in
the region. We must seek to facilitate their access to
options, such as financial relief, most applicable to
their needs, including but not limited to debt relief and
restructuring initiatives.
Turning to support for dialogue efforts — my
second priority — the fruitful consultations I had with
the authorities of Angola, Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Uganda and Rwanda, among
others, gave me hope for improvement in good
neighbourly relations and for regional stability.

S/PV. 8767

Regarding regional security cooperation, my
Office remained in close contact with the ICGLR to
identify avenues of action for increased support for the
efforts of the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism
of the ICGLR. We will also continue to work to
promote non-military measures, such as strengthening
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes at the regional level.
With regard to efforts to promote transparent and
sustainable use of natural resources, my fourth priority,
the preliminary results of a study commissioned
by my Office have shown that, even in the midst of
a pandemic, illicit trade in minerals in the region,
unfortunately, continues unabated, primarily thanks to
the strong price performance of gold, the safe haven par
excellence during periods of uncertainty.
With regard to my fifth priority, I note with
satisfaction the decision of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to organize a virtual meeting of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism in order to overcome the
constraints imposed by the pandemic. The Conference
on Investment and Trade will be organized by the
Rwandan authorities in 2021.
As we mark the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), I welcome the
progress made in the Great Lakes region, whose
countries are among the 25 nations with the highest
rates of parliamentary representation of women
in the world. However, conscious the remaining
challenges and in the face of the devastating effects
of the pandemic on women, my Office organized, on
28 July and 11 and 20 August, three round tables on
women’s private entrepreneurship, the prevention of
sexual and gender-based violence, as well as women’s
political participation in the context of COVID-19. The
conclusions of those consultations recommend the full
integration of the women and peace and security agenda
into peacebuilding and development efforts in the
Great Lakes region, in particular through strengthened
partnerships and effective engagement with women and
young people.
During my last visit, I referred to the steps taken
for the development of the United Nations strategy
for peace consolidation and conflict resolution and
prevention in the Great Lakes region, at the request
of the Secretary-General. I am pleased to inform
the Council that, following an inclusive process
and thanks to the valuable contributions from all

20-265663/17

S/PV.8767

The situation in the Great Lakes region

countries and partners in the region, I submitted
the strategy here at Headquarters yesterday for the
attention of the Secretary-General. Subject to what
action the Secretary-General may wish to take, I can
already indicate that 10 priorities, structured around
three pillars — namely, peace, security and justice;
sustainable development and collective prosperity; and
resilience to old and new challenges — emerged from
the various consultations held.
Those priorities aim to provide a comprehensive
10-year road map for United Nations action in the region
focusing on a number of concrete priority actions,
particularly in the areas of preventive diplomacy,
security cooperation, development, the promotion of
human rights and strengthening of the role of women
and young people by the year 2023, marking the tenth
anniversary of the Framework agreement. Of course,
the efforts of the United Nations will be effective only
if it wins the support of all, not only full ownership by
the countries and organizations in the region but also
continuous support from the international community.
I therefore call for the Council’s support in that regard.
I would like to conclude, as always, on a hopeful
note for a region that has come a long way. There is scope
in the Great Lakes region for discreet and progressive
diplomacy on certain sensitive issues harming regional
relations. My discreet but committed action in support
of the initiatives under way by the four countries of the
region will continue.
Moreover, I will continue working in close
collaboration with MONUSCO, the Resident
Coordinators of the United Nations system, as well
as the co-guarantor institutions of the Framework
agreement, to promote non-military measures within
the fight against spoilers. High-level political buy-in
and adequate resources are essential to improve the
regional security environment. In that context, the
holding of the next summit of the Regional Follow-up
Mechanism will be crucial to secure political support at
the highest level from the countries of the region.
Finally, given the alarming economic impact of
COVID-19, it will be just as important to step up efforts
for dynamic economic cooperation around cross-border
projects and the collective management of natural
resources, focusing on a holistic approach, inclusive
of all stakeholders and drawing strengthened regional
mechanisms, in particular those of the ICGLR.
4/17

13/10/2020

Despite the remaining challenges, not least the
pandemic, the people and the countries of the Great
Lakes region continue to show great resilience and
determination to move forward. I call on the Security
Council to remain committed and sustain its support
for the region.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Huang Xia for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Huang Xia, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Great Lakes Region, for his briefing. I would
like to emphasize three points.
First of all, progress on regional cooperation
should be encouraged. France welcomes the positive
developments in recent months. In particular, I welcome
the continuation of the consultations between Rwanda
and Uganda, facilitated by the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Angola; the collaborative approach on
the demarcation of the borders between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Zambia; the agreement
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Uganda to strengthen their cooperation on security
issues; as well as the holding, on 7 October, of the
Great Lakes summit, at the initiative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is essential to continue the
encouraging, committed momentum we have seen
since the election of President Tshilombo Tshisekedi,
which could be spurred on by the political transition
in Burundi, in order to further reduce tensions and
build confidence.
The continuation of that regional momentum
is critical to respond to the security challenges and
achieve the common objective of stabilizing the Great
Lakes region. Unfortunately, the situation in the region
remains marked by the activities of armed groups,
particularly in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In that regard, I commend the tireless efforts of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Secondly, and more generally, the region must also
address the root causes of instability. The development
of a natural resource development plan and a transparent
extractive sector would help combat the illegal
exploitation of natural resources. France is playing its
full part in collective regulatory efforts, with a view to
20-26566

13/10/2020

The situation in the Great Lakes region

the entry into force, on 1 January, of the regulation on
minerals from conflict zones. France stands ready to
participate in the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region workshop on this issue. Devising national
and regional frameworks for disarming, demobilizing
and reintegrating armed groups would facilitate their
sustainable return to communities. Progress to that
end in the Democratic Republic of the Congo by the
Force de résistance patriotique de l’Ituri group must be
rapidly consolidated to prevent a return to violence.
Efforts must also focus on human rights violations
and the fight against sexual and gender-based violence,
which are obstacles to peace and stability in the region.
International humanitarian law must be respected. That
goes hand in hand with the strengthening of the rule
of law, security sector and justice reform, as well as
the fight against corruption and impunity. On its part,
France has selected the Great Lakes region as one of the
priority areas in its national action plan to implement
the women and peace and security agenda.
Nevertheless, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic particularly affects women, refugees and
displaced persons and has contributed to worsening
food insecurity, particularly in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Regional cooperation is critical
in that regard as well. In that connection, I welcome the
commitment undertaken last week by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Angola and Uganda
to establish a cross-border plan to combat COVID-19.
France is doing its part to support the region by
allocating €1.2 billion of our development aid to health
issues in Africa.
Thirdly, the United Nations has an important role in
supporting the region. France reiterates its support for
the work of the Special Envoy, who plays a critical role
in supporting the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region and monitoring
commitments. The COVID-19 pandemic has made
it impossible for consultations to be as inclusive as
in the past. We hope that dialogue can resume. I also
welcome the Special Envoy’s steps taken to prepare the
second conference on investment and trade in the Great
Lakes region.
The United Nations strategy for peace consolidation,
conflict prevention and resolution in the Great Lakes
region will be a key tool for concretely strengthening
political stability and peace in the region. It should

S/PV. 8767

also make it possible to respond to the challenges of
economic integration and sustainable development in
the region as a whole. Like other external partners that
have actively contributed to its elaboration, we await
the strategy with great interest and hope that it will lead
to an operational action plan.
France and the countries of the Great Lakes region
share the same objective — stability and development
in the region. To that end, we offer them and the United
Nations our unflagging commitment and support.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Huang Xia for his
detailed briefing.
The Dominican Republic commends the efforts
of the countries of the Great Lakes region to curb
the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic and mitigate its socioeconomic impact. We
also welcome the progress in the region, including the
signing of a peace agreement between the Government
of the Sudan and the armed groups, as well as the
peaceful manner in which affected countries have
managed cross-border security incidents. This friendly
rapprochement demonstrates the maturity of regional
leadership and their commitment to peace and stability.
In that context, we urge them to continue to resolve
their differences through diplomacy.
Despite regional progress and the continued
military operations of the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo to counter armed
groups, we continue to be worried about the ongoing
attacks carried out by foreign and local armed groups
against civilians and Congolese armed forces. There
is no doubt that this violence is the primary factor
of destabilization in the region, due to the number
of deaths and calamities suffered by the people, who
are forced to leave their homes and live in deplorable
conditions as internally displaced persons.
We therefore call on the leaders of the region to
regain control over the illicit trafficking of small
arms and light weapons, including the transfer of
such weapons among armed groups, and to intensify
efforts to prevent the training, residence and transit
of armed groups through their territories. We further
call on them to use the certificate of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region to manage and
trade natural resources.

20-265665/17

S/PV.8767

The situation in the Great Lakes region

The impact of the reduction of economic activities
due to the pandemic, the violence of armed groups,
natural disasters and the violation of human rights,
including gender-based violence, abductions and the
lack of development opportunities, are the driving force
behind the grave humanitarian situation in the region.
The large number of internally displaced persons in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, of Congolese
refugees and of refugees from other countries in the
region being hosted by the Democratic Republic shows
the serious state of the humanitarian situation in the
country. In addition, according to the United Nations
Economic Commission for Africa, the economic
recovery of the region could not begin before 2021, and
only if the COVID-19 pandemic is properly managed.
Accordingly, we encourage donor countries to increase
their support through official development assistance
and innovative financial and debt relief programmes
for the countries most affected by the pandemic and its
devastating consequences.
In addition, we call for the vaccine and other
health technologies needed to address COVID-19 to
be made available in an equitable manner and for their
distribution to be guaranteed to all human beings on the
planet. To that end, the role played by the World Health
Organization, donor countries and the private sector is
essential, based on cooperation, solidarity and justice.
As peace and development are intrinsically linked,
we call on the signatories to the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region to promote national and
regional development programmes aimed at providing
employment opportunities, especially in cross-border
areas, and at involving more women and young people
in conflict resolution and decision-making.
In conclusion, we thank all the facilitators,
including Special Envoy Huang Xia, for the progress
made their efforts aimed at implementing regional peace
and cooperation mechanisms. We urge the signatories
to the Framework agreement and its co-guarantors to
continue working in favour of a region where justice,
peace, respect for human rights, equity and sustainable
development prevail for all.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I would like to thank
Special Envoy Huang Xia for his valuable briefing.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
has added pressure to the numerous interconnected
challenges in the region: conflicts with armed groups,
6/17

13/10/2020

human rights violations and abuses, health epidemics
and socioeconomic difficulties. Addressing such
challenges benefits from a regional approach. The
shared benefit from working together is always greater
than that of any country acting individually. We would
like to commend the resolute cross-border steps of
the countries of the Great Lakes region, such as the
mini-summit hosted last week by President Tshilombo
Tshisekedi and the border-dispute solutions being
facilitated by the Southern African Development
Community. We would also praise the work of the
quadripartite process on Uganda and Rwanda and the
resolve of Rwanda and Burundi in normalizing their
bilateral relations. We look forward to receiving an
update on the new United Nations regional strategy on
peace and security for the Great Lakes region.
Estonia condemns the violence perpetrated by
armed groups in the region, in particular by the
Allied Democratic Forces and the Cooperative for the
Development of Congo in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Return, Reclamation, Rehabilitation
militia group in the Central African Republic. The
conflicts in the region continue to be accompanied
by large numbers of grave violations and abuses of
human rights. We are most worried about the increase
in sexual and gender-based violence and the continued
displacement of populations and the number of grave
violations of children’s rights.
The perpetrators of such crimes must be held
accountable in order to fight the presence of a culture
of impunity, which, if left unchecked, will only breed
more violence. Rapid and robust implementation of the
Nairobi Declaration on Justice and Good Governance
would greatly assist in those efforts. The protection
of human rights and the fight against impunity must
remain priorities, in particular during the pandemic,
and we appreciate the readiness of the Special Envoy to
assist in that regard.
With elections coming up in several countries in
the region, we would like to underline the importance
of initiatives promoting the meaningful participation of
women in political and electoral processes and advancing
the women and peace and security agenda in the Great
Lakes region. This is particularly important today,
given the COVID-19 pandemic, which has negatively
affected the implementation women and peace and
security agenda in the region. The same applies to the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. I
20-26566

13/10/2020

The situation in the Great Lakes region

would like to conclude by encouraging the signatories
and co-guarantors of the Framework agreement to
strengthen their cooperation and utilize innovative
solutions to continue tackling regional challenges.
Mr. Sautter (Germany): I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2020/951), and the Special
Envoy for his briefing. Let me make three brief points.
First, on regional cooperation, we commend
the encouraging signals that we have seen recently,
particularly in response to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. At the same time, we remain
concerned about the negative impact the pandemic is
having, especially with respect to health, socioeconomic
and humanitarian issues as well as on the human rights
situation. It is therefore important to strengthen health
infrastructure, step up humanitarian efforts by the
international community and mitigate the negative
socioeconomic effects of the pandemic.
Human rights violations, including sexual and
gender-based violations, must stop. We encourage the
region to seize the current moment of collaboration in
order to make further progress on regional economic
integration and in the fight against the illegal
exploitation of natural resources. There is an urgent
need to address root causes in that regard. The creation
of jobs and tax revenues and the reduction of incentives
for armed groups and criminal networks to use
violence are key. Regional organizations, such as the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the African Union, have an important role to play
in that context.
My second remark is on armed groups. We remain
especially worried by the situation in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which
continues to destabilize the country and the region. We
commend the ongoing increased regional efforts, such
as exchanges among regional intelligence and security
services and the commitment to greater security
cooperation by Rwanda, Angola, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Uganda that was reached
at last week’s regional summit. It is important that
the delayed tenth Summit of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism take place without delay.
I would like to make a third remark, on the situation
in Burundi. We take note of some positive signals
and gestures emanating from the new Burundian
Government, which seems ready to normalize
its relations with the region and the international

S/PV. 8767

community. But visible change is needed; the peaceful
conduct of elections has formed a solid basis, yet more
progress needs to be achieved.
The issue of human rights in a difficult humanitarian
situation is a still a cause for great concern. Democratic
spaces keep narrowing. We are worried about persistent
human rights abuses. We hope to see improvements in
that regard. We also encourage the Burundian authorities
and all parties involved to respect the principle of the
voluntary, safe and dignified return of refugees.
Let me conclude by expressing our hope to soon
see a new peace and security strategy for the Great
Lakes region.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): I want to join others
in thanking Special Envoy Huang Xia for his briefing.
We share the concerns set out in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2020/951) about both the immediate
and the secondary impacts of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic in the Great Lakes region.
We commend the efforts to strengthen regional
coordination in responding to the pandemic and we
echo the Secretary-General’s call for regional leaders to
capitalize and build on this by enhancing cooperation
towards peace and development.
While we recognize the impact that COVID-19
restrictions have had on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
we call for the resumption of these efforts as soon as
possible, including through virtual engagement.
I wish to add our voice to those that have welcomed
the recent steps taken by the region towards improved
relations. As Mr. Xia reported, last week’s mini-summit
between the Heads of State of Uganda, Rwanda, Angola
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well
as the Southern African Development Community
initiative to resolve the border dispute between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zambia, are
two encouraging examples of this. We also welcome
the more positive tenor of dialogue between Rwanda
and Burundi on the normalization of relations. This
momentum from regional talks and dispute resolution
efforts must be maintained; continued cooperation
among regional Powers is crucial to bringing peace and
stability to the region.
I will now turn to some of the individual countries
of the region.

20-265667/17

S/PV.8767

The situation in the Great Lakes region

We welcome the peaceful transfer of power in
Burundi, as well as the resumption of voluntary refugee
returns from Tanzania and Rwanda. It is crucial that all
refugee returns be and remain of a genuinely voluntary
nature. With Tanzania and Uganda’s elections on
the horizon, we call on all national leaders and the
international community to ensure that both sets of
elections are peaceful, free and fair. Reports of shrinking
democratic space in this respect are concerning.
As ever, we remain concerned about the
humanitarian situation in the region. This is particularly
the case in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where conflict, human rights abuses by armed
groups and natural disasters are driving displacement
and food insecurity. We are also increasingly concerned
about the illegal smuggling of natural resources. We
underline the need for increased regional cooperation
to tackle this illegal smuggling and to restrict financial
flows to armed groups operating in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We continue to be troubled by the human rights
situation in the broader region. We are especially
concerned by the increase in sexual and genderbased violence in connection to lockdowns and other
COVID-19 response measures. We echo the SecretaryGeneral’s call for leaders of the region to continue to
prioritize the protection of human rights and the fight
against impunity.
Finally, I want to add that we welcome Special
Envoy Xia’s consultations with national, regional and
international stakeholders on his regional strategy. We
were very glad to hear that his report has been submitted
to the Secretary-General and we hope to see greater
detail and the finalization of this strategy as soon as
possible. I would also underline the importance of
Special Envoy Xia’s work across the region to promote
more joined-up efforts across the United Nations
family in order to ensure that the United Nations is
delivering as one. It is crucial that the regional strategy
for the Great Lakes be well coordinated with both the
transition strategy of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and with Assistant Secretary-General Keita’s
review of United Nations engagement with Burundi.
Mr. Ben Lagha (Tunisia): I have the pleasure to
deliver this statement on behalf of the A3+1, namely,
the Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South
Africa and Tunisia.
8/17

13/10/2020

Let me first express our appreciation to Mr. Huang
Xia, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Great Lakes Region, for his informative briefing. We
commend the work carried out by the Special Envoy
and his Office in promoting peace in the region through
good offices, mediation and preventive diplomacy, as
well as his efforts in supporting election processes and
capacity-building activities in several countries.
Our statement will focus on issues pertaining to
the security, political and humanitarian situations
in the Great Lake Region; on the progress made on
the implementation of the commitments under the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region;
and on the implementation of the road map of the
Special Envoy.
As is the case with the rest of the world, the Great
Lakes region is not immune from the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. In this regard, we
commend the efforts of the countries of the region
to curb the spread of the virus and mitigate its
socioeconomic impact. We nevertheless regret that
the pandemic has exacerbated the plight of vulnerable
populations and had a disastrous effect on social and
economic activity and on the implementation of some
initiatives and projects pertaining to the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework.
With regard to the security situation in the Great
Lakes region, and despite the harsh constraints due
mainly to the COVID-19 pandemic, we salute the
ongoing efforts of the Special Envoy and his Office and
we are encouraged by the positive response of several
member States in the region to the Secretary-General’s
call for a global ceasefire, which was supported by
resolution 2532 (2020).
We equally salute the willingness of countries to
resort to diplomatic channels and dialogue to resolve
their disputes and differences. We encourage leaders of
the region to further reinforce their relations for the sake
of peace, stability and prosperity in the whole region.
We are nevertheless concerned by the ongoing
activities of many armed groups that continue to
perpetrate attacks against civilians and engage
in clashes with the military forces of some of the
region’s countries.
While the security situation in the region
remains critical, we note with satisfaction the
20-26566

13/10/2020

The situation in the Great Lakes region

political development reflected mainly in the regional
cooperation and diplomatic initiatives led by the
leaders of the region, despite the COVID-19 pandemic.
Countries such as Burundi have witnessed peaceful and
well-organized legislative and presidential elections,
and we are looking forward to the accomplishment of
similar processes, mainly in Tanzania and Uganda.
We are encouraged by the ongoing efforts of Rwanda
and Uganda to normalize their relations, thanks
to the facilitation of Angola and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in the framework of the
quadripartite process.
In this regard, we note with encouragement
the holding of the virtual mini-summit of Heads
of State of the Great Lakes region, called for by
President Tshisekedi, on 7 October, as part of his
regional outreach to promote cooperation between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its neighbours
and to advance the implementation by all stakeholders
of the Addis Ababa Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region.
We concur with Secretary-General about the
critical nature of the humanitarian situation in the
region, which has been further exacerbated by the
negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, natural
disasters and the persistent threat posed by the
continued guerrilla activities of armed groups. In
this respect, we express our deep concern over the
displacement of large numbers of people in the region,
which has further increased their vulnerability. Despite
the fact that the human rights situation in the region has
witnessed some positive developments, mainly with the
progress made in the fight against impunity, we express
our deep concern over the continued reports of human
rights violations and offenses, including sexual and
gender-based violence, both by armed groups and by
State actors.
The Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
South Africa and Tunisia emphasize the centrality of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework to
the Great Lakes region, which remains an essential
mechanism to achieve durable peace and stability. We
encourage enhanced cooperation among all signatory
countries. In that regard, while we reiterate the call for
the signatory countries to abide by their commitment to
non-interference in the internal affairs of neighbours,
we nonetheless welcome the recent engagement of
leaders of the region, through their bilateral and

S/PV. 8767

multilateral efforts, to strengthen their ties and enhance
mutual cooperation.
In that respect, we commend the efforts of the
African Union, the Southern African Development
Community and the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region, along with the East African
Community and countries of the region, in supporting
those endeavours in line with their respective
commitments under the Framework. We also commend
the work of subregional organizations and mechanisms
aimed at sharing best practices in tackling the
COVID-19 pandemic and facilitating cross-border
coordination measures to contain that plight. We
encourage initiatives by leaders of the region aimed at
further reinforcing security cooperation and military
intelligence-sharing to protect their respective borders
and contain activities by armed groups.
The role of the international community remains
of paramount importance in the Great Lakes region. In
that regard, we note with satisfaction the engagement
of international partners who focused their attention
on questions pertaining to development, electoral
processes and ways to support the region in meeting
challenges linked to the COVID-19 pandemic. In that
respect, we commend the work of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission aimed at supporting
regional efforts to improve economic cooperation,
development and peacebuilding in the region.
The A3+1 welcomes the continued and active
engagement of the Secretary General’s Special Envoy
with key stakeholders in the region, the co-guarantors,
international partners and other actors on ways and
means to further consolidate the gains achieved
in the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework. In that regard, we commend
the Secretary-General’s good offices, as reflected
in his Special Envoy’s national and regional efforts,
aimed at facilitating dialogue, cooperation and
confidence-building initiatives among countries of
the region. We equally encourage the Special Envoy’s
efforts to support the fight against impunity and
promote the rule of law in the countries of the region.
Addressing the issue of the illicit exploitation of,
and trade in, natural resources in the region remains
a real barrier to sustainable development and a source
of instability, insecurity, mistrust and tension among
countries of the region. We therefore call on the Special
Envoy to continue his efforts and consultations in view

20-265669/17

S/PV.8767

The situation in the Great Lakes region

of the adoption of a holistic and pragmatic approach
to tackle the issue and contain its negative impact on
the region.
In conclusion, while we look forward to receiving
the United Nations strategy for peace consolidation
and conflict resolution and prevention in the Great
Lakes region, the members of the A3+1 reiterate their
full support for the Secretary-General’s initiative
and commend the efforts of the Special Envoy with
national, regional and international stakeholders in
leading the development of the strategy, which we
hope will help identify and elaborate priorities and
streamline the United Nations peace consolidation,
conflict prevention and conflict resolution engagements
in support of ongoing efforts by Governments and
regional organizations in the Great Lakes region. We
also emphasize the importance of a coherent whole-ofsystem approach that synthesizes the efforts of all peace
and security, development and humanitarian actors in
the region. In the same vein, the A3+1 would like to stress
the importance of further strengthening partnerships
with regional and international organizations and
mechanisms, as well as related United Nations entities,
and mainly the co-guarantors of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework.
Mr. Turner (United States of America): We
appreciate today’s briefing by Special Envoy Huang
Xia on the latest developments in the region.
Since we last met to discuss the situation in the Great
Lakes region, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic has continued to turn our world upside down.
The Great Lakes region, which was in the midst of
overcoming the second-most deadly Ebola epidemic
in world history, is no different. Despite the obstacles
to travel created by the pandemic, we are encouraged
by the ongoing and constructive diplomatic efforts that
continue to be made to address root causes of conflict
in the region.
October is an important month for the engagement
of the United Nations in the Great Lakes region, with
three prominent forthcoming reports — a United
Nations regional strategy for the Great Lakes region,
an assessment of the United Nations role in Burundi
and a report on the exit strategy and the drawdown
benchmarks for the United Nations Peacekeeping
operation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
United States looks forward to receiving those reports
10/17

13/10/2020

and working with the United Nations to advance longterm stability and security in the region.
The United States is pleased to see that Governments
have already taken important steps to improve
stability. A case in point: we commend the efforts of
the Governments of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Zambia, supported by the Southern African
Development Community, towards work to address a
long-standing border dispute. We also welcome reports
of meetings between Rwandan and Burundian security
officials, as well as continued progress to mediate
disagreements between Uganda and Rwanda. This
news bodes well for regional stability.
At the same time, the United States is disappointed
by reports of violations of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Region. The report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2020/951) includes many allegations of
troops carrying out attacks and operations outside their
borders, underscoring the need for all Governments to
uphold their commitments under the Framework. Those
incidents must stop, and those responsible must be
held accountable. The United States calls on regional
oversight mechanisms to address those violations in
earnest and take steps to ensure that such violations no
longer occur. We believe that Special Envoy Huang Xia
and his team have a key role to play.
Of particular importance, the United States
commends the efforts of President Tshilombo Tshisekedi
to energize regional reconciliation through a virtual
eastern Congo summit. We hope that conversations
like that one can maintain momentum for much-needed
dialogue among Heads of State that can trickle down into
concrete proposals for regional economic integration.
We have a rare window of opportunity to work together
to address long-standing issues that impact security for
all Great Lakes countries. Governments of the region
could build a different way of doing business by tackling
the illicit flows of minerals that fund armed groups.
This October also marks the twentieth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000), which established the Security
Council’s women and peace and security agenda and
recognized the important role women play in conflict
prevention, resolution and recovery. We must continue
to support women as drivers of social and economic
recovery and put in place the building blocks for them
to contribute fully and meaningfully.
20-26566

13/10/2020

The situation in the Great Lakes region

The United States is very concerned by reports of
wide-spread sexual exploitation and abuse by personnel
who claim to be employed by international organizations
and private relief agencies as part of the Ebola response.
We urge the organizations and agencies involved to
ensure that their recently announced investigations
are thorough and conclude in a timely manner, with
appropriate steps taken to address the situation in a
survivor-centred manner.
Finally, the role of Special Envoy Huang Xia is
more critical than ever. We urge his Office to innovate,
including by using video-teleconferencing technology
to support Governments in continuing the conversations
they have started. There are a number of important
regional conversations under way that will need his
constant support.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Envoy Huang Xia for his briefing.
Amid the difficulties caused by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19), Special Envoy Huang Xia has
actively carried out good offices to promote improved
relations among the countries of the region and
strengthen regional cooperation in order to overcome
the challenges. He has done a great deal of work to
support the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. China commends such
work, and we will continue to fully support the Special
Envoy in performing his mandate.
In recent years, through the joint efforts of States
of the region and the international community, the
situation in the Great Lakes region has stabilized and
improved. The region has a rare window of opportunity
for peace and development. The past six months have
seen the strengthening of that positive momentum. The
general elections in Burundi took place smoothly. The
reform agenda of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has moved forward steadily. Relations among States of
the region are gradually improving, along with a greater
willingness to resolve disputes peacefully.
The countries of the Great Lakes region share
common interests and a common future. Threats to the
security of any country may spill over to its neighbours,
and one country’s crisis may become a challenge for
the region. COVID-19 and Ebola have highlighted the
urgent need for regional cooperation. China calls on the
countries of the region to build consensus, strengthen
cooperation and turn challenges into opportunities

S/PV. 8767

with a view to achieving regional peace, stability
and common development as soon as possible. In that
regard, I wish to stress the following four points.
First, with regard to joint cooperation to earnestly
implement the Framework, countries of the region
should respect each other’s sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity. That is necessary for the
implementation of the Framework and a precondition
for regional peace and stability. China encourages the
countries of the region to continue to resolutely fulfil
their commitments under the Framework and enhance
mutual trust and good-neighbourliness. China calls on
the international community to respect the leadership of
countries of the region in dealing with their own affairs
and support regional and subregional organizations,
such as the African Union, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) and the East
African Community (EAC), in playing their respective
important roles.
Secondly, with regard to steadily advancing
national political agendas, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Burundi have successfully completed
their political transitions. Tanzania and Uganda will
hold general elections this and next year, respectively.
With their political situations stabilized, the focus of
governance in various countries has gradually shifted
to national reconstruction and increased reform. The
international community should create an enabling
external environment and actively help countries of
the region strengthen capacity-building and improve
national governance. The political and security situation
in Burundi has significantly improved and no longer
poses a threat to regional peace and security.
The time is ripe to remove Burundi from the
agenda of the Security Council. China welcomes the
visit by the Secretariat to Burundi, as requested by the
Security Council. We look forward to its report, which
we hope will objectively reflect Burundi’s progress in
the political and security fields and put forward realistic
proposals with regard to future cooperation between
the United Nations and Burundi.
Thirdly, on the issue of attaching importance to
resolving the underlying issues that lead to conflict,
the root causes of the protracted turmoil and frequent
conflicts in the Great Lakes region are complex and
chiefly due to the lack of development. Countries of
the region should jointly consider the issue of how to

20-2656611/17

S/PV.8767

The situation in the Great Lakes region

turn the benefits of natural resources into a driver for
development rather than tension or conflict. China
supports such countries in strengthening consultations
and cooperation so as to jointly resolve the problem
of the illicit exploitation of, and illegal trade in,
natural resources, while increasing its investment in
socioeconomic development, thereby creating more
jobs and means of subsistence. China anticipates that
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
activities being developed by States of the region can
contribute to that goal. We welcome the fact that Special
Envoy Huang Xia has been advocating the convening
of a conference on trade and investment in the Great
Lakes region. We commend such work to assist States
of the region in scaling up their marketing efforts and
attracting foreign investment. The first conference was
a great success, and we look forward to the second one
soon, if conditions allow. We hope that such a platform
will bring new development opportunities to countries
of the region.
Fourthly, with regard to joint efforts to address
common challenges, the security threats and
humanitarian challenges that countries of the region
face are closely interlinked. Currently, the pandemic
has led to the region facing new and complex issues,
which have resulted in severe challenges to its economic
development. Strengthening regional cooperation and
promoting regional integration can help to provide
impetus for the development of countries and bring lasting
stability to the region. China welcomes the cooperation
among States of the region in monitoring the pandemic,
diagnosis and treatment under frameworks such as the
ICGLR and supports the harmonized guidelines on
trade and transportation facilitation adopted by the
EAC and SADC. We welcome the progress made by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda, Burundi
and Rwanda in their bilateral security cooperation.
As a good friend and partner of countries of the Great
Lakes region, China has always steadfastly supported
countries of the region in advancing peace processes,
actively participated in United Nations peacekeeping
operations in the region and done its utmost to help
States of the region strengthen capacity-building.
China stands ready to work with the rest of the
international community in our continued resolute
effort to contribute to achieving peace, stability,
prosperity and development in the Great Lakes region.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): It is my honour to deliver
a joint statement on behalf of Viet Nam and Indonesia,
12/17

13/10/2020

the two States members of the Association of SouthEast Asian Nations (ASEAN) on the Security Council.
At the outset, we would like to thank Ambassador
Huang Xia, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to
the Great Lakes Region, for his briefing.
We have noted the Secretary-General’s report of
28 September (S/2020/951), and we are encouraged
by the progress on regional cooperation despite the
unprecedented challenges caused by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Indeed, the commitment
and leadership of the signatories and guarantors to the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region are
now more critical than ever. To that end, Viet Nam and
Indonesia would like to emphasize the following points.
First, we stress the importance of addressing the
root causes of instability in the region. We welcome
the region’s positive progress, including the efforts of
the Congolese in maintaining a favourable political
climate, the peaceful political transition in Burundi
and the regional commitments to continuing to pursue
peace with neighbours. We continue to voice our
support for the good offices of the Secretary-General
and his Special Envoy, and we look forward to his
United Nations strategy for the Great Lakes Region.
Given the volatile security situation, the region’s
positive progress should be further reinforced by
enhancing the reconciliation process at the national and
regional levels, addressing threats from armed groups,
strengthening the governance of natural resources and
providing development opportunities for countries.
Without that, we will risk undoing the hard-won gains
and exacerbate instability.
Secondly, the work of regional organizations
and United Nations missions in the region should be
supported by the Council. As two South-East Asian
nations, Viet Nam and Indonesia fully understand the
importance of regional and subregional cooperation.
ASEAN’s “One Vision, One Identity, One Community”
is the result of the sustained efforts of all countries
in our region over many decades. With shared goals
and responsibility to our peoples, we could, and will,
achieve a great deal together, including ensuring
regional peace, security, stability and prosperity.
Based on such a conviction, we recognize the
important role of the regional mechanisms in the
Great Lakes region, including the co-guarantors of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
20-26566

13/10/2020

The situation in the Great Lakes region

S/PV. 8767

Agreement and the 13 signatory countries. We welcome
the engagements of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) and the Southern
African Development Community in facilitating
border negotiations, peaceful general elections and the
bolstering of efforts with regard to COVID-19. The
ICGLR continues to play a vital role for peace and in
preserving stability by preventing the illicit exploitation
and movement of natural resources.

continuing to contribute to this actively as the process
draws to a close. In that regard, allow me to thank
Special Envoy Xia for its multiple and transparent
consultations with various stakeholders, including my
country, Belgium. This has involved several bilateral
contacts, his personal participation in our Arria
Formula meeting on 15 July, on illegal exploitation of
natural resources, and numerous interactions with the
International Contact Group.

We continue to support peace in the region through
our contribution to the United Nations peacekeeping
missions. Currently, ASEAN countries contribute more
than 1,600 uniformed personnel to the various United
Nations missions in the region.

Our expectations are high. We are convinced
that the new strategy will encompass all pillars of the
United Nations, including sustainable development
and human rights. We hope that the strategy will allow
us to have an adequate and coherent United Nations
footprint in the context of the gradual exit from the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and an adaptation of the United Nations approach and
presence in Burundi.

Thirdly, during this global COVID-19 crisis, relief
for the humanitarian situation must be prioritized. We
must pay attention to those in dire need of assistance: the
22 million Congolese who are facing food insecurity; the
5.9 million internally displaced persons and refugees;
and those who are vulnerable, including women,
children and the disabled. We call on all international
partners to continue to provide technical and financial
support for countries of the region through bilateral and
multilateral frameworks.
Addressing the complex peace and security
challenges in the region is indeed not easy. We will
maintain our commitment as true partners for the
region together.
Mr. Kridelka (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Special Envoy Huang Xia for his
very informative briefing. Since this was the first
time I have had the pleasure of hearing him speak,
I commend his fluent command of French, which
makes an outstanding contribution to the linguistic
diversity of our Organization, for which I thank him.
His briefing once again underscores the usefulness of
regular discussions regarding the Great Lakes region.
The timing is relevant because, as we know, the
United Nations is currently developing a new strategy
for the region, as well as a new approach with regard
to Burundi.
Let me take this opportunity to make three
points on the role of the United Nations, the regional
dimension of the problem and human rights, including
the universal right to high-quality education.
First, Belgium welcomes the development of a new
strategy for the Great Lakes region. We look forward to

Secondly, although there have been indications of
an improvement in regional dynamics, I note that the
Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2020/951) and the
Special Envoy’s briefing continue to refer to multiple
bilateral disputes involving several of the neighbours
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This shows
the continued importance of the good offices of the
Special Envoy, which also contributed to the convening
of the mini-summit in Goma last week. Belgium also
welcomes the continued involvement of several regional
institutions, including the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and the Southern African
Development Community.
I am also convinced that the Democratic Republic
of the Congo’s chairmanship of the African Union
(AU) next year will give new impetus in this context.
Regional problems require regional solutions. In this
regard, Belgium and the European Union will play
their role as strategic partners of both the AU and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We therefore fully
support our Congolese partners in their future efforts.
Thirdly and finally, despite the worrying persistence
of widespread human rights violations in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we can welcome
some positive developments in this context. The
recent convictions of soldiers and police officers who
committed sexual violence in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo are important steps in the fight against
impunity for human rights violations. The adoption of a

20-2656613/17

S/PV.8767

The situation in the Great Lakes region

new national action plan for women, peace and security
is another key development towards better protection
for and the equal participation of women and girls.
Another welcome development is the revitalization
of the regional platform for youth engagement. In this
regard, let me also refer to our Arria Formula meeting
of 2 October, at which we underlined the need for access
to education in conflict and post-conflict situations,
as well as the importance of new technologies in that
regard. Closer regional cooperation in this context
could, while respecting all sensitivities, also lead to the
sharing of best practices in the region, and we know that
UNICEF has described some of these as model practices
in terms of the uses of new technologies for education,
including for children and adolescents, refugees and
internally displaced persons. Likewise, we welcome the
ongoing demobilization efforts specifically focused on
children in armed conflict. In this regard, it is essential
to facilitate the access of MONUSCO and UNICEF
child protection advisers to demobilization centres.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
At the outset, let me join the words of appreciation
addressed to Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Great Lakes Region, Mr. Huang Xia, for his
substantial briefing.
The security situation in the region is still defined
by the state of affairs in the eastern provinces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which remains rather
complicated. The Congolese army and its supporting
peacekeepers have not achieved a qualitative change in
the fight against illegal armed formations. A number
of border incidents and the spread of the coronavirus
disease pandemic have further aggravated the situation
in the region over the past six months.
Against this backdrop, we welcome the commitment
of the regional States to enhance cooperation in order
to overcome the emerging challenges. We note the
successful settlement of the border dispute between
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zambia,
facilitated by the Southern African Development
Community (SADC). We specifically welcome the fourparty summits aimed at normalizing relations between
Uganda and Rwanda that have been convened under the
leadership of the presidents of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Angola, the most recent of which was
held in a virtual format on 7 October. We also find
14/17

13/10/2020

it very positive that, at the SADC summit in August,
that regional organization reiterated its commitment to
continue lending support to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo as the country strives to stabilize its
eastern provinces, inter alia, by sending contingents to
the Force Intervention Brigade of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We cannot fail to note the
productive efforts of the regional organizations in
responding to the effects of the pandemic.
We believe that all these efforts deserve the strong
support of the global community. We welcome the
work of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General in
that regard, in particular in terms of overcoming the
deficit of trust by enhancing cooperation among the
heads of intelligence and security bodies of the States
of the region.
We proceed from the assumption that it is imperative
that all countries fully and unconditionally comply
with the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes Region, which is the fundamental document and
the tool for achieving stabilization in the region. We
welcome the growing attention of regional players
to the importance of upholding the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework. We believe that its full
implementation will strongly influence the situation
in the Great Lakes region. We expect that the regional
strategy for the prevention of armed conflicts currently
being drafted by the Office of the Special Envoy will
give new impetus to implementing the provisions of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
We share the concern expressed in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2020/951) over the
humanitarian situation in the Great Lakes region,
which has deteriorated during the pandemic. Against
that backdrop, one positive development is the ongoing
repatriation of Burundian refugees from neighbouring
countries. We believe that this process clearly attests
to the qualitative transformation of the situation in
Burundi, which no longer poses a threat to international
peace and security. We hope that the Security Council
will soon be able to take a decision on removing that
country from its agenda.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm that Russia, as
a member of the Group of Friends of the Great Lakes
Region, intends to continue actively assisting the peace
20-26566

13/10/2020

The situation in the Great Lakes region

S/PV. 8767

process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
promoting the stabilization of the region as a whole.

among their countries and restoring confidence among
their Governments.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

Despite the difficult context of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19), the four Heads of State have
adapted to the new normal and held a mini-summit via
video-teleconference, on 7 October, at the initiative of
the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
in order to maintain the spirit of dialogue initiated at the
start of 2019 as the main path for the easing of tensions
and pacification in the African Great Lakes region.

I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Empole (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) (spoke in French): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having taken the initiative to organize
this meeting on the situation in the Great Lakes region.
It is testimony to your commitment to improving the
situation in the region.
I take this opportunity to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres for his report on the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
(S/2020/951), which is before the Council today. I
would also like to thank all the members of the Security
Council for their availability every time they are called
upon to address issues related to the situation in my
country and in the Great Lakes region.
My delegation wishes to express its appreciation
for the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Framework agreement, which
Mr. Huang Xia, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Great Lakes Region, introduced earlier. We
welcome him today and commend him for his sustained
commitment. My delegation regrets, however, that the
report was not made available earlier on the United
Nations website, which would have been useful.
We take this opportunity, following the briefing,
to make a few key observations. I would like to
briefly take up the topic of the political, security,
humanitarian and human rights situation, and then
conclude with some remarks on the implementation of
the Framework agreement.
At the political level, the situation in the Great
Lakes region remains driven by the new momentum
of the diplomatic efforts made since early 2019 by
Mr. João Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço, President of
Angola; Mr. Félix Antoine Tshilombo Tshisekedi,
President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
Mr. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of Uganda;
and Mr. Paul Kagame, President of Rwanda. Their
efforts have significantly contributed to easing
tensions in the region, thereby strengthening relations

The actions carried out by national and foreign
armed groups, peace and security in the region,
diplomatic relations, as well as economic recovery in
the current context of combating COVID-19, were the
main topics of discussion of the Heads of State minisummit meeting. Indeed, in view of the troubling
security situation in the region, the Heads of State not
only condemned the actions of negative forces and
armed groups operating in the Great Lakes region, but
also reaffirmed their willingness to pool their efforts to
eradicate them.
As part of diplomatic efforts to improve relations
with and among all the countries of the Great Lakes
region, President Tshisekedi visited his counterpart in
the Republic of the Congo, Mr. Denis Sassou Nguesso,
on 15 July. In addition, a delegation from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, led by Mrs. Marie Tumba Nzeza,
Minister of State and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
travelled to Bujumbura, Burundi, on 4 and 5 October,
for a working visit within the framework of the second
session of the bilateral ministerial consultation on
peace and security between the Republic of Burundi
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Moreover, the Secretary-General’s report also
highlights the efforts made by the Forces armées de
la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC), in
collaboration with the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), to neutralize the armed groups
still operating in the region. My delegation reassures
the Council that those efforts will continue until those
groups are totally eradicated, because peace and
security remain critical factors for the stability of the
Great Lakes region.
That is the reason for the President of the Republic’s
visit last week, from 5 to 8 October, to North Kivu
province — to express his solidarity and support for
the hard-pressed population in the east of the country,

20-2656615/17

S/PV.8767

The situation in the Great Lakes region

as well as his determination to restore peace there. That
is also why the FARDC’s offensive operations against
armed groups in the provinces of North and South Kivu
must be enhanced, in accordance with the commitment
made by the President of the Republic and Head of State
bringing peace and stability to the region.
These large-scale military operations, launched on
30 October 2019, enabled the FARDC to seize several
bases of the Allied Democratic Forces and significantly
weaken several other armed groups, both national and
foreign. These Government and FARDC efforts have
produced compelling results, but insecurity remains. In
its distress, the enemy has even increased retaliatory
attacks against the civilian population.
In order to enhance its offensive and increase
pressure on the residual armed groups, my country
hopes to, first, strengthen the offensive capacities of
MONUSCO, in general, and of the Force Intervention
Brigade, in particular; secondly, secure the collaboration
of the countries of the region and; thirdly, garner
the support of the international community in the
fight against the illicit exploitation and trafficking of
minerals from the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
With regard to the strengthening of the offensive
capacities of MONUSCO and its Force Intervention
Brigade, as we have already stressed to the Council,
the wish of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
to see enhanced collaboration on the ground within
MONUSCO units and with the FARDC in order to
secure sufficient firepower to effectively protect the
population and restore peace, security and full State
authority throughout the national territory, including in
localities with an armed group presence.
In his address to his counterparts on 7 October,
regarding the collaboration of the countries of the
region, President Tshisekedi called on them to pool
their efforts and take constructive measures to jointly
overcome obstacles and challenges for the benefit of the
people of the four countries, insisting that
“in the current context, there is no alternative
to pooling our efforts to meet these numerous
challenges and putting an end to the recurrent
cycles of armed violence that threaten the security
of the States and people of the region”.
The illegal exploitation of natural resources in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has consequences
for peace and security in the region and for the
16/17

13/10/2020

protection of the environment. The support of the
international community in the fight against the illegal
exploitation of the country’s minerals — which is the
main cause of instability and violence in the east of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, a source of mistrust
and tension among the countries of the region and the
main source of funding for the illicit activities of armed
groups — is crucial.
All actors — countries of origin, individuals,
companies, civil society, transit countries and
destination countries — have for quite a few years been
involved in and are responsible for this flourishing
traffic. We will never win the battle for peace in the
Great Lakes region if armed groups are not cut off
from the livelihoods that allow them to continue their
harmful activities. Resolution 2502 (2019) called on the
Office of the Special Envoy and MONUSCO to work
with all stakeholders to reach a solution to stop the
cross-border flow of armed combatants and the illicit
exploitation and trade of minerals.
Against the backdrop of combating illegality, my
delegation welcomes the reaffirmed willingness of the
four Heads of State to campaign for strengthening the
capacities of existing mechanisms in the subregion
in order to cut off the negative force of sources of
financing for armed groups’ activities and jointly
combat both regional and international mafia networks
that contribute to the exploitation of and illicit trade in
natural resources in the Great Lakes region. Further, my
delegation would like to reiterate President Tshisekedi
Tshilombo’s appeal to the international community
at the General Assembly to ensure that appropriate,
targeted and effective sanctions are applied to those
armed groups and mafia networks, which, through
their harmful activities, are also wiping out all efforts
to preserve and sustainably manage biodiversity
and the protected areas located in the eastern part of
our country.
Beyond these options involving military pressure,
my delegation considers it necessary that all countries
of the region be able to join non-military mechanisms.
In this regard, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
engaged in discussions with some armed groups, some
of which have already signed cessation of hostilities
agreements with the Government and laid down their
arms. The Government reiterates its appeal to all other
armed groups that continue to hesitate to follow suit
and lay down their arms.
20-26566

13/10/2020

The situation in the Great Lakes region

S/PV. 8767

The issue of human rights violations and restrictions
on democratic spaces is at the heart of the actions of the
President of the Republic who, since coming to power,
has committed himself to working to promote the rule
of law. This commitment has already been translated
into action through the implementation of several
measures. Indeed, in the quest to improve the human
rights and social justice situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Government, working
under the leadership of the Head of State, has achieved
a great deal. The political will to promote human rights,
in accordance with the constitutional requirement to
guarantee respect for and defence and promotion of all
human rights, has been sufficiently demonstrated and
the Government continues to implement its programme
on the subject, with particular emphasis on fighting
corruption and strengthening the rule of law.

under the Framework agreement and assume its share
of responsibility in ensuring that peace and harmony
return fully to the region. In this regard, as noted by
the Secretary-General in paragraphs 36 to 38 of the
report under consideration, the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has taken concrete
steps to implement its national commitments under the
agreement. Several examples were cited, including the
renewal by the Government of the national stabilization
and reconstruction programme for areas emerging from
armed conflict, with a view to further consolidating
State authority, and the continuation by the Government
and MONUSCO of dialogue at the community level in
Ituri, as part of the implementation of the agreement
signed with the Front de résistance patriotique de l’Ituri
on 28 February for its disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration.

The humanitarian situation in the region is
dominated by the coronavirus pandemic and the
problem of displaced persons and refugees. In order to
contain the spread of the coronavirus disease, countries
of the region reacted quickly with effective prevention
measures. They are mobilizing to fight the pandemic by
putting in place shared protective mechanisms, which
was reaffirmed by the Heads of State of countries
of the region at the mini-summit held on 7 October.
Furthermore, it should be noted that the displacement
of populations remains one of the main factors of
insecurity and instability in the region, hence the
importance, as stated by the Secretary-General in his
report, of redoubling efforts to find durable solutions
for refugees and displaced persons in line with the
recommendations of the high-level ministerial meeting
on the situation of refugees in the Great Lakes region
held in Kampala in March 2019.

Also, as part of its ongoing efforts to engage the
region in the implementation of the provisions of the
Framework agreement, on 19 October the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will host the tenth summit
of the Regional Oversight Mechanism as a videoteleconference, owing to the coronavirus pandemic.
The meeting was initially scheduled to take place in
Kinshasa on 28 October 2020. It is during this summit
that His Excellency Mr. Félix-Antoine Tshisekedi
Tshilombo, President of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, will assume the presidency of the
Regional Mechanism.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo remains
committed to the Framework agreement, which it
considers to be the way forward as it is the best regional
strategy to follow to definitively end the situation of
instability that has affected the region for quite a few
years and for which it continues to pay a heavy price,
with several million deaths. The implementation of this
mechanism will also make it possible to avoid incursions
by both sides into the territories of neighbouring
countries, as described by the Secretary-General in
paragraphs 5 to 12 of his report.
For its part, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will continue to work to implement all its
national, regional and international commitments

In conclusion, allow me to reaffirm that the
Government and the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo remain committed to the Addis Ababa
Framework agreement in which they have placed much
hope. The Democratic Republic would like to take this
opportunity to call on the countries of the region and
the guarantors of the Framework agreement to take
advantage of the regional momentum observed in recent
months to implement the commitments that they have
all undertaken. It should be noted that if the provisions
of the Framework agreement are turned into concrete
action, they will enable the region, through a logic of
integration, to better manage peace and security issues,
including and especially, cooperation and development
issues. It is high time, indeed more than high time,
that we offer the people of the Great Lakes region the
well-being, peace and economic development to which
they aspire.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

20-2656617/17
