142

43/190.

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

Strengthening technical co-operation among
developing countries in food and agriculture

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/134 of 19 December 1978, in
which it endorsed the Buenos Aires Plan of Action for
Promoting and Implementint Technical Co-operation
among Developing Countries,
Recalling a/so its other resolutions on technical cooperation among developing countries,
Recallingfurtherresolution 9/85 on economic and technical co-operation among developing countries, adopted
on 28 November 1985 by the Conference of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 41
Noting with appreciation that the World Food Council at
its thirteenth and fourteenth sessions called for the further
strengthening of technical co-operation among developing
countries in food and agriculture, particularly in food production, institution building, training and enhancement of
management capability and the development of agroindustries and trade, 42
Noting with interest the progress already made in technical co-operation among developing countries in food and
agriculture, especially in tripartite co-operative agreements and other existing arrangements among international institutions and organizations and developed and
developing countries,
Recognizing the expertise and technological capability
accumulated by developing countries in the fields of food
and agriculture and food production,
Reaffirming that developing countries have the primary
responsibility for promoting technical co-operation
among themselves in food and agriculture, that developed
countries and the United Nations system should assist and
support such activities, and that in addition the United
Nations system should play a prominent role as promoter
and catalyst of technical co-operation among developing
countries in food and agriculture, in accordance with the
Buenos Aires Plan of Action,
1. Endorses the relevant conclusions and recommendations contained in the reports ofthe World Food Council on the work of its thirteenth and fourteenth sessions; 42
2. Reaffirms the role and importance of technical cooperation among developing countries in their socioeconomic development in general and in their agricultura)
development in particular, and in the reinforcement and
final achievement of their individual and collective selfreliance;
3. Welcomes the progress made in technical cooperation among developing countries in food and agriculture, and emphasizes that such co-operation should be
carried out in accordance with the national development
plans, objectives and priorities ofthe developing countries
concerned;
4. Affirms that tripartite co-operative agreements and
other existing arrangements constitute an effective means
of promoting technical co-operation among developing
countries in food and agriculture, in particular in food
40
Report of the United Nations Conference on Technica/ Co-operation
among Developing Countries, Buenos Aires, 30 August-12 September
1978 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.78.II.A. l l and
corrigendum), chap. I.
41 See Report of the Conference of FAO. Twenty-third Session. Rome,
9-28 November 1985 (C 85/REP).
42
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-second Session,
Supplement No. 19 (A/42/19) and ibid., Forty-third Sessiorz, Supplement
No. 19 (A/43/19).

production, and welcomes the progress made so far in this
regard;
5. Calls upon the developing countries, in the context
of their primary responsibility for promoting technical cooperation among themselves, to place greater emphasis on
technical co-operation in food and agriculture and to
strengthen and improve the mechanisms for such cooperation at the national, subregional and regional levels,
especially their national focal points, so as to facilitate
policy co-ordination and exchange of experience;
6. Urges the developed countries, if so requested by
participants in programmes concerning technical cooperation among developing countries, to provide financia) and technical assistance to such programmes in food
and agriculture, including through participation in tripartite co-operative agreements;
7. Urges the organizations of the United Nations system, including the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the United Nations Development
Programme and the International Fund for Agricultural
Development, and other international development and financing institutions, to provide increased financia! and
technical assistance for technical co-operation among developing countries in food and agriculture, and in particular to encourage and take part in tripartite co-operative
agreements and other arrangements;
8. Recommends that organizations of the United Nations system and other international development and financing institutions, within their respective spheres of
competence, give priority in their programmes of work to
technical co-operation among developing countries in
food and agriculture;
9. Requests the World Food Council to continue its
work in identifying effective ways and means of technical
co-operation among developing countries in food and
agriculture and to make recommendations thereon to the
General Assembly through the Economic and Social
Council;
1O. Requests the Secretary-General to in elude in his report to the General Assembly on technical co-operation
among developing countries, to be prepared pursuant to
resolution 42/180 of 11 December 1987, information on
the implementation of the present resolution, including
recommendations for the enhancement of technical cooperation among developing countries in food and agriculture.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December 1988

43/191.

Food and agricultura) problems

The General Assembly,
Recallingthe Declaration and the Programme of Action
on the Establishment of a New International Economic
Order, contained in its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974, the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States, contained in its resolution 3281
(XXIX) of 12 December 1974, resolution 3362 (S-VII) of
16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation, and the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade, contained in the annex to its resolution 35/56 of 5
December 1980,
Recalling a/so its resolutions on food and agricultura)
problems, in particular resolution 41/191 of 8 December
1986,
