Re11olutio1U1 adopted on the reporu of dae Fourth Committee

the prevailing policies, laws and practices which, in the
Trust Territories, relate to land, land utilization and
the alienation of land, taking into account the present
and future needs of the indigenous inhabitants from
the standpoint of the basic objectives of the International Trusteeship System and the future economic
requirements of the Territories, as well as the social
and economic consequences of the transfer of land to
non-indigenous inhabitants,

Having noted the actions of the Trusteeship Council
in this field, both through its regular procedures for
the examination of conditions in the Trust Territories
and through the establishment of the Committee on
Rural Economic Development of the Trust Territories,
Bearing in mind the technical difficulties that the
Committee has encountered in the various aspects of the
study entrusted to it,
Noting with regret that the Committee has not yet
been able to carry out the aforementioned study,
Considering that the questions of land tenure, land
utilization and land alienation call for analysis and
opinion of a technical and expert nature, and recalling
in this connexion General Assembly resolution 561
(VI) of 18 January 1952,
Considering that, in the meantime, it would be appropriate for the Trusteeship Council, with the assistance of the Committee, to continue to devote particular
attention to the question of the alienation of land in
the Trust Territories,
1. Decides, in order to facilitate the eventual study
by the General Assembly of problems of land tenure,
land utilization and land alienation in the Trust Territories, to invite the appropriate specialized agencies,
particularly the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations and the International Labour Organisation to submit to the Trusteeship Council their
observations and suggestions concerning these problems;
2. Recommends to the Trusteeship Council that it
ensure, through the Committee on Rural Economic Development of the Trust Territories or by such other
means as it deems appropriate, the early submission
of its study of the prevailing policies, laws and practices relating to land tenure, land utilization and land
alienation in Trust Territories, taking into account the
present and future needs of the indigenous inhabitants
from the standpoint of the basic objectives of the
International Trusteeship System and the future economic requirements of the Territories, as well as the
social and economic consequences of the transfer of
land to non-indigenous inhabitants ;
3. Requests the Trusteeship Council to include the
results of this study in its next report to the General
Assembly.
729th plenary meetino,
13 December 1957.
1209 (XII). Offers by Member States of study
and training facilities for inhabitants of
Trust Territories

The General Assembly,
Ha·uino examined chapter V, section D, of part I
of the report of the Trusteeship Council28 and the
report of the Secretary-General on offers hy Member

29

States of study and training facilities for inhabitants
of Trust Territories 21'.>,
Recalling that, in its resolutions 753 (VIII) of 9
December 1953 and 1063 (XI) of 26 February 1957,
the General Assembly recommended that . th~ Administering Authorities of the Trust Territones take
all such measures as would ensure the greatest possible use by inhabitants of the Trust Territories of the
scholarships and training facilities offered by Member
States,
Noting that the major part of the scholarships offered
by Member States remains unutilized,
1. Takes note of chapter V, section D, of part I
of the report of the Trusteeship Council and of the
report of the Secretary-General on offers by Member
States of study and training facilities for inhabitants
of Trust Territories;
2. Reaffirms its resolution 1063 (XI) of_ ~6 F~bruary 1957 and once again invites the Admmistermg
Authorities to take all necessary measures to ensure
that scholarships and training facilities offered by Member States may be utilized by inhabita~ts of the Trust
Territories and to render every assistance to those
persons who have applied for, or have been granted,
scholarships or fellowships;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to give such assistance as is possible and as may be sought by the
Members concerned a~d by the applicants, within the
framework of the procedures laid down by the Trusteeship Council;
4. Requests the Secretary-G~neral to !nclude! in ~is
future reports to the Trusteeship Council, deta~led mformation concerning the actual use of scholarships and
training facilities offered by Member Sta~es . for the
education of inhabitants of the Trust Terntones;
5. Requests the Trusteeship Cou!1cil !o resum~,
at its sessions held in 1958, the considerat10n of thts
question and to report thereon to the General Assembly
at its thirteenth session.
.
729th plenary meeting,
13 December 1957.
1210 (XII). Effects of the European EconomJc
Community on the development of certatn
Trust Territories
The General Assembly,
H avinq examined the report of the Trusteeship
Council,28
Having observed that the .Treaty . establishing t~e
European ~co1;omic Commumty :provide~ that certam
Trust Terntones are to be associated with the Community,
Believing that this association may have significant
effects on the development of such Territories,
1. Invites the Administering Authorities concerned
to submit information to the Trusteeship Council on
the association of the Trust Territories under their
administration with the European Economic Community and on the possible effects of the Treaty establishing the Community on the development of those
Territories;
2. Requests the Trusteeship Council !O incJude in
its report to the General Assembly, at its thirteenth
.. Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Session,
A11nexes, agenda item 13, document A/3718.
