3

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COUIWIL
RECORDS

CONTENTS
Pap

Pw\isicxwl
Adoption

upcnd;t (S/Agcndu/l772)

,,~~..,,..,,,~,,,,.,~,~,,,~....~~~...~~
of’ the upcndo ..I,~....,,.,,,,,,~,.,,,,,~,,,..~.,.,*,...~...~.~

lsttrr dated 26 Dcccmhct 1963 from the Pctmuncnt Representative of Cyprus to the
I)nitcd N;ltions uddrcsscd to the Prcsidcnt of the Sccuri;y Council (S/S4HH):
Rrpwt of the Sccrctnry-Ckncrut cm the United Notions operation in Cyprus (S/l 1294)

I
I

I

Symbol8 of United Nation. documenu m composed of apiul lettern combined
with fI#um. Mention of ruch l rymbot indicetee 1 reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol Sl..,) rn normrily published in
qurncrly Sppkmmf~
of the Oflcful Records q/the SmMy CoumdL The drte of the
document indicate8 the supplement in which it rippcrtr or in which informrtion about
it is giwn.
7’he molutions of the !$ecurity Council, numbered in rccordrnce with I ryrttm
adopted in 1964, ore publirhed in yearly voiumee of RwMom
mdDec~lorrr of rhr
Srewrl?y Counclt. ‘Ihe new system, which hrr been rpplied retrorctiwly to moiutionr
adopted before I Janurry 1965, became fully opetrtiw on that date.

1772ndMEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 29 May 1974, at 3.30 p.m.
/~v~II~vI~:

Mr, Chnrlm Gatctc MAINA

(Kenya).

Ihwnt:
Thr rcprcscntativcz of the following States:
Aubtraliu, Austris. Byclorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Chinu. Costa Rica, Frnncc. Indonesia, Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania, Peru. I Inion of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Rritain and Northern Ireland, United
Rrpuhlis 01‘ Camcroon und United Statcs of America.
Provklolul

rgcndr (WAgcnda/l772)

I.

Adopticul ot’ the agenda

‘**a

I.&r
dutal 26 Dc-vmbat I%3 from the Permanent
Rcprcscntativr
‘of Cvprus to the United Nations
urldrcsscd to the PrrGidcnt of the Security Council
lsmxxl:
Hcpcn of the ~~rctary=Gcncml on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus (S/I 1294)

AdqmJlt of the agenda

Lcttcr dated 26 Dcccmbcr 1963 fhm tbc Permanent Repremtatlvc of Cyprus to the U&d Natbm addmad to the

Prddcnt -al the security Council (smn8):
Rcpm OCthe .Semtaty-Ccnml
011the Unlted Natbns
opcratbn In Cyprtn (S/11294)
I. ‘The PHtWDENTz
In acc&dancc with the decision
I;tlcn h) the Council at the prcccding meeting, I now invite
111~trprwnt;~tivcs
of Cyprus, Turkey and Grcccc to take
p1;1~ ut the Council table in order to participate in the
ttiwu&rtn
without the right to vote.
At thr inritatlott of the Fwsi&tt, Mr. Rossldcs (CyprusA
.\fr. ilrwr (Turkey) antfUr. Mqocrlokonomos (Gmrr) took
ptuwr ut thr Counr~l tabk
m. Sir Luurcnw MCINTYRE (Australia): In voting for the
T
d&i nlc)lotion which rho Council adopted this mominp.at
11s 1771~1 mcctinp’ my dcleption has indicated its ruppott
t&r t b Sl~rct:try-Cicnml’s
view that the cumnt situation in
<'~prw
ncc&tutc>
the prczncc of the United Nations
Pc.t,r-keeping R~rcu for a further p&xl of six months. It
I&W+. that the Australian Govcrnmcnt will maintain hr
6ic hn p&v contingent in Cyprus for the period of the

extended mandutc rind thut WC hhall again bc making a
voluntary contribution tow&b the linancinp of the Ibrur.
3, Bcforc commcntiny on some of the isrucs that have
been raised in the Srcrctury-Gcnrml’r
report ~W//ZWj, HP
usual a most comprehmsivr and lucid documcnt.cvcn if not
exactly heartening. I should like to pay a tribute to all those
associated with the llnitcd Nations ctl3ts in Cyprus. The
Secretary-General and his stall: the Force Commander,
Major-Gcncral
Prcm Chand. and the troops and police
under his command. all drzuzrvc our ti~llcst and highest
commendation. It is always diflicult to single out any one
individual in a co-opcrativc rrnbrt such ub the one aasociatcd
with the United Nations Peace-keeping IWX in Cyprus
(IJNFICYP).
but 1 should like, on the eve of his rctirrment.
to pay II special tribute to my old friend and ~llcaguc. the
Secretary-General’s Special Rcprcscntativc in Cyprus, Mr.
Osorio=Tafnll. His 25 years of distinguished scrv~cc for the
United Nations, including scvcn and a half years ofdevoted
duty in Cyprus, is a record of dedication and skill. I hclirvc.
second to none. The paticncc and thr understanding that he
has shown have contributed immeasurably to keeping the
parties in Cyprus in contact rnd our hope% for un cvrntful
scttlcmcnt alive. All of us indeed owe him our gratitddc and
wish him well in whatever ruturc role hr assumes for himscll.
To his successor, Ambassador Weckmann-Muhoz,
WC
extend our full support and good wishes as hc assumes his
new post.
4. 1t was naturallv with some concern that WC learnt of’thc
interruption of th; intcrcommunal talks in Cyprus in early
April. It is our view, as it is the Sccrctary-Gcncral’s
view.
that those talks arc the hrst vrrlriclr for tho attainmcat
ultimately of a solution acccptahlc to both cammunitics an
the island. rnd their auspcnsion appeared to us as a scvcre
setback to the starch for that solution.

rcsumrd rho IWO aides can build on the progress that had
been made prior IO their suspension.
7. At the 1759th mcetine. on 14 Duccmber 1973. when the
Council met to consider the rcncwal of the UNFICYP
mandate, I indicated our support for the SccrcturyGcneml’s proposed second phase reductions in the lcvcl of
the Force. WC arc accordingly pleased to note in the
,Sccrctary-Gcnrral?
report that. as a result ot’l’urthcrconsultations lbllowin8 that meeting, the Sccntary=Gcneral felt
himself abtc to proceed with those r&ctions
during the
course of the contingent rotation that took place during the
period from March to May 1974. We also note the careful
mnnncr in which the mtructurinp of the Force, made ncccswary by its rcdunci numbers. hns been uccomplished, and WC
arc glad to YCC.although it is perhaps too early to make any
llrm asscssmcnt, that thus fur the reductions do not appear
to ha\~ mat&fly
affected the operation of the Force itself
or to have led to rcncwcd outbreaks oftightingor instability,
cvcn though I understand that thcrc has been some increase
rcccntty in minor incidents.
H. Although the grounds for a l’urthcr reduction in the
Force may bccstablishcd in due course, WCwould agree with
the Sccretary-Gcneral
that perhaps for the time being a
t’urther reduction, howcvcr wctcomc it would be. would bc
somewhat prcmaturc in a situation that remains. in the
&crctary-Gcncr;d’s
own words, “tense and potentially
dangerous”.
9. As I had occasion to note last December. and as the
!&rctnry-Gcncral’s
report again reveals. thcrc has cvidcntly
been little progress in a number of important Areas. military.
economic and social. whcrc grcutcr co-operation and undcrstandine would cnhancc the prospects for a return to normal
conditions or something like normal conditions. We note
with rcgrct that there has been little progress towards military dccunfiontution and that Ihcrc have been disturbing
reports of an incrcrtsc in the importation of arms. by both
hides. lilr their USC. The trend towards separate economic
dcvclopmcnt
has apparently increased and we have
crbservcd the Sccrctury-Gcncrul’s
comment that only slight
progress had ken made towards the extension ol’ public
scrviccs to all arcas that arc in need of them.
ItI. As H’C read the Sccrctary-Gcncral’s
report, and particuktrly section 111 on the subject of “Activities towards a
rrturn to normal conditions”, WCWCelm evidenceof the
cxtcnt to which mutual fear and distress is a major obstacle
to bcttcr rchttionu bctwccn the communities in almost all
lictds. WC can thus all the more upprcciatc and encourage
the activities ot’ UNfKYP
in its patient cnbrts not only to
Lrcp the pcucc but uluo. through the cxcrcisc al’ its good
cbtliccs in the imptcmcntution ol’ social projects. to t’ostcr
grcutcr co-opcmtion bctwccn the two communities. and to
hcIp to Iowcr the burricrs miscd by this xamc I’car and
suspicion.
Il. Finally. ulthouph I do not think I can make much
u\ctill contrihutior: -t;y way of comment on the tinnncinl
cituation 01 IJNI~IC’YP at thi% htagc. I do note that the
cituiuion in which UN1KY P finds itsccll’ has shown some
\\dcamr.
ulhcit temporary. improvcmcnt.
Ilnwcvcr.
I
undcr\t;mtt &t thitt UI 1JNI-IC’Y P cntcn the pcricd cl’ the

new mandate. its hard-core drlicit will amount to some
S16.5 million and thut each six-monthly extension ol’ the
mandate is likely to udd to that dcticit somcthinp cd’ lhu
order ol’S1 million, WC cun only rcgrct thut the rcsponsc to
tM Sc~rctary-Gmrrnl’
appeal Ibr I’urthcr udditional limds
has not yicldcvl so I’ar the contributions ncccssary to rrducc I
appreciably the dcht that UNFICY P has built up over the
ycurs, und WC can only cncourugc the Sccrctitry-Gcncrul to
continue his cllbrts to seek lirrthcr assistance and ut the
same time to look l’or al1 possible economics in the udministration of the Force,
12. Mr. LECOMPT (Fr;lnLz) (intqwctation,/
tiicnch):
Once again called upon to cxtcnd the mandate ol’thc IJnitcd
Nutions Force in Cyprus. my dclc~ution. au it hit% ulwuyb
done. voted in favour al the tmditionnl dmti rcsalution
submitted to us.
13. But this vote, cvcn if it h;n ull thr uppcur;lnccs of a
formality which WCrnpapc in cvcry six months. dots involve
ccrtnin concerns to which I should like todr;lu. thrCouncil’4:
uttcntion brirlly.
14. The maintcmtncc of’ordcr in Cyprus. the prcscrvtrticm
of the security al’thc two communities. without cmy doubt is
an objcctivc which. ol’coursc, the Council must suhscribc to;
that is its mission. The dispatch of a pcacc-krcpinp force
constitutes one of the mc;tns by which the Council can
discharge its duty. But this is un extrcmr mcuhurc. in u wny.
to which it has rc’coursc in cxccptionnl circumstancr~. on a
temporary bnris. when the Force. us in the prc%cnt CUIC. is
stationed on the territory ofa sin& Stutc in order to prcvcnt
a confrontation between untclponistic clcmcnts withi:l the
population: the prcscncc of a Force must in fitct make it
possible to cnsurc the ncccssary conditions for thr wilrch l’or
and the cstahlishmcnt of H normal situirtion in which or&r
and security arc guaruntccd by thr limctioning CJ those
institutions which arc proper to ult sovcrcipn Stiltcs. Ilowever. after more thim IO ycan. the snmc circumstnnccs
which wcrc invoked at the time the f?rrcr wits c%tahli\hcd
arc bcinp put forth to justify its mnintcnancc. I:vcn ifscvcral
attempts have been made hy the partics and arc still goinp
on. in order to normalix the situation. they hnvc not yet
proved succ~&~l. WC mny then whndcr it’ the Council.
while taking note of the lilct thut the Force hiIs acquittrd
itself’ impcccuhly. us is shown by the cxprcssiom of satistilctirrn uddrcsscd to it by the intcrL%tcd partics thcrnwlvc%. hits
not the duty to quL%tion this operation. In providinp the
trunquiliacr. hrrvc WC not cncoura%c II ccrtnin r&tanlv
trb
the true trcatmcnt. somrtimcs uncomlhrt;rhtc, irnd alwit>*
demanding?
IS.

Huvc we not also, over the long term. ncglcctcd to

druw the conclusions from u situation which iti. mo\t happ-

ily. no lnnpcr marked by the open ccnti-ontation* or tcnsions of u few years ago? The Sccrctary-CirncraI
promptal
this thoupht himscll’ whrn hc undertook a reduction ol’ the
Force. ;I reduction which is now to bc ac~onrpnnin! hy u
rxzrtuin chitnp in mrthcds. My drlqu~tion. while tilkitlp note
ol’ the commcntu con&cd
in puritpritph 79 ol’ the report,
considers thilt this clli)rt. linked to II ncM pvuhr;ltion ol’ the
rczd nerd\ in the light of the mission ot’thc IG,rcc. hwltt
tw
c~ontiniicdl.

soon bc retiring. You Icavc. Sir. not only with our bc*t
wishes but a\so with our prolbund yratitudc fl)r your heroic
cllirrtr in Cyprus and clsewhcrc ti, rcalirc thr aimr of thr
United Nations and its Charter. Your contribution will not
bc forgotten.

16. The Scactary-Gcnrral.
like his prcdccessor, has also
provided his assistance to the partics in their utrcmpt to
formulutc a diagnosis of the prohlcms dividing them und to
seek wap and mcuns ot’cstublishingbctwcen
them balanced
and harmonious relations. WC arc bcine kept informed on
this subject. Ilowcver, it is obvious that the responsibility
ussumcd by the Council with rc&tard to peace and security in
Cyprus mukcs it nutuml that it should concern itsclfwith the
cfibrts undcrtakcn by the panics.

22. At the same time wc wclcomc the eppointmmt of
Ambassador Wcckmann-MufIoz
as tbc new Special Rcprchcntativc. Amhus\udor Wcckmann=Mufior’s
skilful diplo=
macy as the Sccrctary-Gcncrnl’s
Special Rcprcscntativc in
the Iran-Iraq dispute is only the latest cxamplc of the statrsmanlike qualities which hc brings to hi* new duties.

II.
It is not without concern, thcrcforc, that wc huvc learnt
of the suspension of the intercommunal talks. Without
going into the rcusons allcgcd on either side for this suspcnaion, reasons which arc very usefully set forth in section IV
of the Sccrctary-General’s report. we have to note that these
negotiations. which were rcsumcd two years ago, arc now at a
standstill. Most fortunately, on 4 June next the participants
will bc meeting again: we hope that bccausc the stake is so
importunt-it
is a matter df safcguardinp and protcc$ng the
identity al’ each of the communities within the framework of
a rovcrcipn Stntr rndowcd
with viable and ef’fcctivc
institutions-the
partir% will not take refuge in the starus
qua. which, as WC now hcrc rvcry six months. is accompanicd by a dccpcning polarization of the intercommunal lifeof
Cyprus, and, undoubtedly. by a similar polarization in attitudcs. The cVects ol’ the frcqucnt instnnccs of procrastina=
tion arc obvious. Who of us could occcpt that such a
second-best solution should bc the only result of the cllbrts
which have ponc on for so many years and which the
Council has ccasclcssly Collowcd with such vigilance?

23. Once again we commend the Sccrstary=Gcncrul
t’or
unothcr incisive and important report on the current situa=
tion in Cyprus. WC had hoped that the last six months would
huvc been marked by more progress towards a just and
peaceful scttlcmcnt through the inrcrcommunal
talks.
Admittcdl). the suupcnsion ol’ those talks was u temporary
setback, but WCurc gratilicd that the conccrncd particsbavc
dcmonstmtcd their willinpnms to rcsumc the ncpotiations
shortly and to continue the starch Ibr u pcaccful. mutually
acceptable solution. In this regard. my delegation would like
to rcallirm the support ofthc United States for the intcrcommunal talks as the bczt available mrans of achieving a just
solution based on the concept ol’ a sin&. sovereign and
indcpcndcnt Cyprus, with appropriate guarantcr. for the
safety and well-bcinp of all its pcoplc.
24. WC had hop+-indeed.
WCexpected-that
the wductions in the UNFICYP brcr Icvcl would be curried forward
in accordance with the Secrctary-Gcncral’s
plans. unmarred
by incidents. and leaving the bcpinnings of a more streamlined. more cflicient UNFICYP.
Hcrc. our cxpcctations
were commendably I’ulfillcd.

18. Our constant objcctivc is to make possible the establishmcnt of harmonious coexistence between the two cornmunitics for their own bcncfrt. for that of the Cypriot State
and for the bcnetit of peace in that part of the Mcditcrrancan. This rcmuins our ohjcctivc as todny we renew the
mundatc of the Force. But my dclqation has deemed it
nccnsnry to make clear the spirit in which we have agreed to
this rcncwal.

25, WC arc cxtrcmcly plcased that the Sccretnry-Gcncral
has been able to report completion tm schr&lc of the
second phase reductions in the UNFICYP l&c lcvcls. M!
Govcrnmcnt strongly rupportcd the 25 per cent cuthucks
which the gcrctury-Gcncral
implcmcntcd during the past
year. The support of’ the L’nitcd Stutcs dclrpetion )br still
further I&c reductions is undoubtedly well known by nou
to the mcmbcn of the Council und to crthrr imcrcstrd
purtics.

19. Finally, 1 should like to associate myself with the
rxprmsions al’ gratitude profcrrcd by previous rpcakcrs to
the Spcial Rcprescntativc ot’ the Secretary-Gcncral.
Mr.
Osorio-Tafall, who hns acquitted himself with such distinc=
tion and talent in carrying out the dclicatc task which had
been cntrustcd to him. The trihutc paid to him by the
rcprcscntutivcs of the panics b the most obvious evidence of
this. My drlrgation takes pleasure in grcetinp his successor=
desipnntc, Mr. Wcckmann-Mullet,
WC have been able to
apprcciatc his cmincnt qualitin in his recent mission of
inquiry in Iraq and Iran.

26. At the 1759th mcctinpoftheCiruncil.on
14Dcc3zmttcr
1973. the mandate of UNFICYP
wus lnvt rxtcndcd. I
rxprcssed our dclgutionk
view that UNFICY P could most
rllicicntly cxccutc its mandate esscntinlly ut a mnliator/ohscrvcr Force with substantially fewer pcnonnrl. Events of
thr last six months have not altcrcd our view.

20. Mr. SCHAUFELE
(United States of America): The
United States supports the extension of the mandate of
UNFICYP
for an additional six months. I would like to
cxprcss our prtttitudc and admiration to Major-General
Prcm Chand and the ofliccrs and men of UNFICYP for the
high standard of pcrrormancc wc hnvr come to expect from
them.

27. In addition to the matter crl’ cllioient opccrtion. thr
linuncial diflicultics confronting the Forcc hitvr still not
been rcsolvcd. WC lind it incrcusinply dillicult to ju&) tlr
mounting drbts of t JNFICY P. Wr hclirvc that rdl ol’ UImembers of the Council, us well II\ troop und cash
mntributon-must
give scriour considcrution scp;lratrl)
und collectively to how the cost of nritintoininp the I~otcc
can bc rcdurzd. E~pcnscs. includinp thr p;t)nrrnt crl’ thr
debts oI’UNFICYP.
must somrhc~u becctvrrcd h) carn(rihutions, and very soon.

21. In addition. I want to cxtcnd our special appreciation
to Mr. <horio-Xtlilll,
who. after scvcn and a hsll’ ycats d
imaginative. undmtandinp
and patient laldcrslrip as thr
&crrt;tr>-<icnrr;ll’*
Spcrial Rcprcwntarivc
in Qprus. will

3

28. Although wc do not fully aharc their concerns, my
dckgation understands the rcluctancc of some troop contributors and othen to nupport further reductions in
UNFJCYP Porcln at this time. WC trust that, as the intcrcommunal talks resume their course, the necessity rot and
dcsirabllity or titrthrr cuts will bc accorded prompt and
serious consideration. The Sccrctnry=Gencnl, in his report.
has kll the door open to further redudions and mtructuring, which WC bclicvc arc tinuncially necessary, opcrationally feasible and ruullywithin the scope ofthe Force’s present
mandate,

full mpcct r0r the integrity and rovcnignty 0rcypii.
It UI
in that rpirit that my delegation cxprcascr its hopes lot the
succas of’ the intercommunal talks in Cyprus. which will bc
resumed on 4 June.

34. In thir connexion I should like tocongratuhttc Ambanrsdor Wcckman~Munoz
on his recent nomination to the
post or Specirl Representative of’ the Secrctary-Gcncral in
Cyprus and to aasurc him ol’thc support ormy delegation in
the lLtfilment of his delicate mission.
35, 1 should aIso like to pay a particular tribute to Mr.
O&o-Tafaall, who for approximately eight yeum rcrvcd
with the United Nation8 Force in Cyprus with great dcdication. My delegation wbha him a well-earned rest alter
atmost a quarter 0ra century 0rwwict in our Organi~atiim.

29. Resolution 1x6 (1964). which established UNFICYP.
spclkd out rather clearly that the primary responsibility for
maintaining pcacc and intcrnul order rested with the parties:
UNFICYP was given an important. but essentially rupportinp, role. WC envisage a strcamlincd obscrvcr/mediator
UNFICYP which would still “USCits best cflbrtr to prevent a
recurrence of fighting” and would continue to ‘contribute
to the maintenance and restoration of law and order and a
return to normal conditions”.

36. Aa members of the Council nre awurc, the United
Rcpubtic of Cameroon wan not on the Council when the
first dcciriotu to ensure the rtationing in Cyprus ora United
Nations Force were taken. However, my Government has
unhesitatingly given its constant support to ull the United
Nations cfforu to maintain peace in the island and to create
an atmosphere conducive to understanding betwrvn the two
communities. We shall continue along that construcrivc
line, and it is for this reason that, despite our limited tinunclal means and the many dillicultks inherent in our social
and economic development, my Government hns just
decided to make a vohmury contribution ofS00.000 franc%
CPA to the UNFICYP Special Account.

30. Mr. BOOH BOOH (United Republic or Cameroon)
(Intrrpntarlon~~ttt
fif&):
On bchalr of my dclcgation. I
should like lirst of alt to cxpm our appreciation to the
Sccrctary-Gcncral for the outstanding report hc rubmittcd
to the Council on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
for the last six months. This clear, lucid and complete report
has been very c~~rclitlly studied by my dekgation, which
approves of the motives which underlie the SccrctaryGeneral’s rccommendution to extend the existence or the
Force for a further six months. That is in explanation ol’the
vote wc cast on the drart resolution in document S/l lMl,
which the Council adopted this morning.

37. Mr. EL HASSEN (Mauritania) (Inrrrprrrtrrlon &ITI
Finch): The very comprehensive repon of the SecretaryGeneral which was submitted to the Council on 22 May
1974 has given tu a vtry clear picture of’ the situation in
Cyprus. Tension and mistrust between the twocommunitir!
unf’ortunately Kcm to be the main charactcrirtirrr of thut
luation. Had it not been for the prcscna ol’ the t Initcd
Nations Force in Cyprus, this rituatinn, in which many

31. II’ thrrc is reason to bc gmtificd over the fact that the
general situation in the island has remained relatively calm
uvcr the last six months. as WCgather rrom pamgmph 26 of
the Sccrctery-Gcneml’s
report, my delegation nevertheless
rcgrcts the ract that no effort has been made to achiew a
rignilicant relaxation of the military and politicat situation.
A military conf’rontation is still possible since the two communitics arc still maintaining and reinforcing their military
quipmcnt and living in an atmosphere of mutual fear and
suspicion.

divergent if not contradictory intcmts arc at play,could have
de-rated
into an armed conflict which by dcvclopine
further might have threatened peace in the entire region. But
ifcalm b being maintained in Cyprus thankr to the United
Nations Force, and rlxo to the moderation exercised by the
partlee concerned, no rignifkant progm has yet been mude
towards a final solution to this painful situation.

32. The Sccrctary=Gcncral, in paragraph 44 of’ his report.
in fact notes that lor six months little progress has been
achieved towards a return to normal conditions. and that
the “trend towards the separate development of’ each community has continued unabated”. My delegation is concerned over this rituutt n since it might bc protonged
indclinitcly and. as a consequence, might require the continued prcscna of the United Nations Force in the island,
with sll the financial implications which that would involve.

and the rituation is car from having returned to normalcy.

33. My delegation is still conccrncd over the pcrsistcnt
obstacks standing in the way of a so eagerly d&cd return
to a normal situation. It b true that these are obstacles
diflicult to overcome, but my delegation sinctrcly trusts that
#he panics directly concerned will be able to make rdditional efforts to arrive at 0 common agreement on a &lini=
the constitutionat structure ror the State that will be
l cceptabk to all the component parts of the population wit!t

39. Despite its disappointment, and its impatience to WC
understanding at last replace mistrust and union, under an
appropriate form, triumph over divbion. my delegation h
convinced that the pmrncc of’thc Force rcmainr the dctcrmining f’actor not only in maintaining peace but also in
Keking a solution in keeping with the purposes and principks of the Charter and taking fully into account the kgitimate interest8 0r the parties c~nccrncd.

38. From the Sccretrry-Gencral’r
report, it i9 obvious that
the talks between the two communities thcmxlvcs have at
present been interrupted and that weapons arc being introduccd in the bland. All this must obviously give rise to
cot&cm. And thus, despite the highly constructive role
played by the Force, the objectives which the Council set for

itself when creating UNFJCYP bavc not yet been attained

4

40. Thus i\ why my delegation voted for the drawl nsolution which the Council udopted this morning and which
eacndcd the mandutc of UNFICYP for a further six
months. II should, however, be obvious that the renewal of
the mctndutc of the Force is not an end in itselfand that the
rcmutkabk and consistent ell’orts of the Secretary-General
und his Spc!iul Representative cannot rucceed unless they
mcyt whh u true desire on the part of the parties concerned
10 uchicvc u ptobal arrungemcnt in which all interests would
hc sufcguurded. It seems to us that that is what the Council
hus invited thr parties to do in paragraph 2 of the resolution
it ha%ulreudy udoptcd.
41. In conclusion, my delegation would hope that the
rcncwul of this mnndutc. which has now been extended for
the twentieth time, will be the one which will see fraternity
und pcuce re-esrablishcd in Cyprus.
d2.

Bcforc conctyding my atatemcnt, I would add my

voice to thut of the speakerswho prcccdcdme in ordcl to

puy u wcllcarncd tribute to the Special Representative of the
SccrctnryCcnrral. Mr. Gsorio-Tafall, for the quality and
cxccllcncc of the work he did during his term of ollice in
Cyprus. WC should also like to welcome his successor, Mr.
Wcckmnnn-Munox. who yesterday proved to us his ability
(I\ u distinguished diplomat and excellent negotiator.
43.

Mr. EL-SHIBIB

(Iraq): This is the first time that my

dclqtution has addrcxscdthe Security Council on the situa-

tion in Cyprus in its present context. However, the geographicul proximity of Cyprus to my country and the friendly
t-clarionsWCmaintain with all the partia directly involved
mukc us keenly interested in a peaceful and agreed solution
d this problem. It is in thisspirit and in theearnest hope that
our cxtcnsion of the mandate ofthc United Nations Force in
C’jprun will fucilitatc the achievement of that goal that we
vatcd t&y in favour of the dran resolution adopted at the
l77lst mcetinp.
44. WC note with regret that little progress has been made
in resolving the basic issues since the Secretary-General last
reported to the Council. Indeed. we share the apprehension
that wax widely felt when the communal talks were auspcndcd. and it hus been only the timely intervention of our
cstccmnl Sccretury-Gcneral and the excellentwork of his
rcprc-cmalivc that banished the prospect of a complete and
pcrmanrnt breakdown of the talks.
43.

M? country very much hopes that these talks. which

urc cxpcctcdto bc mumcd soon,will k pursued in earnest
and will not be bogged down by semantic hurdles. We
uppeal to the parties tobanishsuspicionand mistrust so that
an agreement on constitutional arrangements satisfactory to
ull concerned can bc reached.
46. &forc concluding. my delegation wishes to join the
Sccrrtiuy-Gcncrul and the speakers who have preceded me
in paying a tribute and in expressing our gmtitudc to Mr.
(horir~‘l’alirll for long und distinguished service in the cause
trl the Ilnitcd Nations and of peace in Cyprus. We wish also
to cxprcs.. our sincere wishes for the success of Mr.
Weckmann-Mufloz. his successoras representative of the
Sccrctary43zncral. Mr. Weckmann-Munor,
has become
well known to us in Iraq and it is on the basis of this

knowledge that we express our full confidence in his future
success.
47. Mr. STUBBS (Peru) (Irrrer~re~uf&fi~?a Qua/&): The
very lucid and complete report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations operation in Cyprus, which has brought
us up to date on the events that have taken place on the
island between December I973 and May 1974. gave us
sunicirnt reason to cast a favourable vote on the dral?
resolution adopted this morning. WC still consider that the
presence in Cyprus of the United Nations Peace-keeping
Force is required to maintain peace. That Foluc, which has
been carrying out its mission for more than IO years.
deserves our thanks for the preventive role that it has played,
and it still needs the voluntary support of all the parties
concerned, particularly of the Greek Cypriot and Turkish
Cypriot communities. which had been maintaining intercommunal talks until a short time ago and which, thanks to
the timely intervention of the Under-Secretary-GcneraL Mr.
Rokno Guyer. will be resumed in the very near future. We
trust that as a result of these intercommunal talks the agreement so long desired by all will be arrived at, thus solving the
problem once and for all.
48. My delegation would like to state its appreciation for
the efforts made over the last seven years by Mr. Gsorio=
Tarall. the Special Representatiw of the Secretary-General,
who is now withdrawing from that post at his own request.
We also trust that Mr. Weckmann-MufIoz. his successor,
will be able to follow in his footsteps. Mr. WeckmannMufioa has given proof of his ability in the rcccntdiscussions
betweenIraq and tran.and has now been designated Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Cyprus.

49. Mr. SM1RNOV(Byelorussian

Soviet Socialist Rcpublit) (frorulor~~
&u&t): The delegation of the Byelor=
ussian Soviet Socialist Republic has carefully studied the
npon of the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus, from which it is clear that the United
Nations Peace-keeping Force is continuing to play an
important role in the atablirhmcnt of peace and in the
Cypriot people’s return to normal conditions of life. For this
reason, we agree with the Secretary-General about the need
to extend the stationing of the Force in Cyprus fore further
six months.
SO. We believe ttit the probkm of Cyprus should be
settled by peaceful means in the interests of the people of
Cyprus as a whole and primarily by the Cypriots themselves.
The solution of the Cyprus problem should contribute to a
general easing of tension in this area.
We are firmly convinced that the settlement of the
problem should be based on recognition of the
freedom and respect for the independence and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Cyprus.

Sl.

CYPNS

S2. The Byeloruxsion SSR has always opposed and will
continue to oppose any attempts to infringe the sovereignty
of this republic and to solve this question to the detriment of
the vital interests of the people of Cyprus and to the advantage of outside imperialist forces. That is why the Marts of
the United Nations should be dircctcd towards strengthen-

I

;

be.

60. In Mr. Wcckmann-Muflox, the new r~prr~mutivc of
the Secrctaty-Gcnernl in Cyprus, we huve u distinguished
auccessoc to Mr. Osorio-Tafull. and we know the Cyprus
question will be in good. well-tried and trusted hands.

ing the national independence and soverei#n!y of the Stutr
of Cyprus.
53. The Byelurussian dclcpation voted in favour of the
druft resolution extending the rtutioning of the Force in
Cyprus for tt funhcr six months, in the btlicf that over thut
period prcatcr provess would be achieved in the search for u
constructive solution to the problem of Cyprus thon hax
hitherto been made. In this we take into account the information provided by the Secntary-Ocneral in paragraph 80
of his report that the Government of Cyprus as well as the
Governments of Greece and Turkey concur with his recommendation to cxtcud the mandate of the Force for a further
period of six monrhs.

61. The suspended ihtercommunal tulkt ure schcdulbd to
be mumed on 4 June. Thut is a good sign, and we look
forward to the talks being resumed with renewrd vigour.
Time is not necmarily on our aide, and I urn sure ull the
parties do fully realize that the talks cannot be conducted in
a leisurely fashion. The Unircd Nations forces on the island
have already been reduced, and the second phuse of reduction is under way. There is indcvd great pmsure for the
United Nations to reduce the forces rind thus lighten the
financial burden. The current trend in thinking is too clear
nor to have been easily noticed hy nil the purties concerned.
My delcyarion can only express the hope that, the tulkr
haviw covered so much ground, the outstanding questions
concernin the structure and functions of Iocul government
bodies will be solved speedily.

S4. At the same time, we should like to stress that, in
voting in favour of thedraftmolution.weactedin
thebelicf
that the extension of the stationing of the Force in Cypnis
would be carried out in fill accordance with the provisions
of Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March 1964
and the Council’s subsequent resolutions on the question of
Cyprus. The present functions of the Force in Cyprus will be
retained as well as the present principle of voluntary
financing.

62. It was with those considerations in mind that my
delegation voted in favour of the droll resolution on the
renewal of the mandate of UNFICY P.

J5. The PRESIDENTz t rhould now like to make a short
statement in my capacity as representative of KENYA.

63. Aa PRESIDENT
Cyprus.

36. It is now 10 years since the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus was established. That is a lona
time, and the United Nations involvement has also been
very expensive. Peace, however, has a price, and there is no
doubt thar the pmcncc of the United Nations Force has
been a stabilizing clement in a tense situation which unfortunately still exists in Cyprus.

64. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I should tirst like to thank
you, Mr. President, for your constructive statement on the
problem of Cyprus and also to thank the other members of
the Council for their statements and their inlemt in Cyprus
and the continuation of the United Nations Force for II
peaceful solution in an independent, sovereign and unitary
State of Cyprus without any threat to the territorial integrity
and independence of Cyprus.

57. Cyprus is a fellow member of the non-alilned mom
mcnt as well as the Commonwealth. Naturally, thercforc.
WCin Kenya have followed very closely developments on the
island, and it has never been lost on us that the freedom
movements in Cyprus and Kenya arc conremporary and
similar in nature.

‘the readivated inrcrcommunnl talks are the
instrument for achieving a satisfactory, InstinE and
agreed solution based on the concept of an independent,
sovereign and unitary State with the adequate panicipation of the two communities* ‘*, (S/1//37, p@u. 801.
6.

I

59. I should like to seize this opportunity to pay a tribute
to Mr. Osori~lafall,
the Special Representative of the
Secrctary=General in Cyprus, for the distlngubhed service
he has rendered to the inremational community. WC arc
indeed sorry thar he will soon relinquish his duties with the
United Nations, but his will be a retirement well earned and
dcscrvcd.

1

.,.

.

.

bcw

In his statement Ambassador Olcoy never objected to that.
66. On a previous occasion also-thot is. nt the 1727th
meeting, on IS June 1973-l atorrd that the agreed basis was
the independent. sovereign and unitary Slulc. In his reply to
me, Ambassador Olcay never disputcri’whut I had rraid. that

6
t

of

65. t should now like to turn to my colleague Ambassador
Olcay, who registered his view that the ogrryd busb of the
talks had not been the unitary State. The lirst occasion on
which Ambassador Olcay raised an objection to the unitary
State was in December last, when he naid it ‘*has never been
the agreed basis of the talks” [ 1759th merrln~, puru. 17j. But
theu he said he speaks from his own memory on this, and
that statement was made not as his main statcmcnt but as a
reply to what I had said. His main statement never mentioned an)?hing about objections to the unitary State,
whereas the report of the !%cretary-Gcnml
on that same
occasion-that
is, in Devvmber 19730spoke clearly of the
basis, as follows:

58. The divisive forces in Cyprus arc not entirely dissimilar
to those that cximd in my country before independence. We
have on many occasions stated that Kenya respects the
unity. sovereignty and independence of Cyprus. Like those
of many countries, the population of Cyprus is not home=
gtneous. It is therefore vital thar there should be full respect
for the rights and security of all its citizens without any
discriminalion. A spirit of reconciliation and co-operation
must be fostered based on the elements I have just mcntioncd before a new era of peace and proqcrity once again
descends on Cyprus.

-

I call upon the repmentnrivc

the agreed basis wax an indcpndmt. rovereign und unitary
State. On unother occasion--in June 1972-l had said thul

bay. “No. wc have now come with u new ha&. bcc~u\r 01
the two aide-mCmoircs’? Today hc found no dit’licult! in
remonstrating because ol’ somcthine in lhc report IhiH U;I\
not exactly as hc thought it bbould bc. But wh> cn tbik
imponent aubjcct did he say nothing to ditputc Ubilt ~lrc
Secrctury-Gcncral’s
rcporr wid? All tbow thing\ t~~pcthcrwhat do they show? I hove to look. as I did ;r~ tbC morning
mcctinp. into the partcrn ol’policies. I have IO ~JI!,ap;tin th;lt
the talks will bc resumed on 4 June. but the!, arc re~umcd not
on the assumption but on the certainty that the) arc in
rccordunrc wirh the formula-namcl).
on the sitme hG il\
that on which they ha\r been conducted \o far.

“The rfl’ort can and should become mrtrc co-opcraGvc in
the common search for a solid structure o!’ a just and
workable constitution on the agreed buris ol’nn indepcndent, rovcrciyn and unitary Stulc, with due regurd to the
legitimate imcrcsta ol’ull conccrnrd and the wellkrc of the
people of Cyprus . . .“. ~1446th meeting, para. 43.1
When Ambassador Olcay replied to mc on that occasion,
uguin he never dispurcd the agreed basis ofthc tulksns being
a unitary State.

72. Let me turn to the other aspect of the slutcment of my
friend Mr. Olcay. I am sure that what hc doe% hc has 10 do
bccausc hr has to fullow the pattern. Hc cannot get out of’
the patlcrn that I have shown this morning, What pattern is
it? The patturn of obstructing any workable solution for an
indcpendcnt Cyprus. Thercforc the pattern is to dcvtroy lhc
indcpcndcncc of Cyprus, not to nave it. It woutd hale been
naruml to want to save the indcpendcnce of Cyprus. to
avoid the rnosis fear, but wc LCCthar the whole policy is 11)
destroy that independence, and the best way to &fro)
it is
to insist on a constirution that is unworkable. Soeithcr thcrr
is no agreement and there is no lasting solution and therefort it will remain pending so that the opportunity for
parthion may come in, and it would come in through the
federation way, as I shall prove. or it is agreed to ha\c such D
consGrution as is bound to disrupt the State and not bring P
workable and lasting solution. That it was done to disrupt
the State was slated by the constitutional experts whom I
have already quoted. and I am going to refer to tbcm again.
and by the Mediator, who was the person to study the
situation. He xaid clearly that any federation would dr!troy
the Stare. That is why there is BO much insistcncc on thr
federation idea, but they did not dare to bring it up before.

67. When Ambassador Baylllkcn was the rcprr!cntulivc
of Turkey, the rcpon of the Srurctary-General spoke ubout
the basis of the talks being a sovereign, indepcndcnt and
unitary Stare and thcrc was no contradicrion by Ambasaudor Baytllkcn of thut mtatemcnt.
68. Again, in the report of Ml~y 1971 (S//OfpP]. ii wu\
rtatcd that the problem ofCyprus must be solved by arriving
81 n lusting aerccmcnr based on an independent, atncreipn
and unitary Stare. No objection was made hen: or unywhcrc
clsc to thar statcmcnt. Wccan go back ugain and apain. Il’wc
go further back, we see what the attitude of the previous
rcpresenturivcs was. On IO June 1969 Ambassador Eralp
said:
“[The Turkish community] has sat down to talk with the
Greek community in ordcrto work out a system whcrcby
they can live togcthcr in a unitary Starr-l
rcpcat. in a
unirury State within which their idcnriry as a community
will not bc impaired and whcrcin they will run their local
and communal rlTuirs thcmsclvcs” 11474th meet&g, puru.
431.
69. So the egrccmcnt on a unitary Stutc was mcntioncd
there again. Then Ambassador Baylrlkcn said in the Security Council in June 1970 that “the Turkish cmmmunitv was
not against a unitary State. . . the problem . . . was to !&mc
the conception of a unitary State” (iS43rd meerhtg, para.
XXI]. Of course. that is a tubjcct ofdiscussion. lntcrprcrarion
of “unitary Slate” is lcgitimutc. Thcrc arc legal intcrprctalions and dcfmitionr of what is und what is not a unirary
State.

73. When Ambassador Olcay in December 1973 objcctrd
to tht uscof the unitary State. he did not speak ol’fedcmrion.
It is now that the idea of federation is brought in. 11 is the
policy o!’ escalation. Of course, another day we shall hear
“partition”.
But now WChear no partition-no
such idea ut
all. That artirudc was also taken about fcdcration a while
ago. They did not dare mention it in any scnsc as fcdcrution.
Even now Ambassador Olcay speaks &out a f&ralist
form in an clusivc and uncertain way. What is a f’cdcralist
arrangement? It is either federation or non-federation. The
constitutional structures are well known. Unitarv State or
f’edeml State? Thcrc is no use calling them scmnn&. IT you
discuss the constitution of a State, you have got to po by the
generally accepted atructum of Starr!. Thrrc are no prclctrcal and precise negotiations if you ignore constitutional
structurcr and call them semantics. It i$ xmantics tibr thlnc
who want to avoid them or to confuse the issues. 1’11~
question is: Arc WC going to afirm end solidify the indcpcndencc by a workable solurion or nrc wc to destroy it?

70. Now. 1 bclicvc that the rcprescntaGvc of Turkey. Mr.
Olcay. tried to set forth the idea that when the aidemCmoim of I8 October 1971 (S//0401. puru, 791 nnd I8
May 1972 [s//oaCrr. puru. 64 were brought out the basis
chanpcd. It is very clear that the aide-mCmoim were
inrcndcd only as a means of bringing I new proccdurc with
the conatructivc help and prcscncc of the reprcscntnrivc 01’
the Secrctary-Gcncral ond the advice of the constituGone1
cnpcrts. and said nothing about the basis of the talks, which
rcmaincd the same. The talks arc resuming now on thcsamc
basis.

74. Let us rrc now what has been the policy of Turkey on
Cyprus in relation to purtition. Mr. Kcmul Satir. Turhish
Vicc=Premisr. in (I public statement ma& in IYrd. said.
“Cyprus will bc divided into two sections. one of~hicb uill
join Turkey.” Mr. Erkin. in June 1964. in illt itltr’r\i\.;\
granted at Athens to the nrwspupcr Ht~hcriti. Gl.
“th
’
radical solution of the quc!tion of Cyprus w~tultl h to r~dc

71. Furthcrmorc. if Mr. Olcay had the impression that the
basis had changed when the Seerctury-General in his report
of I Deccmbcr 1972[SJ/UR4.~.sixmnnthsnt~rr
therk%umption ol’ the talks. said that rhc talks were resumed on the
basis of an indcpcndcnr. sovereign and unirnry Slntc. where
is the rcmonstmncc of Mr. Olcny on th:lt stalcmcnt? Did hc
7

one part of Cyprux to Greece and the other, closest to the
Turkish Adriatic Coast, to Turkey.” That ix behind the
mind of thosedestroying the indcpcndcnccandnot agreeing
to anything about it.

scprzttion bctwccn the twocommuniti~~
rind, upart from
other objections, fcdcrution of cmtmunitics
which does
not invdvc ulso fcdrrittion of tcrritorics scorn\ to mc a
kry dillicult constituticmial li)rm~?

75 t.ct us now UCwhat the late Ismet InOn& the Turkish
Prime Minister, xaid on 8 September 1964kiorc the Tur=
kbh National Axscmbly: “Oficially, wepromoted the f&ration concept rather than that of partition thesisxo as to
remain within the provisions of the treaty,” This was to
cover it up with somethingmoreacceptableto world public
opinion. rather than to say *‘partition’*. Hc had to explain.
to apologize to the Asxcmbly that hc aaid“fcdcmtion” and
that hc did not xay “outright partition”.

Yet Ambasntdor
Olcuy spcuks about u fcdcratinn
moving d’ p~f1lliltiNl~.

but no

gl.
I am circuhatinp certain maps to mcmbcrsofthcCuuntit so as to m;lblc them to understand thr rituation
in
Cyprus and to bc conviucrd that the popukttion
is inter=

mingled. I hope ull mcmbcr* have the mups.becauseit is
very important
und vital liar thr coming tnlkr. Now. if
mcmbcrs will lo& II~thl#c mrp. they will wc’c thut thcrc is
no part ofCyprus whrrc thcrc is P Turkish mujority. Thcnix

76. 1 quote thcrc statementsao as to show what is the
pattern of Turkey’s policy towards Cyprus and what ix
behind it. It ISno longer behind it, it ix now open.

districtsinto which Qprus busrlwuysbccudividr~. and the
six main towns all hitvs u <ircck majority und P Turkish
minority, varying betweencrncsixth and one fourth or one
fifth or, in mrc c~scs. one third. llow can you partition this
country’! I low cun you wp;rrutc this trrritory so that you cart

77. The periodical H&k S& the mouthpiece of Mr.
Kttflk, who wax the Turkish Cypriot leader, acting, of
course,under the inspiration l nd iwtntctions of Turkey ax
usual, stated in its editorial of 9 August 1965:

have a federal system’!
82. WC lwv gonr all the way toward!,u~~:uommcwloting
the
Turkish side by giving them utl possibls rights. But federation is not workublc. The csiatirlg C’oncititution o!‘C)prus is
not I liderntion.
E\m Mr. I)ruktug himscll admits that the
Constitution
of C’yprus is of II unitury sovcrrign Stutc. tic
culls it “tt hi-rommunul
tmititr) hcncrri&ut Stntc”. Rut cvcn if
you call it “bi~omn~un;rl”-~~)u
cnn cnll it whutcvcr you
like-it
is unitar) unrl it is not II fcdcrcltion. If Mr. DcnktaQ
thought it was u f&ration.
hr would have said M). But hc
cannot, kcautc thcrc is not cmr’ charocIcristic of a fcdcra-

“Cyprus is another Akxandrctta in the history ofTutkey. The power of Turkey will cnxure an honourable life
for the Turkish Cypriots in the sameway as it did in
Akxandrctta by annexing it and bringing it under Turkish domination” [S&6.3(&
Mr. KUflk declaredon IO January 1964that partition wax
the best solution and even went so far u to propose the
thirty-fifih paralkl as an ideal line of demarcation.

tion. It has only one council: it dots not cvcn have local
govcrnmcnt. The udministrution i.. control und the Turkish
community only hits communuI rights: that is. separate
communul rights on rr.ligic*n, rduc;ltil)n;tl,
pcrs~~nel right;
not administratibr right.

78. When WCknow thesethings,is it at all astonishingthat
the Government of Cypnu took exception when the Prime
Minister of Turkey. who happensto be the leader of the
party founded by hispredcccsxorInC)nU.spcaks
about f&ration. That explainswhy there isthis pattern that 1spokeof
this morning of preventing conciliation and normalization
in Cyprus by force, preventing the Turkish Cypriots from
associatingwith tk Greek Cypriots. 1mentioned that and
AmbassadorOkay did not refute it.

83, Thcrcforc. thcrc is no ndministrati\c
right at alI.ttt any
level. tlow could it bc u tiJcratian’! It’ tb structure of
Cyprus today is not u fcdcration and we witnt to change it

into a fcderotion. it meansthat wc want toehunpc the whole
mtructurc,completelyapurt from its beingunworkable. And
the talks wcrc not for the purposeofchanging thcstructurc.
The Turkish Cypriot Iredcnbip was insistingthat “wc arc

79. They all have freedomof movement. The Turks walk
everywhere in Cyprus cxccpt in rcxtricted military areas
where no Greekscan go, The Greek Cypriots cannot cross

not going to chitugc tlv struuturc bccnusr on thut WCdcpcnd
for our community’s
right”. Now thcj witnt to uttack it and
blow it up. Ihr whole unititry SItltr. in ordsr to bring in

many public roads.rmong
whkn are communication
roads.
because they arc prohibited by Turkbh fqhten and we, for

our part, do not want to useforce. The United Nationstried
and istrying to keepthe situation calm.Wearcvcrygrateful
for that. In thii report you will we that theTurkish Cypriotx
are trying to break this sfufusquo in Limassot.

federation. which i unworhuhlc.
84.

80. WC now come to the question of federation. If we
cannot have I unitary State, cm we have a federation?
Ambassador
Okay ix tying to ntlc out the unitary State.
and federation is rukd out by the realities of the situation.
A$ 1 said this morning, Lord Radcliffe was sent by the
British Govermnent to examine this claim for federation.

85. WCdo not want to hrrvr suspicions.but WCwould like
to clcnr this mnttcr up in u wtly that will hrlp the talks to

llow can this policy bc nmstructi\T
or positive
towards C’yprus’! I urn so glad thut Ambursador Okay
brought it out in sucha way that WC’
csn sccclenrlythat they
arc spcnking of u f&ration
now.

progress. Now th;rt wc hu\r seen thut f&lcrution is imp&e
blc. it’ the Council wunta to http Cyprus und grt rid of this
problem tmd thr rxpcn\c. it h:ts to help in some way. I
ruhmit, towcuds tt ujluticbn OII the hiIsis oftt unitary State,

He saidthat he had given his bestconsiderationto the claim
put on behalf of the Turkish Cypriot community for n
federated system.and aAAcd:
*a. , . . But can Cyprus be organised as a federation in this
way? 1 do not think xo. There is no pattern of territorial

8

Administration of Vilhqc Accounts rind Pcndacomo. 7I:ia
can bc veritird at any moment.

which is the only basis on which the problem can bc rolvcd.
It cannot be solved athvrwisc. When they made the Zurich
und Ltmdon hprccmrnts. thrv puvc kornc nopative rights of
~trb tn the Turkish minor&,
but no fcdcratcd rights
~WIUW it did not rxist. Thcrri’ore. now, if wc arc going to
tukc uwuj those ncpntivc rights which have proved unworkuhlc, let us lind xomc uthrr wtty to ensure that thrru wilt be
no d;mgcr ot’ chunging the indcpcndcncu of Cyprus, thut
indcpcndencc for which l’urkcy shows so little rqect that it
wunt\ to give it an unwclrkublc constitution. But if WC want
it, thm thcrc ure many ways to cnsurc that the status 01
indcpcnrlcncc ix not chunpcd. Thcrcforc, thrrc arc muny
wuya 11tutcan bc tltoupht WI, without drttroying the htrttclure of thr St;~tr,

91. Now with regard to the displaced persons: the Jib=
phccd persons are not in their villages because they wvrc
forced out by the Turkish Cypriot leadership in order to
crcatc a pattern of reparation. They were rcgrcgatcd. They
wanted to go back, but wcrc not allowed to do ho. And the
Gwcrnmmt
agreed to build them houses and did build 350.
92. I hove hcrc the dctailw conccrnhtg the vilktg~- in which
they wrrr built: of 132 inhabitants in Morfu, not one hau
been ulluwrd to return by thcTurkish Cypriot leadership: in
Kyrmia. of 666 not one has rctumud. So WChave the list ofcr
number of vilktgcs where the houses were repaired by the
Go\crnmcnt but not one inhabitant has returned. In some
cases xcvcn out of 35 inhabitants returned; in another, one
out of I07 rcturncd; and so on. So that, if the rcfugccs arc
nut back, it is not the Govcrnmcnt’s fault that they arc not
allowed to rctum by the Turkish Cyprtot leadership. This
has km reported by the Secrctary=GcncraI in previous
reports.

Ita. M) ~llcngur mrntioncd comphtints about the public
scrvicvs. The) UK! not hd importunt, hul wc wunt to clarify
the m;lttrr. First ofull. with regard to the rlrctricity uuthor=
ity. it is indicated hcrc that in.1974 six new Turkish villages
wcrc’ given dcctricity,
Ilowcvrr
public scrviccs in ‘the
mclavcrs urc dillicult bcc;lusc of the obstructions put in the
wity of the <ircrk Qpriot
cmploycr?, in entering the
k!llchnr~.

93. I do not want to take up more time. but I would xay
that all thcsc complaints arc absolutely unfoundrd ottd thry
arc in fact the result of a policy of upnratirm, imposed on
the Turkish Cypriots by punishment und tints. I have tuice
gi\cn the list of punishment and fines imposed on Turkish
Cypriots if they have any relations with Greek Cypriots or
enter a Grvck shop. We have a recent document by thr
so-called Turkish Cypriot Administration
diving instruo
tionr that no Turkish Cypriot may enter a Greek shop and
that those who do are to bc marked. Now what has the
intention of this pattern of policy over the years been but to
create such a rift in Cyprus as to prcparc the way to thr
solution to which they :re looking?

H7. I huvc wn cm one occusinn, when tt trqrn went to u
‘I’urLish village in the cncht$rci-just
rccmtly-thot
they
wcrc not ullclwcd to go in und cttrry out the public scrvicc. I
bclic\c tt VW dcctticit).
Thr reports d’ the Slwrctary(icncritl spcuk of thcsc dillicultir~ in the enclaves.
nn, So when the Turks complain about thcsc scrviccs. they
must rcalixrr thut a lot of the ditliculties arc caused. as is
mdicutcd in the Secrctury-Gcncral’
report. by the barriers
in thr rmclavcs. But puritgruph 48 ofthc Sc~rctary-Gcncrcll’w
rcplrt hhon* the grrut assistant givrn in drought relief by
thr Ciovernmcm to thr Turkish Cypriots, and WC arc glad
that that wari done. We arc glad to do it bccausc theTurkish
Cypriots. the pcoplc themsclvcs, wish to live in pcacc and
amity. and they xhow the best fcc~ing. But it is the policy
that prcvcnts them from doing that. I did not indicate the
sums that wcrc given, but they arcfgJg.000 on this occasion,
fW.000 on unothcr. and so on-all assistoncc given by the
Go\t!rnmcnt to the Turkish Cypriot community.

94. Now, thcrcforc, bccauu of this policy it has been
customary for the Turkish rcprcscntativc in the Scctttity
Council to mention the question of cnosis in order to confuse the real issue of indepcndcncc and to find some justiflcation or cxcttsc for the rystcmatic obstruction of the
independent State of Cyprus and of any logical and workable solution for an independent State.

UP. In rcgurd to clcrrricity. WC lind that they already owe
~‘33 million. which they do not pay. The rtrangc~t thing is
that the inhabitants o! un urea ol Ajios Kasaiunos. whcrr
thcrc is the Turkish Cypriot yuurtrr. hud thcirctrctricity
cut
off. ‘I’hcy wrnt to the clcctricity uuthority and asked why
they hurl cut OR the light. It was found that the so=called
Turkish Cypriot aministration had cut the light off in that
whole ttrctt of Ayios Kassianos bccausc they wanted them to
pay to the Turkish Cypriot administmtion the cost of the
light which was provided by the Government. The Govcmmmt. which was paying for the rxpnsc of the elcvtric light.
uas not puid. 111~amount went into tttilliuns and millions,
but the Turkish Cypriots ittsi*tcd OII collcctinp from the
Turlri-h Cypriot\. And if they did nut pty, thr? cut off the

95. Turkcy’a fears of enosir arc not gcnuinc but rffectcd.
Thry know very wcll,as dots cvcryonc rlsc. that enosis ix not
runsidcrcd un achievable proposition and is not the aubjcct
of oficial policy either by Cyprus or by Grcccc. That is why
Cyprus has given itr whole heart to its indcpcndencc end ix
striving for a workable and solid indcpcndencc in a viable
$I;
and. for the same nason, convcrscly Turkey is oppos96. ‘Rat Cyprus has been predominantly Greek in chum0
tcr and culture through the millrnia in an unbroken continuity is an historic reality. Thr: preservation of Cyprus as a
xinglc. undivided and inagral unit is an historic responsibila
ity. The natural ethnic rntiments for Grcccc of the large
majority of the people of Cyprus were never conccalcd and
arc well known in the United Nations. But that ix no impediment to the prcscnt state of unitary indcpcndcttcc to which
Cyprus is dedicated and which it is working hard to retain.

llghl.

90. That is another amazing policy. and hcrc WC have
complaints by Mr. Olcay about the electricity. But hcrc is the
oficial document: Minutn
86s. liaison Committee.
9

1960 is baud on the concept of equality in law on the part of
the two communities and, conscqucntly, the fcdcralist
spirit-no
matter what the Greek Cypriot explainers of this
may describe it to be-and this is meant to bar the way IO
cnosis or division. The day after its signing-l should agitin
like to point out that when 1 speak of-the day after” I do not
mean precisely the next day but immcdiatcly atter its signing; it is not a sign of my decaying memory in this case-the
Greek Cypriots, finding that in fact it was an obstacle to the
realisation of the ultimate objective. denouncedit. Already
the Archbishop was suggestingto anyone who wished to
believe it that his hand had been forced. To do what? To
reject en&. Passingover in silencethe Turkish part of the
sacrifice which had been made in order to achieve a
compromise-the renunciation not only of its rights, both
historical and juridical, on the island but also its partition
thesis,the thesisof the Turkish Government and rhc Turkish Cypriots-the Greek party this time is playing on thu
thcmc of independence,which, in all good faith and wholchcancdly, not only the Turkish community but also the
Government of Turkey agreeswith, the Government which
I have the honour to represent here.

Its position in the United Nations has been constructive and
so har been its policy as an indepcndcnr Start: all these years.
97, Therefore. I hop that we will not wttstc our time on
these excuses and proceed towards cm independent, sovcrcign and unitary Cyprus which can have a workable conrtitution and vlrble cxistcncc. I also hop and feel sun that
Ambassador Olcay nalizcs that this is true. I have great
respect for him. I am certain that hc understands the sittuttion in his heart and mind,
98. I apologize for taking a little time, but since we are at
the end of a I&year period we have to review the situation
and clear up the matter.
99. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Turkey has
asked to be allowed to speak and I now call on him.
100, Mr. OKAY
(Turkey) (IntnprrrurlonJWtt
shall begin by quoting a great French poet:

fit&r):

I

%non.
cruel Ztnon
ZCnon d’ElCe
m’as-tu per& de cctte I&he ail&e
qui vlbrc, vole et qui ne vole pas?
Le son m’enfante et la I&he me tue
Ah! Ic soleil . . . Quclle ombre de tonue
Pour p&me, Achillc immobile i grand pas”.

104. Rut this indcpendcnccmust for theGrcckabcaccompartied by a new constitution, and I say a new constitution
advisedly, becausetheold constitution-to which Ambassador Rossida referred just now and which, he said, had
nothing whatsoever to do with the federal system-if my
memory doesnot betray me, provided for twochambers for
cuch of the two communities. the absolute right of veto on
the part of the VicePresident of the Republic, carefully
allotted quotas of memberswithin the Council of Ministers
and absolute control over foreign policy, which, I belicvc,
even applied to the appointment of diplomatic agents.

Having thus demonstrated that my memory has not yet
begun to show signsof decay. in so far as 1am able to I shall
attempt to reply to the argumentsput forward by my friend
Ambasssdor Rossida. I have very great respect for the
rigours of Aristotelian thought and its profound logic.
Nevertheless,I cannot refrain from recalling that it wasthe
Gmks thcmsclvcswho began all thr vagariesof thr Greek
sophists.I know that I can count on the tolera-tcc of Ambassador Rossidesand his senseof humour when I say that
there an sometimes nrma and fiat names rhut arc
predestined.

105. I shall now come back to my text where I wasraying
that for the Greeks this indcpcndenccwasto be occompanicd by a new constitution on the basisof a State which was
describedas unitary, (LState in which--and now I shall uw
the Greek terminology-“the majority would makelaw and
dictate it”. In the unitary system, then, nothing prevcntcd
this majority. if the casearose. from opting for union with
Greece, thus putting an end to the ephemeralindependence
of an island. an island which as the head of State himself
avowed. and I can cite hundreds of examplesof this, has
never considered this indcpendcna as anything but u
second-bcsrsolution, a compromise. And I am quoting the
words used by Archbishop Makarios-a rtagc.

101, It isdillicult for mc to understand how certain quarters which arc so ready to suspectthe existenceof ulterior
motives when the Turks talk of a federal systemdesignedto
perpetuate the existence of a sovereign State of Cyprus
within the United Nations arc not profoundly shocked,
when the very existence of this State is challenged by the
clear-cut and proclaimed desireofa whole community in the
sameState to put an end to it, despite the no lessobvious
wi&o~~hcr
community not to fall under the yoke of a
t

106. Turkcv, however, Is bound by its contractual obligations becauseit honours, has always honoured and will
continue to honour the princtplc of pacru smt snvondo. So I
would ask Ambassador Rossides:Does your Government
~~~;Il;ound
by treaties solemnly signedby Archbishop

102. Gne of the many diflicultics confronting us when we
have to make a Judgcmcnt on the Cyprus problem is the
incrcdibk facility with which the Greek side modifies its
positions or renouncesthem-all except one-and I hope
this doesnot offend AmbassadorRossides-thcattachment
to enosh, to which I shall come back and which 1 shall
expIaIn.
I

107. As I have done on many previous occasions,I invite
AmbnssadorRossidcsto tell me how heexplainsthe fact that
in the courseof the intercommunal telks which were held in
Cyprus for the establishment of a new constitution
the, Greek side, acting, I suppose. on the authority of the ruprcmc head of State, refused to conccdr the
inclusion in the new constitution of a text ollicially, dztinitivcly and clearly rejecting partition or cnosis.I should be

103. The dilemma of Turkbh diplomacy is that whilst

trying to explain these changes it has to demonstrate to
world public opinion that in substancenothing changes.1
shall try to be brief. The Constitution solemnly adopted in

c*

._

.

.

10

..

very plcascd il’ thcrc could bc a denial forthcoming on this
subject as thcrc has been on othrr occasions when, unfartunatcly. the denials failed to corrcspond to the truth.

always tukcn every opportunity to object to the USCof’thc
words “unitary State” which the Sccrctariut IIO doubt used
them with thr best intentions in the world.

108. I shall Explain what I mean. Ambassador Rossidcs
said that often I was silent, that I did not raise objections to
the rcfcrcncc ta the concept of a unitary State when the
Sccrctariat rcfcrrcd to it in its reports or when hc himself
refcrrcd to it hcrc. llcrc rgain the question of failing
memory arises ttcutcly. Since the Secretariat is rcprcscntcd
hcrc. and with your permission, and through you, Mr.
Prcsidsnt, I would address it in order to ask if it rcmcmbcrs
that on scvcral occasions I raised very serious objections to
the l&t that the question of the concept of a unitary State
was mcntioncd in a report, cvcn when rcfcrcncc was made to
it in a ntatcmcnt attributed to a Sccrctury-Gcncrnl whois no
Iongcr in the Organisation. Even then I rclt that probably
one day Ambassador Rossidcs would come here and say
that the basis for negotiations had been and would IX the
unitary State. And since from ‘the very beginning I had
miacd objections, I bclicvcd that reference should not bi:
mndc to it in a text. I always attcmptcd to stress this fact in
my contacts with the Sccrctariat. I perhaps was not always
rucccssful in persuading the Sccrctariat not to mention the
text in this way, in the knowledge of how controversial it
might bc. Perhaps I did not succeed in making the Secretariat understand that one day Ambassador Rossidcs would
come hcrc and say that this concept was the basis from the
very beginning. Well. what beginning? The beginning of
nqotiutions bctwccn the panics in Cyprus.

112. I now wish to turn to another quotation from a text I
have bctbrc mc in English written by Mr. Criton G. Tornarie
tis, who I believe is the Attorney Gcncral of the Republic of
Cyprus, giving his interpretation of the 1960 Constitution.
I Ic said:

109. I can statcall that here in public, knowing that at Icast
the Sccrrtariat is very well aware the’t everything I am now
saying is in fact the truth. I shall go even further. however: I
had the honour of being the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
my country and as such I personally di.scusscd-as I said this
morning-with
U Thant the question of a resumption of
negotiations which began in I%8 end had been suspcndcd,
having met with total failure.
I IO. That is one of the reasons why the resumption of
thcsc negotiations was so long drawn out: it was precisely
bccausc I myself insisted on the need to omit any prccondition to the resumption of thcsc negotiations. And by
“prc-condition”
I meant at the time-as I mean now-the
unitary State or the basis of the unitary State. At no timcand I am sorry for Ambassador Rossidcs-have
I failed
right hcrc to indicate that WC, you and I, should not try to
solve the problem. But cvcry time, I did say that all the
possibilities of a solution should be open to those in the
discussions in Cyprus and that among thcsc possibilities the
f&ml possibility was not excluded. I said that.and it can be
proved from the texts. Unfortunately, I do not have ull the
texts of the statements I made on the live occasions when I
had the honour of having been invited to speak in the
Council.
Ill.
Conscqucntly-I
am trying to find the right word
hcrc-I absolutely reject the idea that I cvcr acccptcd tacitly
or overtly the possibility that the basis for a unitary Stutc
was the basis accepted by the Turkish Govcrnmcnt or ths
Turkish negotiators in Cyprus. I am sure that alter the
oratorical outbunts of Ambassador Rossida on this subject
the Sc~rctariat will End it casicr to undsrstond why I have

“The Constitution of Cyprus was based on two main
principles. The one consisted in the recognition of the
cxistcncc of two communities-the
Greek and the
Turkish. . . who were given equal treatment, whilst the
pcoplc of Cyprus us a whole and the other racial cornmunitics of whom it consisted have been conspicuously
ignored. The other principle was aiming at the participttlion of each community in the exercise of the Iimctions of
government snd at avoiding the supremacy of the larger
community . . . assuring also an equal and partial administrative autonomy to each community”.J
It is not a Turk who wrote that text. It dots give a certain
insight into the conception that was underlying the 1960
Constitution.
113. I do not want to expatiate any further on the I%0
Constitution. I should like to state what the Turkish Cypriots would like to KC with respect to the l96OConstitution. It
should bc a Constitution which makes Cyprus an indcpcndent Suttc, whcsc independence would bc guaranteed
forcvcr, thut is to say. that no matter what may bc the
dreams or aspirations for cnosis-never
disguised by the
highest kaders at all levels of the Greek Cypriot hiemrchythat Constitution should make it possible for Cyprus to live
and remain in independence, an indcpendtnce which should
bc so gcnuinc that there would be no shadow of’a doubt that
the Cypriot Government was not a Greek Cypriot Govcrnmcnt in the scnsc that in certain circumstanm
it would
prefer to rcccivr its instructions from somewhere other than
its own capital. That is our idea of a Cypriot constitution
which would be appropriate rnd would reflect the aspirations of the two communities,
114. I wish to stress the point that without the Turkish
community there would be no Cypriot indcpcndcnce. It is
only the Turkish presence which made Cyprus an indcpendent State. If there had been no Turkish clement, there
would bc no rcprcsentativc of Cyprus sitting here. because,
obviously. if cvcryonc on the island had wanted what only
one community wants today, the island would have ceased
to bc indcpndcnt long ago. It would be a Greek province,u
the head al’ State sometimes inadvertently has indicated,
bccausc of the stress of the moment, in receiving Greek
rcprcscntntivcs
from the motherland, by saying, “I am
happy to greet you in southern Greece”.
I IS. I think I urn rcpcating myself, and that is why I shall
confine myself to stating how the Turk&h Govcmment
conccivcs the formula on the basis of which, I hope, ncgotia=
lions will bc rcsumcd on 4 June next.
-i--~'-~-

Ilb. At Ihr bcpinning of my xturemcm this morning. I
st.~trd the .fcclinp of my Jclcgcltion that a grcut dcul 01’time
h;r\ hcyn Ittst o\r’r semantic argumcntr--and
I am rorr) to
USA+Ihi!, t’ormulu upuin. one which dots not r&cm to plsusc
\cr! much ml good friend Ambassador Roxsidcx-bccuuw
of ctlirrt* to ;ntroducc unucccpluhlc lcrminology into the
lircrururc of Ihc intcrcommunal talks. Unfonunarcly, WC
huvc witnessedonccagain.and more than 0ncv.a rcncwul of
Ihcsc clli~~s. Borh my Greek collsupuc and Ambassador
Ro4dl% huvc pivcn rhcir own intcrprclution of the formula
yuo~d in paragruph 63 of thu rcpon for the rc?rumptionof
llrrr laths. Both claim that in lhcir view the tutkr ahout la
rb3urn\: in Cyprus hii\* its \hcir basisP unitary Stulc. So as
not to give occasionin 10ycarx‘ time to Ambussador Rossidr%to tell my successorthat by remaining xifent on the
rubjccl I have tacitly ugrcrvl to it. I should like the rccurd to
show my (iovcrnment’x intzrprcturion of the formula
aprrcd upon ftir the resumption of the talks.
I 17. In rhc \ icw of my Govsrnmcnr. that formulu dots noI
include ctny rcfcrcncc to a unitary Stuw, and my Ciovcrn=
mcnr cannot ncccpt any other basisthan the two mcmoranda of rhc SrcrcraryGcncrol dared rt%pcctivcly Ill
Wobcr 1971and 18 May t972-no mole. no hz~. Again I
shall quote from the aarcmcnt I made this morning, in
#hich I Nlid thur I wished
... . . in st;ltc most unequivocally that rhc Turkish side
sharesthr Sccrcrury-Gcncral’n hop ?hur the punit!%will
rctum lo a consideration of the substanceof the prub
lrms that fact them, und reck to reach agrccmcnl on
cons0tutionol arrangcmcnts Ihat will be xarisfactory to
41 canccrncd’. And it is in this spirit that theTurkish side
will continue the talks when they arc rcxumcd on 4 June
1974.” 1I7tlst

metring, pura. SS.]

I IX. 1thank you, Mr. Prcxidunt. and I apolqim: for huving rukrn w much time of the Council, but I nccdcd to tukc
irlmo\t as much time as my dear friend Ambassador Rasstdr%has taken.
I IY.

‘I‘hc PRESIDENT

I call on rhc rcprcscnrutivc of

<‘!plllP.

120. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I wax very glad to hearmy
diktinguishcd friend Ambassador Olcuy rccitc a French
pocrn. Unfonunarrly. at the rime. my earphone was not
working, and I could not relish Ihc poem. I asked around,
and no one could Ml mc about it. I should like to hear it.
ProbuMy hc can tell mc later on, when wc meet aursidc. C
muy unwcr him wirh another poem. That ix a good idea. I
think-to have a conversation in poetry. It ismore plcaxanr,
and it ismore philosophic. I am surethcrc wasxomc philow
phy in it which, owing to mechanicalmalfuncrion. I did not
c’;IIL’)I.The rcprcscntotivc of Aulstralia was kind enough ta
trj and help mc with this earphone, but il wax still nor
ucarking. I do run know if thcrchanycausc for rcp1y. I hope
tht the poem cnntaincd no shifting of ground.

127. Mr. OKAY (Turkev): Wcn AmbassadorRtnsidr%
asks,“But Chut wnsthchds if it wnsnol a unitarv St:lrc?“. I
have 10remind him that the idcn wusprcciscly &I thcrcwns
no prc-nrrungcd busis.ihrrc was no prc-arrungrul brmul:l.
and the negotiators had to bc frru 10dcvisc P cr>n\tittninn
which was, in the words of Ambassador R(msidl\ himself. u
workahlc constitution. the hahiSof which cndd onlv h* nn
cxistinp constitution thut had to hc mc~ilitx!.ul.And I
rcmcmbcr that many package ckuh wwv urr;tn!sql. m;Irt\
solutions wcrr put forwurd. much pivr-an&t.rkc trr*k plittrg
in rhc many ymrs during which nc~t,~iRtions~~ntlnllcu!.IW
thcrc WI* ncvcr u tcrt which wid thut lhr bnst\ cd’ rhr
ncgoriutions wus llic un~lory Slutc.

121. &tllril*\,ldor 01~~ ill%>wid that an various WCsWIFEIx h;ld during private tulks with thcSccrctary4cncral
chjcctrd to the uw 01 Ihe word* “unitary Stale”. Tho\c

l2H. Ambuxsudor Ro4dcs hiIs nt;my cdcmtngc*ovl*r mc;
nnc of them is that a1this v~:ry moment hc hasa text in his
hand. But I urn sure that more alrcful study nt whclt I llmr

I2

in a central government but they have comptcte internal
governments. separate, independent from the ccntrc. This
requires separate territorial areas. Nothing of the kind exists
in Cyprus. Every part, every village, comes under theadministration of Ihe centre, and Ihe communal rights wcrc only
rcslrictcd rights, not rights of administration. They wcrc
rbstricted rights, as I have xaid, of education. religion and
personal rights. So the existing Constitution is rhat of’ a
purely unitary State in every senseoflhc word. Ambassador
Way, admhting now rhar that was the basis on which the
negotiations were conducted, for purposes of modilication,
admits the unitary State, as u basis oTthe talks, as recorded
in rhc report of rhr Sccrctary=General.
132. Now. there is nothing wrong with a federal systcmpcr
SC.There are various kinds of federrrl systems. In the United
States it is not based on any ethnic criteria. But what is
wunted in Cyprus is the reverse of a federation. in a sense. In
a federation you lake separate entities und then you join
them in II federation by a link. In Switzcrtand there were
four or five diffrrent cnritics living in din’ercnt States or
cantons and they joined in one federal Government. 1iowever. in Cyprus you take one unitary State-as the map has
rhown. with such an intermingled population-and
try
adminisrratively
lo divide it, and you cannot divide it. Evcnlually you causca movement ofrhe population in order 10 lit
in with that idea of an administration of a fedcrat system
which is unworkable. Therefore, you take a crystal ginss,
you break it in two and then you join it with a rap. 1fyou
have two big crystal jars, you can perhaps join them
together. but you cannot join one crystal #lass with itself
unless you break it. So the purpose of a federal system in
Cyprus is 16 break the unity of Cyprus, destroy it. with the
concept of federation--this
supposed concept of federating
it.
IJJ. Sullicient unto Ihe dayis Ihe evil thereoband perhaps
the members of the Council now will be nble lo go tobedand
dream of federation.
134. The PRESIDENT:
tive of Turkey.

I give the floor to thr represenu-

135. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): Mr. President. Ihow who
have been longer than you in the Council knov that thee
are two possibilitiesfor ending the discussionshere al’ the
problem of Cyprus. The last speakeris either Ambassador
Rossidesor myself, and it is usuatly AmbassadorRossides.
Out of the five limes I have appearedhere. 1think that four
times the last speakerwasAmbassadorRossidrs Therefore
1 would like to try to changethe pattern today becausehe
has indicated rhat we can now go home and dream about
federation. Before ping home to dream about fcdereiion. I
urn going to my just a f’cw words: Ihe basisfor which WC
ahouid like to seeCyprus strive in the future would be one in
which the Iwo communities will have cquai rights in the
l’utureof the State and rhat would give (0 lhr Iwo cnmmunitic? the ussur;Lnce
thar their rtulus will nor bechanpc;rhlcby
u majority decision+he basic status beloqinp to the two
communities.

IJb. I must ulso say that in this island. u herr I know the
population lives in such e mixed situation. the IWI (hn~t=
tutian. which isconsidered.atranpi) enough. tl m&i lor a
I3

uniter> Slittc. ullowcd, in addition to what I havesaid about
dirtinct c~~n~n~unuichnmbcru, Ihc right of veto und no on,
IH~ wpmtu
municipiiGtzz as wril in iivcofthe major citim.

thcrc arc nonr of these prrrcquluitn of federation. There is
no comparable situation when the concept of federation is
linked with that of partition.

137. Alho I should like to rccuil thur I have said that thcrc
arc us man) possibilities and variations on the thcmc of
fcdcruli~m us lhcrc arc Stutcs thut adopt this form, and
amonp those I hnvs mcntioncd. as just one of the examples,
thctc i\ Belgium, whcrc the wmc imormingling of population cxius, where the main dill&ncc is one oflan~uageand
whrrc horh sides, wherever they live and in whatever group
thq live, huvc in their personal rights. in their status tmd in
thclr inlluencc over the national life a separate. distinct
voice. nor only UY c&ens bur also as members of a certain
ct~mmunity. Therefore, there arc endless varia!ions, I am
not u jurist. I hitvcalwaysadmitrcd
that I donot knowull the
intriatcics of either administrative law or any other law.
llowcvcr, thr main thing is that I donot want thediscussion
10 t;tkc plucr hcrc hut l want the record to show once more
and for posterity--I
am ncvcr sure wirh Ambassador
R\n~idr%--that here lrnd now I hove said that the basis&he
ncpcrriuticns which arc &our to start is not the unitary Stutr.
Whur iI will tinnily br. what name it will finally havcnnd the
term it will t’inuily tukc dcpcnd on rho ncpotintors on the
rpor.

141. Anyway, wince WCarc npcaking for posterity. wc shall
wuy, “All’s well that ends w&“-and
I hope that this Security Council me&g will end well,

I.%+. ‘l’hc PRESIDENT:
rive of Cypruk.

142. The PRESIDENT:
Turkey.

1 call on the rcprcscntalivc

143. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): Ambassador Rossides has
declared that whcrc thcrc is II country which may threaten
with partirion, federation creates u danger. My answer is
that whcrc there is a country which threatens to end its own
indcpendcncc there is, for those within that country who do
not want to follow whcrcvcr indepcndcnce will end. a right
not to cease to bc independent and free citizcns.Thcnfore,
it
is a two-way street. Ambasliador Rossides quoted Shake+
pnrc. **Ail’s wcil that ends well.” I hope that the end is not
here in the Security Council, that it will be decided in Cyprus
for the benefit of both communities and of Cyprus es a
whole. and. as a side benefit. for the bcttcrmcnt of rciations
bctwcen Grcccc and Turkey.
144. The PRESIDENT:
Cyprus.

I give the floor to the rcprcscnta-

I call on the rcprcsenlativc

IJO. Mv friend mcntioncd Belgium. Brlgium is a country
whcrc Ji&cnt
ethnic cntitim, the Walloons and the Fleming*. hn\~ occupied diffcrcm tcrritorics. so that they could
Iend thcmsclvcs well to II fcdcration. Yet they have not P
fcdcrationist constitution. But if they wanted to have it. they
could bccausc they have the prerequisites for it. In Cyprus

146. The PRESIDENT: I ussume that theconsideration of
the item bcforc this meeting has been concluded. I should
like to thank cvzrytrnc for the co-operation thar has been
extended.

I4
,.I f W,.f

\ ,,*..n.

\,u

tad

of

143. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I simply want to say that
perhaps in the map that WC distributed it was not stated that
the population of Cyprus is 82 per cent Greek and I8 per
bznt Turkish. This is perhaps something that should bc
borne in mind.

139. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I shall bc briefer than my
collrupuc. If. as hcsarap. WCspeak for posterity. we have to be
careful shout what WC say. and we have to finish up with
words for pmtcrity.

I ,,L

of

.__
Ixl.wll

._..

._

_-._

-._.-

..-. --

-.-m-

Wr?MI-July

IPllf-2.M
