S/PV.8083

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8083

rd meeting
Thursday, 2 November 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Amendola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Seck
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-35985 (E)
*1735985*

S/PV.8083

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of sympathy in connection with the
terrorist attack in New York City
The President: On behalf of the members of the
Security Council, I should like to condemn, in the
strongest terms, the cowardly and unconscionable
terrorist attack on 31 October in New York City — home
to United Nations Headquarters — that targeted
innocent civilians. The members of the Security
Council express their deepest condolences to the
families of those killed, and offer their sympathy to
the people and Governments of the United States of
America, Argentina and Belgium. I ask members to
stand for a moment of silence for the victims.
The members of the Council observed a minute of
silence.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: As this is the first public meeting of
the Security Council for the month of November, I should
like to take this opportunity, on behalf of the Security
Council, to pay tribute to His Excellency Ambassador
François Delattre, Permanent Representative of France,
for his service as President of the Council for the month
of October. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Security Council in expressing deep appreciation
to Ambassador Delattre and his delegation for the
great diplomatic skill with which they conducted the
Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Filippo Grandi, United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Grandi.
Mr. Grandi: A few weeks ago, I was in Bangladesh,
at the border with Myanmar, witnessing the most
rapid refugee exodus since the massive population
2/24

02/11/2017

movements of the mid-1990s. It was a stark illustration
of what happens when the root causes of conflict and
violence are not addressed and when the relationship
between a State and some of its people breaks down.
The result is a human tragedy on a dramatic scale.
Around the world, countries that border crisis
zones are struggling to absorb the social, economic
and political shocks of large-scale refugee movements,
while the broader consequences of unresolved conflicts
reverberate across and beyond regions. Protecting
refugees is a binding obligation, reflecting core
principles and shared values, but it is also a contribution
to regional and global stability. That is why I am
grateful to the Council and the Italian presidency for
the opportunity to address the Council today.
My predecessor’s last comprehensive briefing to the
Security Council as High Commissioner for Refugees
was in January 2009 (S/PV.6062). In that briefing, he
shared his concern that we might be entering a period
of deepening and interlocking crises. Almost nine years
on, that bleak prospect has become a stark reality. The
number of people who are forcibly displaced worldwide
is now approaching 66 million, up from 42 million in
2009. That includes 17.2 million refugees under the
responsibility of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), representing a
70 per cent increase since then.
A succession of major new crises has caused
massive displacement across virtually all regions. The
cataclysmic conflict in Syria has driven 11 million
people from their homes. Syria and Iraq today account
for a quarter of all those forcibly displaced globally.
New crises have developed in Libya, Mali, Ukraine,
Yemen and the Lake Chad basin. Many have unfolded
in ungoverned spaces, driven by varying combinations
of poverty and underdevelopment, environmental
degradation, inequality and persecution. In northern
Central America, gang violence has become a main
cause of displacement. Situations that appeared to have
stabilized, including some that had seen voluntary
repatriation movements, as in Burundi, South Sudan
and the Central African Republic, have been affected
by fresh crises, triggering new refugee outflows.
At the same time, protracted crises have remained
entrenched. Refugees fled Afghanistan almost 40 years
ago, but more than 2 million remain in Iran and Pakistan.
The terrorist attack in Mogadishu last month was a
grim illustration of the instability affecting Somalia.
17-35985

02/11/2017

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

Some Somali refugees are returning and need support,
but 800,000 still live in sprawling settlements or cities
across the region. Young Afghans and Somalis are
moving further afield as part of mixed migratory flows.
The sharp rise in forced displacement reflects
weaknesses in international cooperation and declining
capacity to prevent, contain and resolve conflicts.
Competing interests are being pursued through proxy
wars instead of being resolved through diplomacy
and dialogue. Neglected local crises gather pace and
become transnational, with broader implications. The
focus is on short-term interests rather than on longterm collective stability.
Have we become unable to broker peace? I ask this
question here in the Security Council — whose raisons
d’être are peace and security — because I see the direct
impact of these failures every day on the lives of tens
of millions of people who have been forced to abandon
their homes, with grim prospects of being able to return,
sometimes for generations. When I meet refugees, their
first question is not about food or shelter, but about
peace and security — because it is security, and peace,
that will convince them to return home.
And weaknesses in international solidarity are
also eroding protection for those who flee. Many
refugee-hosting States, particularly those neighbouring
conflict zones, keep their borders open and generously
host thousands — sometimes millions — of refugees.
But certain States — often those least impacted by
refugee flows, and often wealthy ones — have closed
their borders, restricting access to asylum and deterring
entry.
Last year’s Summit for Refugees and Migrants,
and its concluding New York Declaration, called for
comprehensive responses to refugee flows, extending
beyond humanitarian action and leading up to a global
compact for refugees. Since then, important steps have
been taken in pursuit of this vision by Member States,
development institutions such as the World Bank,
civil society and the private sector. We are making
significant progress, but a full response to today’s
massive displacement can be achieved only through
action to restore security, resolve conflict and build
peace. I wish to draw the Council’s attention to five
areas where I see particular scope for the Council’s
engagement.
The first area is prevention. Prevention is possible.
Decisive action last January helped resolve a political

S/PV. 8083

crisis in Gambia and allowed refugees to return home
quickly. We need more such concerted efforts. Early
action is critical to addressing the causes of conflict
and to avoiding deepening displacement crises.
Displacement, on the other hand, is a symptom of a new
or worsening crisis.
A current example is the Central African Republic.
Ongoing conflict along religious grounds has once
again driven over 1 million people from their homes,
with internal displacement up 50 per cent since
January. I fully support the Secretary-General’s call for
fresh efforts to build peace through dialogue, and his
reminder to the international community to support the
courage and resilience of the Central African people.
The situation in Burundi also demands renewed
attention. There are 420,000 refugees from Burundi
in the region. The Government of Tanzania has been
publicly encouraging returns, and UNHCR is working
closely with both Governments to ensure that these are
voluntary, safe and dignified. But without concerted
action to build stability inside Burundi, further
conflict, as well as internal displacement and refugee
outflows, may occur. Responding to refugee crises in
Africa, generally speaking, continues to be frustrating,
as they are often generated by conflicts suffering from
a deficit of political attention, and they are made more
difficult by a serious deficit of resources.
A second area relates to the critical role of
peacekeepers. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
as in other countries, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in that country has played an
important role in enhancing security and enabling
displaced people to progressively rebuild their lives.
However, fresh and ongoing conflict is driving further
displacement. Over 100,000 Congolese refugees have
fled in the past year alone, and internal displacement has
swelled to over 4 million people — 50 per cent higher
than just two years ago. As displacement escalates, we
count on the Mission to once again play an important
role — for example, in increasing access and enhancing
security in Kasaï, as humanitarian efforts are scaled up.
And, as in other operations, such as in South
Sudan, Darfur Mali, and the Central African Republic,
peacekeepers contribute to the safety of humanitarian
staff and help enhance our access, including through
security escorts, health facilities and evacuations.
We must preserve the neutral, impartial character of
humanitarian action, but these examples show that it

17-359853/24

S/PV.8083

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

is often necessary and indeed possible to work with
peacekeeping missions in a manner that draws on our
diverse strengths for the protection of civilians we are
all mandated to serve. That is a key perspective for
the Council to consider in its discussions over mission
mandates.
A third and growing area is addressing complex
migratory movements in fragile, unstable situations.
These frequently take place where institutions are weak
or absent and violent extremism and criminal networks
have taken hold. Along the Central Mediterranean
route to Europe in particular — stretching from
sub-Saharan Africa through Libya to Italy — refugees
and migrants continue to face grave exploitation and
abuse. Together with the International Organization
for Migration, we are working on a comprehensive set
of protection and solution interventions in countries
of origin, transit and asylum, addressing the drivers
of these movements, strengthening the capacity of
countries to address refugee and migratory flows,
and expanding resettlement and other legal pathways.
Lack of security, especially in Libya, complicates these
efforts, but working in coordination with the United
Nations Support Mission there, we are expanding our
presence and making progress.
In parallel, strong, collective action is needed to
tackle the horrific abuses perpetrated by traffickers
and to identify and prosecute them. I commend the
important initiatives already undertaken by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the European
Union Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation,
the European Union Naval Force in the Eastern
Mediterranean and others. I wish to ask the Council to
also consider the use of sanctions against known senior
figures and companies engaged in trafficking.
Fourthly, sustainable peace is critical to securing
solutions to displacement. Very few displacement
situations in the past decade have been brought to
a definitive conclusion. One was in Côte d’Ivoire.
Early, resolute political intervention by regional
actors brought to a grave political crisis a close. That
enabled more than a quarter of a million refugees
and large numbers of internally displaced persons to
return home. But that is an exception, sadly. Only half
a million refugees worldwide returned home last year.
The peace process in Colombia offers hope, but has not
yet translated into significant solutions for refugees and
the internally displaced.
4/24

02/11/2017

In Myanmar, security and the establishment
of respect for human rights and the rule of law in
Rakhine state are essential prerequisites for the return
of refugees. Progress on citizenship for the stateless
Rohingya is absolutely crucial, as will be community
reconciliation and investment in inclusive development,
benefiting all communities. The recommendations
of the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State are a
recognized blueprint in those respects.
It is critical that the United Nations, the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations and the international
community at large work constructively to assist both
countries. UNHCR stands ready to provide support and
expertise, including through the joint working group
discussed in bilateral talks between Bangladesh and
Myanmar. We believe that our role is critical to ensuring
that international standards are met and returns are
sustainable. I seek the Council’s support in conveying
that message to the concerned States.
In South Sudan, the promise brought by
independence has been tragically squandered.
One-third of the population is displaced and abandoned
by its political leaders. Two million South Sudanese
refugees are now in the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Kenya,
the Sudan and Uganda. More than half a million
arrived this year alone. The pressure on host countries
is immense.
The situation of the 2 million internally displaced
people in South Sudan is also dire. More than 200,000
live in overcrowded, poorly serviced protection-ofcivilian sites. Together with the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan, we are trying to identify alternative
solutions so that the displaced can start to carve out
a more stable existence. The support of the Security
Council for that effort will be important, but what is
crucial is to break the political stalemate.
The announcement by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development of a high-level revitalization
forum is welcome. I urge the Council to press further
for time-bound, meaningful actions that can bring
about a joint ceasefire upheld by all parties and the full
and inclusive implementation of the 2015 Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan. I fear that failure to do so will mean that
humanitarian efforts will soon reach their limit and
more people will die.
17-35985

02/11/2017

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

Finally and linked to my last point, protection
must be sustained while solutions are pursued,
including through support to host countries. Here,
I turn to Iraq and Syria, where we are moving into a
new and complicated phase. In Iraq, despite military
progress, grave protection challenges, including new
displacement, forced evictions and revenge attacks,
must be overcome to prevent further displacement and
allow for return. Investments in security have prevailed
so far, and with reason. Peacebuilding, recovery and
stabilization are now critical to bringing communities
together and guaranteeing a conflict-free future for a
diverse nation.
In Syria, civilians continue to bear the brunt of
major military confrontations at key strategic locations.
Meanwhile, fragile ceasefires and shifts in territorial
control have restored relative calm to some parts of
the country. Although there has been substantial new
displacement, many internally displaced people and
much smaller numbers of refugees have returned home
this year, often to places devastated by the conflict.
Signs of resilience are starting to emerge, and it is
important that those be nurtured, especially if progress
on de-escalation is achieved in parallel at the Astana
talks. Meanwhile, significant obstacles to sustainable
return persist, including ongoing military operations,
insecurity and other protection risks; a lack of legal
status and documentation; housing, land and property
challenges; destroyed shelter and infrastructure; and a
lack of services and livelihoods.
International protection and support for Syrian
refugees in neighbouring countries must be sustained
during this uncertain period. Yet, funding for refugee
and resilience programmes has dropped, with only
49 per cent of the funds needed received so far in 2017.
As a result, the situation of Syrian refugees deteriorates
and pressures for onward movement continue to grow.
My appeal is that, as the members of the Council focus
on the different tracks, hopefully leading to peace in
Syria, they do not lose sight of the need to support
refugees and countries hosting them. We must resist
the pressure for premature returns, as that would be a
destabilizing factor in that fragile context. On the other
hand, voluntary and supported returns — when the time
comes — will be a key contribution to sustainable peace.
I wish to share my appreciation to the Security
Council for the visits it has undertaken to meet
refugees, internally displaced people and other crisis-

S/PV. 8083

affected communities. As I am sure those present will
agree, listening to their voices is a profoundly moving
experience, and also a powerful reminder of the
responsibility that we all share to ensure that they are
protected and their plight is resolved.
As I address the Council, millions of severely
traumatized children, their lives blighted by atrocities
witnessed and deprived of education, are facing an
uncertain future. Women are struggling to care for their
children on their own, in makeshift shelters with little
privacy, with their partners dead or missing. Elderly
people see their lives drawing to a close in a country
that is not their own. Thousands of people are stranded
at borders, frustrated and confused by arbitrary and
dehumanizing treatment and new barriers to entry, and
suffer deep scars from the persecution they fled and the
mistreatment they suffered in their flight to safety.
International cooperation has the power to bring
about real change to their lives. I am fully committed to
ensuring that the UNHCR plays its role, and I know the
same is true of UNICEF, the World Food Programme,
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and other trusted humanitarian partners. But giving
hope to millions of uprooted people and avoiding a
repeat of the recent massive outflows will ultimately
rest on political solutions. We and they, the uprooted
people, are counting on the leadership of the Council to
help deliver those solutions.
The President: I thank Mr. Grandi for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I start by vehemently
condemning the terrrorist attack in New York and
expressing solidarity with the United States.
As this is the first meeting of the month, I would
like to congratulate Italy on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and to pledge the
fullest support of my delegation. I also wish to express
our appreciation to France for its very successful
presidency last month, and in particular for the very
timely initiative to try to shine a light on the security
and other related challenges facing the member States
of the Group of Five for the Sahel.
We thank the Italian presidency for organizing
this important briefing on the issue of refugees, which
has become one of the most pressing challenges of our
time. We are very pleased to see the United Nations

17-359855/24

S/PV.8083

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

02/11/2017

High Commissioner for Refugees, Filippo Grandi,
and we appreciate his briefing on the challenges and
the way forward regarding international protection
for refugees and other forcibly displaced persons. We
appreciate the work he has done since assuming the
heavy responsibility of leading that critical agency,
all the more so today when the challenge has become
so enormous.

is also in line with the commitment that we made at
the United Nations Global Compact Leaders Summit in
2016. However, we continue to face serious challenges
in funding programmes that support refugees — for
instance, Ethiopia’s refugee response plan for the year
2017 has a funding gap of 75 per cent, which will impact
the integrity of humanitarian assistance and has so far
resulted in food cuts of 19 per cent.

Reports of the unprecedented levels of global
forced displacement, which have surpassed the
number of persons forcibly displaced as a result of the
Second World War, are indeed very alarming. Even
more worrying is that there is no encouraging trend,
neither with respect to the conditions causing such
displacement nor the response at the global level to
address the challenge.

While commending the generosity of countries
that offer resettlement for refugees, which remains
indispensable in terms of sharing the burden with
countries that host large numbers of refugees, the
number of resettlement opportunities remains
minimal. As such, with the difficulty in financing
refugee response plans in such countries, and with
limited resettlement opportunity at the global level,
the voluntary repatriation and reintegration of refugees
continues to be the preferred solution in the majority of
refugee situations.

The number of forcibly displaced persons in
Africa continues to increase, primarily due to conflict,
persecution and a lack of durable solutions. The Security
Council missions to the Lake Chad basin and the Sahel
region certainly helped to enhance our understanding
of the enormity of the challenge. In our subregion, with
nearly 1 million refugees and 1.5 million internally
displaced persons, Somalia has remained one of the
most protracted displacement situations in the world.
However, with the ongoing conflict in neighbouring
South Sudan, Ethiopia, as well as other neighbouring
countries, is receiving large numbers of South Sudanese
refugees. The recent surge in the number of refugees and
internally displaced persons has created unprecedented
challenges, and the burden on countries hosting
large numbers of refugees is constantly increasing,
something that is often overlooked. The great deficit
in burden-sharing must be recognized — I am more
or less repeating here what the High Commissioner
already stressed. I also agree with what he said about
the need for a speedy resolution of the political problem
in South Sudan.
The matter of burden-sharing and enhanced
cooperation in the search for international protection
and a durable solution — that is, local integration,
resettlement
and
voluntary
repatriation
and
reintegration for refugees — is more urgent than ever
before. Countries hosting large numbers of refugees,
such as mine, continue to open up their borders to
refugees and to provide international protection
through the provision of employment opportunities,
out-of-camp policies and self-reliance schemes. That
6/24

We believe it is important to create favourable
conditions for the sustainable, voluntary return of
refugees to their countries of origin and to ensure
the safety and security of returnees. In that regard,
tackling the root causes of some of the protracted
refugee situations, and thereby facilitating conditions
for voluntary repatriation and return, as well as the
reintegration of refugees, is absolutely imperative. That
serves to underscore the need to find durable political
solutions to conflicts so as to ensure that people are
not compelled to flee their countries of origin in the
first place in order to find safety as a result of conflict,
terrorism and violent extremism.
Furthermore, countries emerging from conflicts
certainly need sustained international support; for
instance, reports from the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees during this session of the
General Assembly indicate that approximately 34,000
Somali refugees have returned to Somalia in 2016,
while the fragility, instability and insecurity of the
country continue to affect its reabsorption capacity and
to hamper further voluntary returns.
In our view, the voluntary return of Somali refugees
will be sustainable only with the continued support of
the international community in maintaining peace and
security in the country, particularly with sustained
support to the Federal Government of Somalia and in
fighting Al-Shabaab. That will be critical in creating
17-35985

02/11/2017

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

S/PV. 8083

conditions that are conducive to further repatriation
and reintegration of Somali refugees in Somalia.

Her husband went missing as they fled. “I don’t
know if he is dead or alive”, she said.

At the end of the day, there is no better approach
than prevention, as well as sustaining peace and
addressing root causes to ensure that meaningful
progress is made to tackle the vexing challenge of
refugees, and the displacement of people in general.
The High Commissioner is right in highlighting that
aspect of the challenge we face and in his emphasis on
prevention. Of course, no meaningful progress can be
made when the issue is politicized, as often happens.
Our region has not been entirely free from that, which
only complicates matters. Part of the remedy is for the
Council to maintain unity in the initiative it takes to
address displacement issues.

Together with her children, she eventually
reached safety, and I pay tribute to Bangladesh for
the humanitarian assistance provided to her and to so
many others.

I would like to conclude by affirming Ethiopia’s
commitment to working with all the relevant parties
in addressing some of the root causes of forced
displacement in our subregion, as well as to continue
providing international protection to refugees in
Ethiopia and maintaining an open-door policy
towards refugees.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): At the outset, Sir, I
wish you all the best in your month of the presidency. I
also want to thank United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees Grandi for his compelling, but concerning,
remarks this morning.
We meet today at a crucial time for global
displacement, as the number of people forcibly
displaced is at an all-time high since the Second World
War and, sadly, the trajectory is only upwards. Today
I want to share the story of just one of the 65 million
people currently displaced around the world. It is the
story of a mother from Rakhine state faced with the
hardest decision of her life: to flee into the unknown
or face the violence engulfing the province that she
calls home. She told a journalist last month:
“We were happy, but now we are in this chaos; they
are killing people and burning houses, and people
are unable to stay”.
Faced with such brutality, she had no choice but to
flee with her husband and children, risking the journey
to Cox’s Bazar. She said:
“When we got in the boat, we were scared, as water
were getting in. I was scared that it would sink.
People were crying.”

But that family’s story has been repeated and
repeated and repeated over the past months. Only
two days ago, a boat carrying refugees to Bangladesh
capsized, claiming the lives of at least four people. It a
story that will only keep being told until the conflict
pushing them away is fundamentally addressed and
they are allowed to return home.
As Filippo rightly said, whether in Burma, in Syria
or anywhere else in the world, the Council has a unique
role to play in maintaining the peace and security that
would have stopped that family and so many others like
them from having to flee their home. We have a special
responsibility also to hold to account those who do not
respect international humanitarian law or refugee law
and those who fuel displacement.
Simply put, the stark number of people in need today
tells us that what we doing is not working. Refugees are
spending longer and longer displaced, often in poverty,
with a dwindling hope of return. A new global approach
is now needed to tackle protracted crises, and a more
comprehensive response is required to help the growing
number of people currently displaced.
That is why the United Kingdom strongly supports
the aims of the comprehensive refugee response
framework. It focuses on long-term, sustainable
solutions. These help build the self-reliance of refugees
and ease pressure on countries such as Kenya, Uganda
or Lebanon, which have generously welcomed and
hosted so many. The framework means delivering
jobs, education and better services to refugees and
host communities, while also better coordinating the
international response.
The United Kingdom actively supports this
approach where the new refugee response framework
is being rolled out. We are also already delivering
the sort of long-term response to refugees’ needs that
the framework recommends, including through job
compacts to provide tens of thousands of refugees with
the opportunity to work in countries such as Jordan or
Ethiopia, as well as innovative education programmes
and support for host communities and refugees alike.

17-359857/24

S/PV.8083

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

To make these approaches work, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) has a vital role to play in dialogue with
Governments, partnerships with other actors, and
giving advice and support where needed. In Jordan, we
welcome the cash assistance that it is giving to refugees
to meet basic food needs. In Turkey, we support the
assistance that it is providing to refugees to prepare for
the oncoming winter, and in the response to the crisis in
Burma, it also has a role to play in the returns process,
in cooperation with the Bangladeshi authorities.
But to deliver all this and more, it is clear that
UNHCR, like all the other parts of the United Nations,
will have to reform, and I welcome High Commissioner
Grandi’s commitment to this. UNHCR has a central
role working with other agencies in reforming the
humanitarian system. It is important that UNHCR
continue to work better and more collaboratively with
partners on the ground, including with development
actors. We want to see improved transparency,
increased accountability to beneficiaries, more
multi-year programming and a continued scale-up in
the use of cash.
In the face of an unprecedented need, it is clear
that we cannot just do business as usual. We need a
new approach, and we look forward to working with
colleagues from the Security Council, UNHCR and
elsewhere to achieve that new approach.
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni (Sweden): Let me just start
by saying how saddened we are at the horrific attack
in New York. We convey our condolences to everyone
affected, and our thoughts are with them.
Let me also thank France for its presidency last
month and welcome Italy as well as wish it good luck
for this month.
Let me begin by thanking the High Commissioner
for being here and briefing us today. Our work and that
of the High Commissioner and his Office are intimately
linked. For when we fail to prevent or resolve conflict,
it is the High Commissioner and the staff of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) that stand with neighbouring countries and
humanitarian partners to provide refuge and relief to
those forced to flee their homes. At the same time,
how the international community responds to forced
displacement across borders has clear consequences for
international peace and security.
8/24

02/11/2017

There are now more people than ever in need
of UNHCR’s assistance. We commend the High
Commissioner and his staff for their continued
leadership and for providing a voice to refugees, who
arrive with nothing except heartbreak, fear and their
futures stolen and erased by conflict and displacement.
High Commissioner Grandi began his presentation
at the border between Myanmar and Bangladesh.
Like him, we are deeply concerned by the situation
in Myanmar and Bangladesh. We know he needs our
support to respond to the needs of those on both sides
of the border. We welcome the important financial
contributions to the response made at the Myanmar
conference in Geneva some weeks ago, and we
encourage all Member States to ensure that he and his
partners have the resources they need to do their job.
If the Rohingya refugees are to return home, a
political solution to the crisis is essential. Sweden fully
supports the way forward laid out by the SecretaryGeneral. We must address the immediate crisis by
ending the violence and ensuring humanitarian access,
while at the same time taking steps to achieve a lasting
resolution to the conflict in Rakhine state. This includes
the issue of citizenship for the Rohingya. Only then
will refugees be able to return home voluntarily and to
dignified conditions, where they can begin to rebuild
their lives with confidence in the future.
The United Nations should be invited to assist in
this process. UNHCR has a key role to play in providing
support, expertise and experience in upholding
international standards, and ensuring sustainable
conditions for return.
Sweden was one of the original 26 countries
that negotiated the 1951 Convention. Since then, our
commitment to the plight of refugees has not waned.
Today UNHCR continues to have our full political
support. The growing numbers of forcibly displaced
people mean that there is also a need for enhanced
and sustained financial support for UNHCR and other
humanitarian organizations. Support is not needed only
in those places that are currently grabbing the headlines,
but also, as the High Commissioner reminded us today,
in protracted situations that risk being forgotten, such
as the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We encourage all Council members to maintain
and increase their financial support to UNHCR, in
particular through flexible, unearmaked financing that
allows UNHCR to respond quickly in crisis situations.
17-35985

02/11/2017

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

The High Commissioner has illustrated the
clear links between conflict and refugee flows. As
I mentioned at the beginning of my statement, the
inability to prevent and resolve conflicts often results
in large-scale refugee flows that have enormous human
and political costs. These flows often in turn contribute
to instability and conflict, resulting in a mutually
reinforcing cycle of conflict and displacement.
The protracted refugee crisis in Syria is a clear
illustration of the need for early warning and early
action to prevent conflicts and subsequent forced
displacement. We commend UNHCR’s efforts in
addressing the needs of the millions of displaced
persons resulting from the Syria crisis.
We agree with the Secretary-General and the High
Commissioner that we must redouble our efforts to
prevent conflict from emerging, to manage and end
conflicts when they do, and to prevent a slide back into
conflict when peace is achieved. That is the mission of
the United Nations, and all parts of the Organization
must work together to that end. The Council must live
up to its responsibility by using all the tools at our
disposal to end conflict and sustain peace. By doing so,
we can enable people to return home.
International humanitarian law and human rights
law are essential for the protection of the lives, health
and dignity or persons caught up in conflict. They must
be respected at all times. In addition, humanitarian
organizations must be given full and unimpeded
humanitarian access to refugees in need of assistance
and protection. Half of the world’s refugees are
children. Refugee children, particularly unaccompanied
minors, are particularly vulnerable and should receive
protection, health care, education, psychosocial support
and the hope needed to rebuild their futures.
Humanitarian relief can be only one part of
the response to forced displacement. Millions of
people around the world are trapped in protracted
refugee situations and living in limbo. Providing
dignity, particularly for refugees trapped in these
circumstances, requires both short-term approaches
and long-term, durable solutions. We continue to see
generosity and solidarity towards refugees across
the world. It is essential that we recognize the role of
those countries and communities that are hosting large
number of refugees and provide them with support.
Working together, the international community and
host-country Governments can provide for refugees’

S/PV. 8083

self-reliance, livelihood opportunities and hostcommunity development. This will also help to
maximize the positive contribution that refugees
make to their host communities. We also welcome the
important partnership of UNHCR with the World Bank
in this regard.
By working closely together, the United Nations
system can ensure that refugees are not left behind in
development processes. We strongly support UNHCR’s
coordination roll, building on the Comprehensive
Refugee Response Framework, in reaching agreement
on the global compact on refugees, to be adopted next
year. The new global compact will provide an important
framework for comprehensive responses to large-scale
and protracted displacement.
Let me conclude by thanking High Commissioner
Grandi once again for his briefing. In light of the clear
interlinkages between our work and his, we would
encourage the High Commissioner to come back to the
Council more often and to alert us when he believes
early action or support from the Council is needed. We
would also welcome the opportunity to receive another
update and to have another broad exchange with him in
the course of 2018.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Let me
first congratulate you personally, Sir, and wish Italy
every success in its presidency of the Security Council.
I also thank you for your high praise of the French
presidency and assure you of France’s full support.
I also thank the High Commissioner for Refugees,
Mr. Filippo Grandi, for his important briefing and pay
tribute more broadly to him and his teams for their
outstanding work and exemplary commitment. In the
words of the President of the Republic, Mr. Emmanuel
Macron, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees is for France “the guardian
of our lodestar”. It is a compass that must guide our
action, and France will always be at its side so as to
guarantee refugees the protection they need and that it
is our moral, legal and political duty to provide.
The insecurity and massive violations of human
rights that fuel conflicts, as well as the impunity
that accompanies them, are the primary causes of
displacement, which in turn destabilizes States. It is
therefore up to the Security Council to remedy this
situation in the context of its mandate as guardian of
international peace and security. I also recall that the
forced transfer of populations is likely to constitute a

17-359859/24

S/PV.8083

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

crime against humanity as defined by the Rome Statute.
The Security Council has the responsibility to prevent
such crimes.
As the High Commissioner said, there have never
been more refugees in the world than in 2017 — more
than 66 million people in total, more than 10 million of
whom are stateless. I should like to address a number
of situations he addressed that are of particular concern
to us.
First, I would like to express our deep concern
about the humanitarian situation of the refugees, mostly
Rohingya, who have fled and continue to flee Burma.
France has tirelessly condemned the attacks perpetrated
since 25 August against the civilian population in
Rakhine state. The ethnic cleansing has already forced
more than 600,000 people — the majority of whom are
women and children — to cross the border in the hope
of surviving, without counting the internally displaced,
whose numbers we do not know.
We have three specific priorities for resolving
this crisis. They have been relayed and stressed to the
Burmese authorities, notably at the Security Council’s
Arria Formula meeting that France organized with the
United Kingdom, with the participation of Mr. Kofi
Annan, during its presidency last month. The High
Commissioner spoke at that meeting. In the short term,
the military operations of the Burmese army must stop,
and safe and unimpeded access to humanitarian aid
must be restored in order to allow the safe, voluntary
and sustainable return of Rohingya refugees to their
country. The key to a solution lies in compliance with
those three requirements.
I wish to reaffirm France’s support for Bangladesh,
which has opened its borders and welcomed hundreds
of thousands of Rohingya refugees. The international
community must continue to support Bangladesh in
its efforts. At the donors’ conference in Geneva on
23 October, France contributed almost €3 million.
I would also like to stress the need for the dialogue
between Burma and Bangladesh on the return of
refugees to include UNHCR. That is a critical point
on which I must insist, in support of the statement just
made in that regard by Mr. Grandi.
Finally, the safe, voluntary and sustainable return
of Rohingya refugees will ultimately depend on the
effective consideration of the root causes of the crisis,
and particularly the question of citizenship and equal
rights for all persons belonging to the Rohingya
10/24

02/11/2017

community. France will remain fully engaged,
together with the United Kingdom and its partners, in
developing a strong and united Council response. It is
time to translate our words into action, and we must do
so urgently in response to the ethnic cleansing taking
place before our very eyes.
In Africa, the situation in the Central African
Republic is particularly worrisome, with the number
of Central African refugees in neighbouring countries
similar to the level we experienced at the height of
the crisis in 2013. This situation is the consequence
of the deterioration of the security situation that has
been observed for several months in the east and northwest of the country, owing to the growing number of
clashes between armed groups, whose sole purpose is
to monopolize territories and resources and discredit
the Central African authorities and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).
This spiral must be interrupted and a positive
dynamic revived, as the Secretary-General said during
his recent visit to the Central African Republic. In that
context, the forthcoming renewal of the MINUSCA
mandate should allow us to increase the Mission’s
human resources and refocus its action on the priorities
of protecting civilians, supporting the political process
and humanitarian access.
Finally, I would like to return to the humanitarian
situation in Syria, which remains extremely worrying.
More than 11 million Syrians have been uprooted by
the conflict, while some 6.3 million are internally
displaced and suffer limited access to humanitarian
assistance. The plight of internally displaced persons in
eastern Ghouta, Idlib governorate and around the berm
is particularly tragic. In addition, 5 million refugees
have taken refuge in Syria’s neighbouring countries.
On behalf of France, I again thank Lebanon, Jordan and
Turkey for hosting a large majority of those refugees.
Hosting refugees is not only a moral duty, but also
an obligation under our international commitments.
In meeting these challenges, we have an imperative
to provide legal and safe channels for those in need
of protection, in particular by strengthening the fight
against traffickers and smugglers. It is in that spirit
that last month France established the first protection
missions for the resettlement of refugees in Europe in
the framework of the Central Mediterranean action
plan adopted in August with our partners.
17-35985

02/11/2017

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

Hosting refugees is also important in terms of
solidarity with countries neighbouring conflict zones,
which are on the front lines of these large-scale
displacements ­— whether they are the neighbouring
States of Syria, the countries of the Lake Chad basin
or the Horn of Africa, or more recently, Bangladesh.
In order to support their efforts, France has decided
to increase its financial aid to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the International Organization for Migration by
€10 million in support of such States in the Middle East
and Africa. This solidarity also requires the sharing
of responsibilities. That is why France has made the
commitment to resettle 10,000 refugees from Turkey,
Lebanon, Jordan, the Niger and Chad by 2019.
As rightly pointed out by High Commissioner
Grandi, only a comprehensive approach will deliver an
effective and lasting response to the challenges posed
by the increase in forced displacement. The Security
Council has a particular responsibility to contribute
to identifying and implementing this new approach.
Mr. Grandi may rest assured of France’s steadfast
commitment to that end at his side.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): We would
like to thank Mr. Grandi, United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, for his briefing. It is good
to have him here with us this morning. The United
States remains steadfast in our support for the High
Commissioner’s mandate and for the work of his Office,
which is more critical now than ever.
With new and protracted crises leaving over
65 million people forcibly displaced worldwide — over
22 million of whom are considered refugees — the
stakes of this global challenge could not be higher or
more evident. The Council has a vital role to play in
curtailing the underlying political dysfunction and
conflict that give rise to and prolong mass displacement
and humanitarian need.
When we act on our mandate and follow through
consistently, we can be successful. It is therefore
imperative that we do more to act on our mandate and
work to prevent and mitigate conflicts, especially by
following through on the decisions we make in this
Chamber. As we do so, it is important to have briefings
like today’s from the High Commissioner in order to
remind us of the critical nature, real-world impact
and human dimension of crises occurring worldwide.
As described to us today by the High Commissioner,

S/PV. 8083

several situations globally highlight the importance of
more robust action to solve these problems.
In Burma, more than 603,000 Rohingya have fled
into neighbouring Bangladesh only since late August
to escape escalating insecurity and alleged human
rights abuses by security forces. An unknown but
likely significant number of Rohingya are internally
displaced within Burma after their villages were burned
or they were forced out of their homes. While reported
violence has lessened, continued insecurity and fear of
further violence threaten to drive more Rohingya into
neighboring countries.
The Government of Bangladesh has stepped up
impressively, taking in the displaced and providing
for their safe temporary care, but undeniably this is a
burden on Bangladesh’s resources and, of course, many
Rohingya simply want to be able to return safely to
their rightful homes in Burma. We welcome Burmese
State Counselor Aung San Suu Kyi’s commitment that
refugees will be able to return home. We encourage
the Governments of Burma and Bangladesh to work
closely with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) throughout this
process and to allow it and other relief organizations
full access to displaced populations across the country.
In South Sudan, we can see the human cost
of a Government’s failure to uphold its most basic
obligations to its citizens. More than 2 million South
Sudanese have fled to Uganda, the Sudan, Ethiopia,
Kenya and other countries. Refugees have found safety
and protection in those neighbouring countries, but the
resources of host communities and Governments are
limited. Inside South Sudan, another 1.9 million people
are displaced, facing ongoing food insecurity and threat
of famine.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, nearly
4 million people are now internally displaced. Many
internally displaced persons (IDPs) in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo live in protracted displacement
due to continuing conflict, limited access to livelihoods
and basic services, and the absence of political will on
the part of the Government to address conflict and
underdevelopment, thereby deterring the investments
needed to pave the way for durable solutions. The
devastating impact of renewed and intensifying
conflicts in the Kasaï region there have led to the
displacement of nearly 1.3 million people over the past

17-3598511/24

S/PV.8083

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

year, both within the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and into neighbouring countries.
As the civil war in Syria continues, an estimated
13.5 million people remain in dire need inside
Syria alone, including 6.3 million IDPs and another
5.3 million refugees. These numbers are simply
staggering, amounting to half of Syria’s population
before the civil war began. In Syria, the Al-Assad
regime has used chemical weapons against civilian
populations and bombed entire cities into ruins, in
explicit and irrefutable contravention of international
law. Adding to this, the Syrian regime’s obscene
refusal to allow humanitarian organizations to access
vulnerable populations, its continued practice of
redirecting humanitarian assistance for political
purposes, and its military tactics further compound
suffering. Those who make it out alive have fled,
largely to neighbouring countries like Turkey, Jordan
and Lebanon, which are playing an indispensable role
in providing safety and support to these refugees in the
midst of the unimaginable and indescribable conditions
caused by both the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS) and the Al-Assad regime.
The spread of violent extremism over the past
decade has also created a new wave of suffering and
displacement, characterized by unthinkable violence
and inhumanity. Boko Haram, for example, has
continued to drive the humanitarian crisis in Nigeria
and the Lake Chad basin to devastating proportions,
while recent gains against Boko Haram and ISIS in West
Africa have led to nearly 1.3 million persons returning
to areas of origin; nearly 2 million still remain internally
displaced or are refugees in neighbouring countries.
Ultimately, in each of these situations and in
others around the world, a sustainable resolution to
the underlying political conflict and development
are essential to ending the global refugee crisis. The
Council must therefore take action towards these ends.
We also have a duty to press Member States to step
up and ensure that UNHCR is fully resourced for
delivering on the growing demands it faces. Given
the magnitude of this global crisis, the UNHCR 2018
budget and the wider global humanitarian appeals have
once again climbed above last year’s figure to historic
highs, reflecting the extraordinary humanitarian needs
of forcibly displaced people all over the world. The
United States provided over $8 billion in humanitarian
aid in the fiscal year 2017 — representing a historic
high — including nearly $1.5 billion to UNHCR.
12/24

02/11/2017

We must all follow through on our commitments to
increase contributions to humanitarian appeals and
promote durable solutions for the displaced. We all too
often throw around numbers — 20 million, 4 million,
600,000 — to describe people in a way that is easier
to handle. We talk about numbers instead of actually
talking about real people.
However, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
last week, Ambassador Haley met with women in
camps who described living in absolute fear — fear that
if they left the camp, they would be raped, and fear that
if their children left the camp, they would be abducted.
No person should have to live like that. No individual
should have to experience what those individuals
experience each and every day.
But in the photos from Ambassador Haley’s trip
of those same camps, there are children smiling and
waving, showing the innocent hope and joy that they
still have while living in a world where horrible things
are happening all around them. The sad reality is that
without action by their Government and the engagement
of the international community, they will likely end up
like their parents, with their fathers pulled off to war
and their mothers living in constant fear.
However, we can change that. If those children can
have hope in such a dire situation, so should we. We must
translate that hope into concrete action to change their
lives for the better. We owe it to them and to children
all over the world to take our mandate as a Council
seriously and to hold those Governments accountable
when they fail to protect their people. Only then can
we do our part to create a future where they can live,
live out their dreams and fulfil their potential. We want
those children to know that we hear their voices, we are
here for them and we will act for them.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We join others in wishing the Italian presidency
every success, and we also extend our gratitude to the
French delegation.
We welcome the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and thank him for his briefing.
Assistance to refugees and stateless persons is today
a key component of the comprehensive efforts aimed
at maintaining international stability. We commend
the efforts of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to boost the
effectiveness of the international protection regime. We
17-35985

02/11/2017

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

note the leading role of UNHCR in drafting a global
compact on refugees and introducing a corresponding
set of measures. We believe that if the efforts of the
international community are combined, those measures
will significantly improve the situation of refugees.
The current situation of refugees is largely a
consequence of interference in the internal affairs of
States, primarily in the Middle East and North Africa.
We believe that those who have taken an active part
in such interference bear the primary responsibility for
delivering assistance to the victims of those policies,
namely, refugees and forced migrants. What will
most help to alleviate the suffering of refugees is the
establishment of lasting peace in Syria, Libya and
other conflict-ridden countries. It is also important
to consistently fight terrorism. Assistance to host
countries and countries of origin is key, including to
create the conditions necessary for the voluntary return
of refugees and ensuring their reintegration into society.
Our hope is that the experience and professionalism
of UNHCR will allow us to achieve swift progress in
addressing the situation of refugees from Myanmar,
who, thanks to the consistent and steadfast efforts of
Bangladesh, have been greeted with a warm reception.
The urgent challenge still remains to prevent
refugees from being subject to political manipulation
by forces inciting ethnic and religious enmity. It is also
important to pursue efforts to prevent terrorists from
infiltrating among refugees, and avoid the use of refugee
camps for the recruitment and training of militants.
Our country strives to facilitate international
efforts to assist refugees. We are a donor to UNHCR,
and we host and provide arrangements on our territory
for a significant number of refugees and forced
migrants from various countries. We also provide
substantial amounts of bilateral and multilateral
humanitarian assistance. We trust that UNHCR will
actively facilitate that process by taking measures to
create suitable conditions for the return of refugees to
their homes in Syria.
Russian territory is currently hosting more than
1 million Ukrainians fleeing conflict zones, to whom
we are providing a decent life. We are in constant
contact with UNHCR on that issue. On a regular basis,
we send part of our voluntary donation to finance
UNHCR operations in Ukraine, and we provide
significant amounts of humanitarian assistance to
victims in south-eastern Ukraine. We thank the Office

S/PV. 8083

for its efforts to draw the attention of the international
community to this issue, and we call for ongoing,
objective coverage of the humanitarian consequences
of the Ukrainian crisis to facilitate the reintegration of
returning refugees and internally displaced persons to
south-eastern Ukraine.
In conclusion, I reaffirm our high praise for
the activities of UNHCR, which frequently acts as a
lifeline for millions of people who are forced to flee
their homes.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
condemns the terrorist attack that took place in New
York and expresses its condolences to the victims.
We appreciate the efforts of the French presidency
and congratulates Italy on its assumption of
the presidency.
China thanks Italy for convening today’s meeting
and welcomes the Under-Secretary of State for Foreign
Affairs of Italy, Mr. Vincenzo Amendola, who has
come to New York to preside over this meeting. We
also thank the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Mr. Filippo Grandi, for his briefing.
The situation of refugees around the world
continues to deteriorate. Armed conflicts and natural
disasters have resulted in an increase in the number
of internally displaced persons. Refugee issues are
complex and have many underlying causes, and have
become protracted and hybrid in nature. Factors such as
terrorism, turbulent regional situations and mixed flows
of refugees and migrants have added to the difficulty of
providing refugees with protection.
Over the past year, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), under the
leadership of High Commissioner Grandi, has actively
pushed for internal reforms, intensifying its coordination
efforts and improving its emergency response capacity,
thereby making significant contributions to protecting
the welfare of refugees and responding to refugee
crises. China appreciates all those efforts and supports
the Office in maintaining its positive role in that regard.
Faced with the complex refugee situation and
related challenges, the international community should
continue to work within the framework of international
law, including the 1951 Convention relating to the Status
of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol, and on the basis of
mutual respect. Enhanced international cooperation
will create synergy in addressing the global refugee

17-3598513/24

S/PV.8083

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

problem. The issue requires tackling both the symptoms
and root causes by increasing support and assistance
to host countries and communities, and eliminating
discrimination against and prejudice towards refugees.
We must also focus on the root causes that give rise
to refugees by peacefully settling disputes through
dialogue, increasing development aid to countries in
need of assistance, creating the necessary conditions
for the return of refugees to their homes, and promoting
ongoing development in their countries of origin.
In handling matters related to refugees, the
international community should uphold the principles
of objectivity and neutrality, avoid interference in the
internal affairs of the countries in question and prevent
the politicization and abuses of international refugee
protection mechanisms.
China has long cooperated with UNHCR. In June,
High Commissioner Grandi made a successful visit
to China, where both sides achieved firm consensus
on deepening our ties of cooperation. Pursuant to
the outcomes reached at the Belt and Road Forum
for International Cooperation in May, China will
work with the relevant international organizations in
a joint push to implement a tranche of international
cooperation projects for countries along the Belt and
Road, including providing food, tents, prefab buildings
and other refugee relief items to those countries;
establishing refugee scholarships; and financing the
participation of refugee athletes in international and
regional competitions.
During the leaders’ round of the Forum, the
Ministry of Commerce of China also signed a
cooperation agreement with UNHCR, whereby it
pledged $8 million to the Office as an appropriation to
the United Nations Fund for South-South Cooperation.
China will earnestly honour and effectively implement
the aforementioned assistance initiatives. China is
ready to work with all parties in actively participating
in the intergovernmental negotiations on a global
compact on refugees, to be launched next year, so as to
contribute to the improvement in the global governance
of refugees.
The problem in Rakhine state of Myanmar involves
complex historical, ethnic and religious factors. Many
differences and contradictions have been brewing
for a long time. The Government of Myanmar is now
working actively to ease the tensions in Rakhine state,
and the situation there is now moving towards stability.
14/24

02/11/2017

Myanmar and Bangladesh are now seeking a settlement
of the problem of the Rakhine state through bilateral
negotiations and consultations. The United Nations and
the international community should remain patient and
provide constructive help and cooperation to Myanmar
by working together for an appropriate solution to
the problem.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Since this is our first public
meeting under the presidency of Italy, Mr. President, I
would like to congratulate your country on assuming
this post and wish you every success in steering the
Council’s work during this month.
I thank the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees for his comprehensive overview of the
situation with refugees globally and for outlining the
main challenges, operational and policy priorities of his
Office, with prevention featuring prominently among
them. We commend the endeavours of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) to tackle problems that refugees are facing in
different parts of the world. Its efforts are indispensable
in addressing and solving related humanitarian crises
that, unfortunately, are still a sad reality in the twentyfirst century.
Ukraine commends the activities of the United
Nations High Commissioner in this field, in particular
the adoption of its five strategic directions for
2017-2021, which will guide the Office’s engagement
with all people of concern. Given the scale of conflicts
on the global map and the constantly growing number
of affected persons, the process of reforming UNHCR
and its capabilities to respond to new challenges is very
welcome. The persistent work to involve international
development actors in the search for long-term solutions
to humanitarian crises is noteworthy. We commend and
encourage further progress on this track.
The historical commitments made by Member
States in September 2016, here in New York, through
the adoption of the New York Declaration for Refugees
and Migrants should lead to the successful elaboration
of the global compact for refugees so as to address
forced displacement situations more comprehensively
and provide all affected people with better protection.
Ukraine welcomes UNHCR’s significant efforts and
engagement to protect and assist internally displaced
persons throughout the world, who represent a major
percentage of persons of concern to UNHCR under
its mandate.
17-35985

02/11/2017

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

We welcome the High Commissioner’s visit
to Ukraine last year, which generated a positive
momentum in response to the situation of internally
displaced persons in my country. As a result of the
ongoing Russian aggression against Ukraine, there are
1.7 million internally displaced persons in my country.
All these persons were forced to leave their homes in
Crimea and certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions following the military occupation of these
territories by the Russian Federation, which, as we just
heard, presents itself as a humanitarian donor while in
fact it has been a donor of heavy weaponry, mercenaries
and regular troops in the Donbas.
Population displacement on this scale on the
European continent is not something to be overlooked,
brushed aside or glossed over, and those people deserve
to be mentioned, just as the High Commissioner rightly
did, along with refugees and internally displaced
persons in Syria, Yemen, South Sudan, Myanmar and
other countries. In that light, we thank UNHCR and
its international partners, including individual Member
States, for the valuable assistance provided in response
to the displacement crisis in Ukraine. For our part, we
will continue to actively support the activities of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, including those in my country.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): I thank the Italian
presidency for highlighting the plight of refugees and
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
Grandi for his comprehensive briefing.
In the aftermath of the Second World War, most
countries agreed to protect refugees under the 1951
Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees.
However, this vision of a better world has eroded with
the unfolding of a global unprecedented humanitarian
crisis. We therefore need collective solutions, visionary
leadership and global cooperation on a massive scale.
Primary among these are the ending of conflicts,
persecution, terrorism and violent extremism that
force people to flee; the implementation of peace
agreements; upholding ceasefires, and allowing
humanitarian access.
The Astana platform supporting the Geneva
process to mitigate the situation in Syria is a good
illustration. The protection of civilians should be the
key responsibility of Member States which in conflict
areas must be helped with capacity-building in the
rule of law, good governance, security sector reforms,

S/PV. 8083

promoting human rights and investing in development
to create political, economic and social stability.
It is therefore obvious that the protection of civilians
should be an integral element of all multidimensional
peacekeeping operations and political mission mandates.
In addition, protection experts must be strategically
positioned in all mission units and other mechanisms,
working closely with United Nations country teams
and the Governments of host countries, as well as with
police- and troop-contributing countries. Training must
be provided on the protection of refugees, women and
children. Care must be taken to see that refugees in
camps have adequate food and water and are not subject
to forced labour, sexual abuse and exploitation.
Understanding the root causes of displacement
is necessary to long-term development and to
strengthening the security-development nexus by
investing in poverty reduction, education, job creation
and basic services. Protection of civilians criteria
must also be part of relevant sanction committees, and
perpetrators must be brought to justice.
We call upon all Member States to carry out
all measures related to counter-terrorism, in full
compliance with international law. It is equally critical
to harmonize legislation and amend criminal codes
accordingly. Additionally, the fight against terrorism
must not lead to the killing of civilians or their expulsion,
causing them to flee to other countries. Hospitals,
ambulances, schools and critical energy, transport and
communications infrastructure need to be protected to
serve local populations. Intensive programmes should
be initiated to enable refugees and internally displaced
persons to return home.
Addressing the Security Council last month,
Secretary-General Guterres, quoting World Food
Programme statistics, indicated that “a 1 per cent
increase in food insecurity leads to a 2 per cent increase
in refugees” (S/PV.8069, p. 4). Conflict in one country
places demands on its neighbours to provide food and
basic services to refugees. That can lead to further
instability, which affects the security of an entire region
and beyond. Therefore, only a region and subregional
approach would make concerted action across borders
possible. The magnitude of the refugee crisis is so
alarming that the international community has to step
up to increase support for UNHCR and the International
Organization for Migration (IOM). A determined effort
would enable the setting up of a strong refugee system

17-3598515/24

S/PV.8083

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

that offers asylum for legitimate claims and provides
basic survival kits and supplements, even to families
who host refugees. Nearly 84 per cent of refugees today
are hosted by middle- and low-income countries. They
need to be supported.
Likewise, we should open up safe routes for
refugees and initiative resettlement programmes.
Similarly, saving lives should be our key goal, so that no
one dies crossing a border or fleeing in a boat. Together
with investing in search and rescue operations and
helping those in distress, all countries are expected to
invesitgate and prosecute trafficking gangs that exploit
refugees and migrants.
We also need to fight xenophobia, racism and,
inter-ethnic tensions that lead to hostilities and
senseless expulsions of people. Kazakhstan has
lessons to share based on its experience of holding
three annual conferences of traditional and religious
leaders of all religions, and establishing an assembly
of Kazakh people that includes all ethnic and religious
denominations, particularly youth, in order to foster
unity and social harmony.
Kazakhstan, together with its neighbours, is
making every effort to develop and implement policies
that ensure basic human rights throughout Central Asia.
My country has a long record of excellent collaboration
with the relevant United Nations agencies, such as
UNHCR and IOM, as well as with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and others. To coordinate
regional and international efforts to deal with the
influx to, from and within Central Asia, Kazakhstan,
in cooperation with UNHCR and IOM, initiated in 2011
the regional consultative Almaty process in order to
create mechanisms to monitor irregular migration and
devise new, coherent, comprehensive and differentiated
policies. That regional initiative presently includes
seven member States and two observers from our part
of the world. It will expand in geographic scope with
the increasing flow of populations across the region.
Finally, Kazakhstan is strongly committed to
reaching concrete outcomes on the issue of refugees
with the United Nations and other Member States,
based on fundamental principles of human dignity,
justice and freedom.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, Bolivia
expresses its congratulations to the French delegation
16/24

02/11/2017

for the conduct and conclusion of a successful and
productive month in the presidency of the Security
Council. Similarly, we express our best wishes to the
Italian delegation in the month of November and we
appreciate its initiative to hold today’s briefing about
a very important topic that has not been discussed in
the Council since 2009. We hope that henceforth the
issue of refugees will be addressed more frequently,
since it is a topic intrinsically linked to international
peace and security. We also appreciate the briefing by
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Mr. Filippo Grandi.
According to data from the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and as
Mr. Grandi mentioned, at the end of 2016, as a result of
war, persecution, armed conflicts and violence, there
were close to 65 million people forcedly displaced
throughout the world, of more than 22 million are
refugees, 17 million of whom are under the mandate of
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
more than 5 million of whom were registered by the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. Former Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs Stephen O’Brien has
said that we are facing the biggest humanitarian crisis
in the world since the Second World War.
The scourge of war and armed conflics forces
thousands of people to leave their countries of origin
and their homes in the hope of finding more favourable
security conditions. They have to abandon everything
that they know — their families, friends, homes and
everything they have built with their work throughout
their lives. However, their martyrdom does not end
there. Once they leave their homes, the situation they
experience, if they survive, is precarious, since they
are often categorized as a problem or a burden and
questioned about their motivations. Sometimes they are
even placed in camps and forced to stay there.
Currently, as the High Commissioner mentioned,
one of the most complicated situations involves the
more than half a million Rohingya people who had to
leave to their homes and seek refuge in Bangladesh.
We commend and highlight the willingness shown by
the Government of Bangladesh, which has taken in
thousands of refugees. In that context, we also commend
all those countries that receive with open arms all the
people who are fleeing the scourge of war, violence and
armed conflict.
17-35985

02/11/2017

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

Likewise, many of the refugees are from Syria.
After years of war and conflict, many have lost hope
and do not believe they will return to their country.
Many of them choose the European continent to start
from scratch. They are forced to do so in precarious
conditions, moving with what they can carry in a state
of poverty. Many of them have difficulties in getting
a decent job, both because of their refugee status and
because of cultural or linguistic barriers, so that even
children have had to leave school to work and help
their families.
In order to put an end to this and other crises, it
is necessary to address the root causes of war, armed
conflicts, terrorism and the threat of violence, which
in many cases are the result of interventionist and
regime-change policies. They are changes that mostly
do not translate into peaceful or democratic transitions.
In that connection, the responsibility of all of the States
Members of the United Nations is first to recognize
the historical debt owed to those countries and people
who suffer because of actions often perpetrated
through conflicts initiated, encouraged and led by
certain military and economic Powers. That is why we
believe that, by closing their borders, building walls,
criminalizing migration and denying access to refugees,
some countries promote xenophobia, discrimination
and racism. Additionally, such policies serve to fuel
the rhetoric of terrorist groups, which we are all trying
to fight, including ,of course, intolerance of different
religious beliefs.
In that connection, during the World Peoples’
Conference, held in June under the theme “For a world
without walls, towards universal citizenship”, Bolivia
proposed that we work together on the concept of
universal citizenship, with the aim of decreasing, in
addition to human trafficking, the barriers that prevent
refugees from escaping war and armed conflicts.
We call on countries to reflect and to comply with
the joint obligation of solidarity to receive refugees and
offer them protection, as well as to help them look for
ways to improve their self-sufficiency, expand their
resettlement to third countries and create favourable
conditions for their voluntary return. Initiatives
such as the New York Declaration for Refugees and
Migrants, a document that expresses the political will
of world leaders to save lives, protect rights and share
that responsibility worldwide, establish the basis for
a global compact that has the potential to generate

S/PV. 8083

tangible change with respect to how we address
forced displacement.
We also emphasize that the 1951 Convention relating
to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol remain
the fundamental pillars of the international refugee
protection system. Although since 1951 the regime
for the protection of refugees has been reinforced by
the adoption of regional instruments across various
continents, the protection regime is weakened by
the lack implementation. As a result, the chances for
establishing a system of mutual understanding and
collaboration diminish.
In many cases, aid is scarce, particularly in
sub-Saharan Africa. For example, the levels of funding
needed for the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees for its work in the Central
African Republic and Burundi are funded at only 9 per
cent and 11 per cent, respectively. For South Sudan,
and the neighbouring countries that host 2 million
refugees from that country, the funding level is at only
31 per cent. Similarly, the resources available for Syria
and neighbouring host countries have decreased with
respect to last year’s levels.
Global social and economic trends point to
displacement continuing to increase over the next
decade, while taking on new and different forms. The
patterns of displacement will be affected by the increase
in the world’s population, which will increase from its
current number of 7 billion inhabitants to more than
10 billion in 2100 — an increase that will occur mostly
in Africa and Asia. In that regard, the needs of refugees
will increase to an even greater level, thereby leading
to complex situations in providing refugee camps with
resources. Accordingly, the international community
must therefore concretely deliver on its pledges to
provide sustainable support for the countries receiving
large flows of refugees.
Lastly, in order to achieve concrete solutions,
States must work to ensure the voluntary and timely
return of refugees, as well as their integration into
societies undergoing long-term conflict situations.
Likewise, solutions for refugees must be incorporated
into the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
by increasing commitments to provide resettlement,
settlement locations and mobility for refugees, and
actively involve them in seeking solutions. All that
requires solidarity, cooperation and the sharing of

17-3598517/24

S/PV.8083

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

international responsibility. We must all shoulder the
responsibility that we share with regard to this crisis.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I congratulate the delegation of France on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of October. I wish you, Sir, and your delegation
every success during your term of office, during
which you can count on the support of the delegation
of Uruguay.
I thank Mr. Filippo Grandi, United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees for his comprehensive
briefing, in which he laid out a very timely and detailed
account of the most urgent and difficult to manage
situations. It is crucial that we be aware of the views
of the High Commissioner when addressing many of
the conflicts on the agenda of the Council. I agree with
him that briefings such as this must take place at least
once a year.
Unfortunately, the world is witnessing record
numbers of refugees. The majority of the 65.6 million
people who have been forcibly displaced throughout
the world, including refugees, asylum seekers and
internally displaced persons, fled their homes as a
result of various conflicts. The statistic of 65.6 million
people represents nearly 19 times the population of my
country, and that number is only a point of reference.
Beyond the statistics, which seem overwhelming, we
should try to grasp the actual lives that lie behind
those numbers. It is no coincidence that the countries
that generate the highest number of refugees are on the
agenda of the Security Council: Syria, Afghanistan,
Somalia, South Sudan, the Sudan, the Central African
Republic, Burundi and Myanmar.
Accordingly, the direct relationship between
conflicts and the number of refugees worldwide is
indisputable. It is the responsibility of the entire
international community, and especially that of the
Security Council, to focus on preventing conflicts so as
to avoid a continued increase in the number of refugees
and internally displaced persons. Preventing conflicts
and adopting policies aimed at achieving long-term
stability will make possible halting the increasing
number of refugees and internally displaced persons.
At the Summit on Addressing Large Movements of
Refugees and Migrants, held during the seventy-first
session of the General Assembly in New York last year,
States Members of the United Nations unanimously
adopted the New York Declaration for Refugees and
18/24

02/11/2017

Migrants. That historic political Declaration is aimed at
improving the way in which the international community
addresses large movements of refugees and migrants,
including protracted situations involving refugees. We
commend the work of the international community and,
at the same time, we would like to highlight aspects of
Uruguayan policy pertaining to refugees.
Uruguay recognized the right to asylum and the
rights of refugees through the adoption of its law 18-76,
of 19 December 2006. All persons in Uruguay have the
right to seek refuge on our national territory to preserve
their life, physical, moral and intellectual well-being,
freedom and security. Likewise, Uruguay espouses two
fundamental principles with regard to refugees, namely,
the principle of non-refoulement at the border and
confidentiality. The first principle assures that during
any immigration control entry into Uruguay shall not
be denied to any individual expressing their intention
to seek refuge. That provision applies even to cases in
which the applicant lacks the documentation required
under migratory law or produces obviously fraudulent
or falsified documentation. Concerning confidentiality,
no information regarding asylum seekers or refugees
shall be made publicly available.
Pending the completion of the petition process,
every asylum seeker in Uruguay is entitled to the
issuance of a temporary identity document that bears
similar features as those issued to legal residents,
thereby facilitating their access to basic health services,
education and legal employment. Once legal refugee
status has been granted, that document is subsequently
replaced by the same form of identification issued
to residents.
Rather than continuing to detail out national refugee
policies, we believe that a positive approach in the area
of refugees
​​
would set the international community
upon the right path to facing that global challenge. As
set forth in the New York Declaration, protecting those
who are forced to flee and the obligation to support
countries and communities that host them are shared
international responsibilities that must be assumed
in a more equitable and predictable manner. We must
address the root causes of forced displacement, support
host communities and actively promote sustainable
solutions for refugees, particularly when refugee status
becomes protracted. For the short- and medium-term,
High Commissioner Grandi can count on Uruguay’s
commitment to participating actively and constructively
in developing the global compact on refugees.
17-35985

02/11/2017

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

Mr. Bessho (Japan): First of all, I would like to
join others in congratulating Italy on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. It has our
full support.
I would also like to express my sympathies to the
victims of the attack in lower Manhattan. It is a stark
reminder that terrorist attacks can happen anywhere
and against anybody.
I would like to express my gratitude to Mr. Grandi,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, for
his comprehensive briefing.
The role of the Security Council is to work to
achieve peace and security in the world, but we
are continually reminded that humanitarian issues,
including the refugee issue, need to occupy a large
portion of the Council’s attention. As Mr. Grandi’s
briefing illustrated, we are currently seeing an increase
in the severity of the humanitarian crisis. There is a
greater need for a strengthened response to refugees.
As of October, Japan has contributed approximately
$150 million to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), which includes
emergency-grant aid to Myanmar and Bangladesh, as
well as to the Middle East and Africa.
As for the humanitarian crisis in Syria, although
the Security Council has been tackling the situation in
that country for six years, there has been no substantial
improvement. Considering the critical situation of
refugees from Syria, Japan has delivered assistance to
host communities through the United Nations. Japan has
also accepted Syrian students, helping them to continue
their studies in Japan. We believe such educational
opportunities will not only serve as a complementary
pathway for the vulnerable populations, but will also
contribute to building the capacity of today’s youth,
who will be rebuilding Syria tomorrow. Japan places
importance on activities to ease the pain suffered by
the Syrian people due to the long-lasting conflict and to
build resilience in their communities.
The situation of refugees and displaced people
in Myanmar and Bangladesh is a serious concern for
the international community. To address the situation,
Japan increased its emergency grand aid to $4 million in
September, in addition to the $12 million contribution
already made earlier this year through international
organizations, including UNHCR, which has been
assisting those affected by the current situation.

S/PV. 8083

Japan places importance on UNHCR’s efforts to
apply the Comprehensive Refugee Response Framework.
The Framework will be an important element of the
global compact on refugees, which will be adopted next
year. We see the Framework as an initiative that in line
with the humanitarian-development nexus, which Japan
firmly supports. Based on that idea, Japan carried out
projects in the areas of humanitarian assistance and
development cooperation in collaboration with various
actors, including UNHCR, in places such as Uganda,
Iraq and Turkey. At the same time, we also pay further
attention to the Framework from the view point of
adding another important element to the humanitariandevelopment nexus: peace, something on which Japan
places increasing importance. The role of the Security
Council, together with the Peacebuilding Commission,
is crucial to supporting the political process for peace
and to complete this nexus.
Lasting solutions for the refugee issue cannot be
achieved solely through emergency humanitarian
assistance. Supporting the self-reliance of refugees
is necessary for the day when, through the political
process, the time comes for them to repatriate or
resettle. When a humanitarian crisis ends and refugees
return to their home countries, providing seamless
assistance — such as peacebuilding for reconstruction
and stabilization, poverty reduction and economic
development for stabilization and prevention of the
recurrence of conflict — is essential.
Japan will continue to work within and outside
the Security Council to secure peace and prevent
the recurrence of conflict, which is a major cause of
refugees. At the same time, Japan intends to continue
its assistance in the areas of humanitarian assistance
and development cooperation to ensure effective
collaboration in those areas. Japan will learn from its
experience and hopes to work with the international
community, especially through closer cooperation with
UNHCR, for the delivery of effective assistance.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Italy on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
wish Italy every success.
I would also like to thank Mr. Filippo Grandi,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, for
his comprehensive briefing to the Council. I also like
take this opportunity to express our deep appreciation

17-3598519/24

S/PV.8083

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

for the tireless efforts that he is exerting to improve the
lives of millions of refugees around the world.
Forced displacement has become a global
phenomenon. Millions of people move every year,
fleeing armed conflict, oppression, violence, terrorism,
extreme poverty, food insecurity or the negative impact
of climate change, natural disasters or other factors.
Anyone following this situation today, in particular as
it relates to the Middle East and Africa — to which
Egypt belongs — can easily deduce that armed
conflicts, oppression and violence, including terrorism,
are among the main reasons that have led to increased
flows of refugees throughout the world during the past
few years. In the current year alone, more than 2 million
refugees left their homes because of protracted crises.
The severe humanitarian crisis in Myanmar has led
to the displacement of more than 600,000 Muslims, who
are fleeing the systemic violence practiced against them.
The Syrian crisis also remains the largest humanitarian
crisis in terms of the resulting displacement of civilians.
In the same vein, we cannot forget the protracted,
decades-long suffering of millions of Palestinians who
are still waiting for a just settlement that fulfils their
legitimate aspirations for a better life.
Egypt believes it is necessary to adopt a comprehensive
approach in addressing the root causes of displacement.
That would include measures in the economic, political,
cultural, humanitarian and other spheres. We must
emphasize the development dimension and must open
up new channels for accepting refugees. Security
solutions and the closing of borders will not serve any
interest, and they violate the 1951 Convention relating
to the Status of Refugees.
The greatest positive contribution from the United
Nations is in the area of the peaceful settlement of
disputes and conflict prevention, and in seeking lasting
political solutions through preventative diplomacy. In
that connection, the Security Council must work to
prevent renewed conflicts and to fulfil its duties in
the area of civilian protection and armed conflicts.
Attention should be given to vulnerable segments of the
population, such as women and children. The Council
must adopt long-term strategies to build peace in
affected countries. One of the main duties of the High
Commissioner for Refugees in post-conflict situations
is to contribute to efforts aimed at the safe, voluntary
and dignified return of refugees, in coordination with
the relevant States.
20/24

02/11/2017

In conclusion, we would like to point out that,
based on its firm belief in the importance of joint work
and international cooperation to address the root causes
of crises, Egypt is shouldering the burdens of hosting
large numbers of refugees of varous nationalities.
Many of them enjoy equal status with Egyptians and
are enjoying access to education, health, housing,
commodities and subsidies. We welcome all ongoing
efforts to develop the global compact on refugees in a
manner that contributes to sharing the responsibilities
and developing a unified vision and a strong position to
provide a dignified life to refugees and to respect their
rights and their human dignity.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The Senegalese
delegation would like to begin, Mr. President, by
associating itself with the condolences you expressed,
Sir, in connection with the victims of the terrorist
attack that befell the American people, as well as the
Argentine and Belgian people.
On the occasion of this first public meeting of the
month, my delegation would like to congratulate the
Italian delegation on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council, as well as to commend you,
Under-Secretary Amendola, for personally presiding
today. I also commend the French delegation for its
outstanding conduct of our work during the month
of October.
My delegation welcomes the initiative of the Italian
presidency of devoting this meeting to the critical
problem of refugees and internally displaced persons,
particularly in situations of conflict — an issue that
requires the urgent, decisive and coordinated action of
the international community for a lasting settlement.
Additionally, I would like to thank the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Filippo
Grandi, for his comprehensive briefing on the situation
of refugees worldwide, which shed light on our
discussions, by forging a clear link and indicating
the desired complementarity between the role of the
High Commissioner and that of the Security Council.
That is why the Senegalese delegation echoes the call
made by the initial speakers to increasing the dialogue
between them.
The unacceptably high number of 65.6 million
uprooted people in the world in 2016 is of particular
concern, especially since almost all of those cases are due
to conflict. The Council has the primary responsibility to
resolve this situation if it cannot prevent it. Considering
17-35985

02/11/2017

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

that every minute 20 people — primarily women and
children — are internally displaced or become refugees,
how many thousands of lives, especially of women and
children, will plunge into uncertainty by the time this
morning’s briefing ends?
That is why, in our view, at a time when humankind
has more resources and capacities than ever before for
every individual to live in dignity, it is regrettable
that the international community is still searching for
solutions and financing to resolve primarily man-made
crises that could have been avoided. That is why Senegal
keeps affirming that in situations of conflict, it is the
responsibility of all parties to scrupulously respect
international humanitarian law, human rights law and
refugee law by providing protection and assistance
to civilians first. The existing normative framework
obligates the parties to a conflict and other stakeholders
not to displace civilian populations and to take measures
to prevent and manage possible movements.
And when national Governments cannot or will
not assume responsibility for protecting internally
displaced persons and refugees, international actors
must act, using a two-pronged approach of encouraging
States and other entities to respect their obligation to
protect those populations under international law while,
at the same time, supporting the development of local
and national capacities to fulfil those responsibilities.
My delegation believes that the Security Council
can, and must, make better use of all the means at
its disposal to help the parties involved to assume
their obligations to refugees and internally displaced
persons. For example, the Council’s aide-mémoire for
the consideration of issues pertaining to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict suggests that members
of the Council adopt certain initiatives with regard to
forced displacement.
Similarly, international action must be strengthened
to better support those populations and their host
countries and communities. Indeed, the burden is
increasingly heavy for host and transit countries,
which, for the most part, are developing or lowincome countries.
I would also like to stress the importance
of partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations, if we are to improve our care as it
relates to reception, integration, provision of basic
services, as well as management of statelessness. On
that point, I would like to highlight one of the firm

S/PV. 8083

recommendations of the Ministerial Conference on
Statelessness in West Africa, held in February 2015. It
suggests that nationality that is determined at the time
of the refugees’ arrival is a valid presumption that can
be challenged only by the State of origin on the basis of
hard evidence that the State itself would need to furnish.
The 10 million stateless persons reported by the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
in 2016 attest to the vulnerability of refugees to losing
their identity, especially when their exile is protracted
and the administration of their country of origin is
hobbled by serious dysfunction.
Addressing the problem of refugees and displaced
persons also requires strong regional partnerships.
In that regard, my delegation would like to recall
the contribution of Africa in managing that
phenomenon — particularly as evidenced by the
adoption of the African Union Convention Governing
the Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems in Africa
and the African Union Convention for the Protection
and Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in
Africa. We must note that the African continent
itself hosts 30 per cent of the 65 million refugees and
displaced persons.
To ensure better protection for internally displaced
persons and refugees and, above all, in order to mitigate
that phenomenon as much as possible, Senegal would
like to renew its call for better conflict prevention
based on reliable and rigorous warning systems,
as well as on the need for open cooperation with all
the relevant stakeholders, including regional and
subregional organizations.
It is in this spirit that, in referring to the New
York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants, we wish
to reaffirm Senegal’s commitment to achieving the
goals set by the Comprehensive Refugee Response
Framework. Accordingly, we call on the international
community to redouble efforts to ensure the adoption
of the global compact on refugees in 2018, as it is clear
that conflict resolution and prevention requires genuine
political will if we are to bring about a lasting settlement
to the problem of refugees and internally displaced
persons, including voluntary return in conditions of
safety, dignity and respect for their rights.
Bearing in mind the importance of the post-conflict
phase in the resurgence of crises, it seems appropriate
to take into account the systematic promotion and
protection of the human rights of refugees and

17-3598521/24

S/PV.8083

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

internally displaced persons in efforts to consolidate
and sustain peace.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
importance of a comprehensive approach that
duly takes into account the political, economic,
social, environmental and legal dimensions of the
protection of civilians and stresses a preventive and
proactive approach.
In addition to bolstering efforts to find political
solutions to conflicts, it is also necessary to support
countries in conflict in their implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals, especially those
linked to the problem of forced displacement, as well
as to foster a culture of justice and peace by boosting
women’s participation in the resolution of conflicts and
promoting peaceful and prosperous societies.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Under-Secretary of State for Foreign
Affairs and International Coooperation of Italy.
First of all, I would like to thank High Commissioner
Filippo Grandi for his comprehensive and outstanding
remarks and for the work carried out on the ground by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to assist all those in need of international
protection, including the victims of trafficking.
Allow me also to thank all of the members of the
Security Council for their insightful contributions on
an issue that deserves an urgent, coherent and collective
response, as well as preventive action whenever
possible. We cannot close our eyes in the face of human
suffering. We cannot hide its tragic consequences for
future generations. Therefore, today we make a call
for action.
I think that regular briefings on this matter are more
than welcome. Of course, Italy will continue to play its
part, and the refugee agency can count on Italy’s full
support. From Myanmar to Libya, and from Somalia to
Jordan and Yemen, Italy will work side by side with the
agency to ensure protection and assistance for civilian
populations, in particular the most vulnerable segments
and those who deserve special protection.
We are aware of the increasing need for financial
resources in order to operate in multiple crisis
scenarios, which is why we have decided to further
increase our financial support and plan to remain
one of the agency’s main donors. In addition to our
annual voluntary contribution to the regular budget so
22/24

02/11/2017

far, we have already approved additional emergency
humanitarian projects. Further initiatives will be
implemented by the end of the year. The dramatic
figures provided by the High Commissioner and the
many critical situations he addressed in his briefing
clearly show that we are facing one of the most serious
challenges to international stability, and especially to
respect for fundamental human rights and freedoms, as
well as international humanitarian law.
We must shift the focus on human mobility from
an emergency approach to an encompassing and longterm one. We need to enhance our capacity to tackle the
root causes of crises and give hope and dignity to the
most vulnerable segments of the civilian population,
especially youth. Indeed, the 2016 New York Declaration
for Refugees and Migrants has improved the way in
which the international community has begun to look
at and respond to such a large and disorderly movement
of refugees and migrants. We need a joint response and
strengthened cooperation among countries of origin,
transit and destination.
In our opinion, the global compact for safe, orderly
and regular migration and the global compact on
refugees, to be adopted next year, should represent a step
forward in preventing and eradicating the root causes
of forced migration and refugees flows. We have shared
our proposals, which are based on three main actions,
namely, investing, protecting and valuing — investing
in supporting countries of origin and transit, protecting
refugees and the most vulnerable migrants and valuing
the many positive aspects of migration flows.
Italy’s priority is to promote two key principles.
The first one is partnership among countries of origin,
transit and destination of flows. There is growing
evidence of the need to collaborate on migration, not
just to fight trafficking in human beings and criminal
networks associated with migratory movements, but
also to deal with the root causes of migration. The
second key principle, which I already mentioned, is
shared responsibility, both in managing the migratory
flows and in protecting migrants and refugees,
especially the most vulnerable ones, such as women,
children and people with disabilities.
With particular reference to the global compact on
refugees, increasing resettlement and complementary
pathways for admission are essential to cope with
the current large-scale influx of refugees from crisis
17-35985

02/11/2017

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

areas such as Syria, Libya, South Sudan, Somalia,
Afghanistan and Myanmar.
In Libya, it is critical to improve access to protection
and support for asylum-seekers, refugees and internally
displaced people and vulnerable migrants, in the light
of the recent drastic decrease in sea arrivals in Italy
from Libya, on one hand, and the potential increase
in the number of those remaining in Libya in unsafe
and precarious conditions, on the other. Scaling up the
presence of the refugee agency in Libya is important, as
the High Commissioner mentioned, for the protection
of human rights in refugee camps.
The Security Council can play an important role in
preventing and halting the refugee crisis by promoting
and encouraging the prevention and resolution of
conflicts, which are the main causes of large-scale
movements of displaced people. In that context, I
would like to express once again Italy’s support for the
Secretary-General’s peace continuum approach — from
prevention to peacekeeping, from post-conflict recovery
to inclusive national reconciliation and sustainable
development processes. The Security Council can
play its role, including when renewing or drafting
peacekeeping missions’ mandates. Indeed, as the High
Commissioner highlighted, peacekeeping can be a
fundamental and extraordinary tool to protect refugees
and migrants and to facilitate their relocation.
Most important, the Council needs to act with
resolve and unity in order to put an end to the protracted
crises and conflicts that force people to flee. I have
mentioned all such crises and protracted conflicts. We,
as members of the Security Council, have the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. We must therefore meet the expectations of
the millions of people who are counting on us to restore
and build peace.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): As I noted during my statement, there are
more than 1 million Ukrainians in Russia who fled the
area of conflict, as well as an equal number of labour
migrants from that country. Therefore, in spite of the
unrestrained anti-Russian propaganda from Kyiv, those
citizens have taken refuge in Russia to flee war or to

S/PV. 8083

resolve their socioeconomic issues. In our view, that is
the real cost of the mantras of Russian aggression that
we, unfortunately, heard voiced today.
The President: I now give the floor to High
Commissioner Grandi to respond to the comments made.
Mr. Grandi: I will be very brief, Mr. President, as
you have already effectively summarized many of the
themes that emerged from the discussion today.
I would like to thank all delegations, which
unanimously expressed support for refugees and for the
work of my organization, including, in some cases, with
very specific examples of support. I would also like to
thank the Security Counicl for once again recognizing
that refugee problems and problems of forced
displacement can be resolved only through political
action. I would like to encourage all of the members of
the Council to remain focused on such action so that,
when I meet the Council again, there will perhaps be
a smaller number than the 66 million I reported today.
I would like to reassure all members, many of
whom have encouraged me and asked me to continue to
improve the effectiveness of the work of my organization
through internal reforms and participation in broader
United Nations reforms led by the Secretary-General,
that I can guarantee that that commitment to reform is
very real and is already being enacted in practice.
As many said here today, the process leading to
the establishment — hopefully next year — of a global
compact of refugees, parallel to a global compact on
orderly and safe migration, will be a further opportunity
to improve the type of work that we do and the responses
to the refugee crisis through what the New York
Declaration for Refugees and Migrants last year termed
the comprehensive refugee response framework.
As I reported yesterday to the General Assembly,
which is more the forum for this type of discussion, we
are conducting important applications of this framework
in many countries hosting large numbers of refugees,
such as Ethiopia, Uganda and many countries in Central
America. What we learn from that application and
what we are learning through informal consultations
with Member States will be brought back to Members
through a zero draft of a global compact early next
year, for more formal consultations throughout the year
in Geneva and eventually here in New York.
I will therefore ask the Council once again — and
members have expressed that sentiment themselves — for

17-3598523/24

S/PV.8083

Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

support for this important process, through which we
really have an opportunity to expand the range of actors
involved in refugee responses, especially development
actors and the private sector, and to improve the
effectiveness of those responses and give impetus to the
drive to find solutions to the refugee problem.
I should like to stress that many Council members
have raised, and rightly so, the gravity of the refugee
crisis presently affecting Bangladesh, with the refugee
flow from Myanmar. I also should like to join those
who have thanked Bangladesh for keeping its borders
open to receive more than 600,000 refugees in the
space of a very short period of time — two months.
We should not forget that Bangladesh is already hosting
200,000 to 300,000 refugees from previous influxes,
so it will soon be hosting almost a million people in
a very overcrowded part of the country, which I have
recently visited.
We are, of course, engaged with other humanitarian
and development actors in responding to the crisis in
Bangladesh. I would like to reiterate that with respect to
my request for support for our offer to Bangladesh and

24/24

02/11/2017

Myanmar to have a role in the discussion — leading,
hopefully, to the voluntary and dignified return of
refugees to Myanmar — that offer is put forward in a
completely non-political spirit, as is always the case
with our actions, in the spirit of being constructive,
as mentioned by some delegations, so as to improve
effectiveness when the return happens and to ensure
that it is conducted on a voluntary basis and according to
principle, and that it has international legitimacy. That
is the role that my agency can play in that important
development if and whenever it happens.
I would like to conclude once again by thanking Italy
and the Council for having invited me to this meeting
and thanking you in particular, Mr. Under-Secretary,
for presiding over this meeting. I am very grateful for
the fact that several members have invited me to return
and brief the Council regularly. I remain available to do
so any time the Council deems it necessary.
The President: I thank Mr. Grandi for the
clarifications he has provided.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

17-35985
