United Nations

S/PV.4717

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-eighth year

4717

th meeting
Tuesday, 11 March 2003, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Traoré . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Guinea)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Ndoumbe Eboule
Mr. Streeter
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Pleuger
Mr. Aguilar Zinser
Mr. Akram
Mr. Gatilov
Ms. Menendez
Mr. Mekdad
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
Letter dated 7 March 2003 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Malaysia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2003/283).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

03-27472 (E)

*0327472*

S/PV.4717

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
Letter dated 7 March 2003 from the Chargé
d’affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission
of Malaysia to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council
(S/2003/283)
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Algeria, Argentina,
Australia, Belarus, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Colombia,
Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador,
Georgia, Greece, Iceland, India, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Iraq, Japan, Kuwait, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Norway, the Philippines, the Republic of
Korea, Singapore, South Africa, the Sudan,
Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey, Viet Nam and
Zimbabwe in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Aldouri
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Nesho
(Albania), Mr. Baali (Algeria), Mr. Listre
(Argentina), Mr. Dauth (Australia), Mr. Ivanou
(Belarus), Mr. Murillo de la Rocha (Bolivia), Mr.
Moura (Brazil), Mr. Heinbecker (Canada), Mr.
Giraldo (Colombia), Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla
(Cuba), Mr. Padilla Tonos (Dominican Republic),
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Lagos Pizzati (El
Salvador), Mr. Lordkipanidze (Georgia), Mr.
Vassilakis (Greece), Mr. Ingolfsson (Iceland), Mr.
Nambiar (India), Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia), Mr.
Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Haraguchi
(Japan), Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait), Mr. Kittikhoun
(Lao People’s Democratic Republic), Mr.

2

Jegermanis (Latvia), Mr.Diab (Lebanon), Mr. Own
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Zainuddin
(Malaysia), Mr. Mackay (New Zealand), Mr.
Sevilla Somoza (Nicaragua), Mrs. Yahaya
(Nigeria), Mr. Kolby (Norway), Mr. Manalo
(Philippines), Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of
Korea), Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore), Mr. Kumalo
(South Africa), Mr. Erwa (Sudan), Mr. Staehelin
(Switzerland), Mr. Kasemsarn (Thailand), Mr.
Cengizer (Turkey), Mr. Ngo Duc Thang (Viet Nam)
and Mr. Chidyausiku (Zimbabwe) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council, which reads as follows:
“In accordance with article 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council, I have the honour to request the
participation of His Excellency Mr. Yahya
Mahmassani, Permanent Observer of the League
of Arab States to the United Nations, in the
discussion of the agenda item entitled ‘The
situation between Iraq and Kuwait’, which will
start on 11 March 2003.”
That letter will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2003/292.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr.
Yahya Mahmassani.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite the Permanent Observer of the League of
Arab States to the United Nations, Mr. Yahya
Mahmassani, to take the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 11 March 2003 from the Chargé
d’affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of
Sudan to the United Nations, which reads as follows:
“In my capacity as Chairman of the Islamic
Group, I have the honour to request that
Ambassador
Mokhtar
Lamani,
Permanent
Observer of the Organization of the Islamic

S/PV.4717

Conference to the United Nations, be allowed to
participate in the debate in the Security Council
on the agenda item entitled ‘The situation
between Iraq and Kuwait’, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council.”
This letter will be issued as a document of the Security
Council (S/2003/298).
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
the provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Mokhtar Lamani.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Lamani to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in response to the request contained
in a letter dated 7 March 2003 from the Chargé
d’affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of
Malaysia to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (document
S/2003/283).
I welcome the presence in our midst of the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Louise Fréchette.
Before opening the floor, I wish to request all
participants to limit their statement to no more than
seven minutes in order to enable the Council to work
efficiently within its timetable. I thank you for your
understanding and cooperation.
I now give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Aldouri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to extend its gratitude to you,
Sir, for the convening of this open meeting. We would
also like to extend our thanks to the delegation of
Malaysia, Chairman of the Coordinating Bureau of the
Non-Aligned Movement, for requesting this meeting,
given the need to hear the opinion of the international
community, in a spirit of transparency and collective
responsibility, on a serious problem and on the threat of
aggression against a member State of the Movement.
My statement will concentrate on replying to
some of the questions that are being pondered by the
representatives of many States, particularly after the

confusion of facts and falsehoods and untrue
allegations propagated by the United States and the
United Kingdom with respect to Iraq’s compliance and
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions.
First, has Iraq complied, and is Iraq complying
with the relevant Security Council resolutions on
disarmament? Iraq cooperated with the United Nations
Special Commission (UNSCOM) during a period of
eight years. Hence, 95 per cent of the disarmament
tasks were fulfilled, between 1991 and 1994. That was
confirmed by Mr. Ekeus. Cooperation continued until
1998, which led former inspector Mr. Scott Ritter, a
United States citizen and the senior inspector at the
time, to admit that Iraq no longer possessed weapons of
mass destruction. Today, following the return of the
inspectors — who were withdrawn from Iraq in 1998
by Mr. Butler, upon the orders of the United States of
America — Mr. Blix, in his briefing of 7 March 2003,
stated that Iraq is proactively cooperating, and he
referred in detail to the scope and nature of that
cooperation.
Secondly, do the inspectors encounter any
problems in reaching the sites to be inspected? Mr. Blix
and Mr. ElBaradei answered that Iraq opened all doors
and sites to inspectors, that there were no obstacles,
that the inspections currently under way are serious,
effective and immediate and that inspectors can reach
any site they wish to inspect with ease and without any
notable problems.
Thirdly, have the inspectors found weapons of
mass destruction? The replies of Mr. Blix and Mr.
ElBaradei confirmed that inspection activities have not
found any weapons of mass destruction or programmes
to produce such weapons. They confirmed that Iraq
declared recently its missile programme unilaterally
and that Iraq, under the supervision of the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC), is destroying Al Samoud 2
missiles, which UNMOVIC deemed to be proscribed.
Fourthly, were the United States and the United
Kingdom able to demonstrate the existence of
proscribed weapons or programmes through the
intelligence data and documents presented by them? A
negative response to that question was given by Mr.
Blix and ElBaradei. In fact, one of the documents
presented, alleging an attempt by Iraq to import
uranium from an African country, proved to be a

3

S/PV.4717

forgery. Furthermore, the latest intelligence report
submitted by Britain was originally a thesis by a
student of Iraqi origin written in 1990. That
intelligence report essentially contained previously
published
information
plagiarized
by
British
intelligence services and was replete with errors of
language and syntax, according to the student’s
statement.
The allegations presented by Mr. Powell on 5
February 2003 were refuted by the facts in the
possession of the inspectors, following four months of
reinforced inspections in Iraq. Therefore, none of the
allegations — none of the so-called facts put forward
by Mr. Powell — have proved to be true.
Fifthly, are there any shortcomings in the work of
inspectors and their scientific and technical capacity to
discover any proscribed weapons or programmes? The
inspectors have at their disposal the latest advanced
equipment, including laboratory testing equipment of
soil, water and air, remote sensors that detect materials
in deep ground, vibration detectors and aerial
surveillance aircraft. Iraq has not interfered in the work
of inspectors from any technical aspect whatever.
Sixthly, was not resolution 1441 (2002) an
initiative of the United States and United Kingdom to
reinforce the inspection regime and an attempt to rule
out implementing resolution 1284 (1999)? Iraq’s
acceptance of resolution 1441 (2002) and its precise
implementation of all provisions contained in it had
prevented the United States and the United Kingdom
from using it as a pretext to declare war on Iraq.
Having lost such an opportunity, they started to raise
doubts concerning the inspections and the inspectors
and their capabilities. They then sought other new
pretexts such as terrorism, regime change, Iraq’s threat
to its neighbours, American interests and the need to
disarm Iraq of its so-called weapons of mass
destruction by force. This means waging war, which is
the main objection of this game.
Seventh, does the document submitted by
UNMOVIC to the Security Council at its last meeting
(S/2003/232), which takes up unresolved disarmament
issues, mean that weapons of mass destruction do exist
in Iraq? Mr. Blix replied to this question by saying the
document on remaining disarmament issues does not
provide any evidence that Iraq has proscribed weapons
or programmes. Rather, the document contains a list of
questions, the answers to which will enable UNMOVIC

4

to verify the prior destruction of these weapons in 1991
in order to reach a so-called material balance.
UNMOVIC, as well as its predecessor, the United
Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM), have spoken
repeatedly on this matter.
Bear in mind that Iraq did request UNMOVIC for
some time, even before the adoption of resolution 1441
(2002), to present such a document. It would be
important for Iraq to view the main tasks required of it
in order to implement them as soon as possible and to
study such questions and answer them.
Eighth, the so-called new evidence put forward
by the United States and the United Kingdom during
the past two days that alleges that Iraq is in material
breach of Security Council resolutions no doubt
reflects, I believe, the quandary faced by the United
States administration in proving its previous
allegations. These allegations have become a subject of
ridicule. The issue is no more than that of a small
experimental primitive pilotless aircraft without any
prototype for production whatever. Inspection teams
have viewed the aircraft, its specifications, and their
details. They ascertained those technical specifications,
especially regarding fuel tank and engine capacity;
they were tested within the range of the airport. This is
a radio-controlled aircraft, which is controlled by and
remains within the sight range of its ground controller.
It does not go beyond eight kilometres. Therefore, it is
not a weapon of mass destruction or a delivery method
that surpasses the range set forward in Security Council
resolutions.
Is this truly a material breach of Security Council
resolutions, and particularly resolution 1441 (2002)?
We leave it to you to ascertain the truth of such
allegations. They show the bankruptcy of the attempts
of the United States administration to convince the
international community that such allegations are true.
The issue, ultimately, is in the hands of UNMOVIC. It
is up to UNMOVIC to reach its conclusions.
I would like to conclude my statement by making
two points. The first is that Iraq is aware that since it
first began dealing with this matter, the United States
and the United Kingdom will put in doubt any result
reached, because their goal is not disarmament, which
has in effect been achieved. They very well know this,
as will soon be established by UNMOVIC and the
International Atomic Energy Agency. Rather, their
objective is to lay their hands on our oil, control the

S/PV.4717

region and redraw its borders in order to ensure the
continuation of vital interests for the United States for
a long period to come. This is a new direct colonization
of the region.
My second and last point is that Iraq has taken the
strategic decision to rid itself of weapons of mass
destruction. Had this decision not been the right one, it
would not have cooperated with UNMOVIC. Today,
Iraq, before the Council, reiterates its readiness to
cooperate in a fruitful and constructive manner so that
it will be determined that weapons of mass destruction
no longer exist in Iraq and that sanctions imposed on it
would be lifted. We will convincingly answer the
questions of anyone who has any doubts about Iraq’s
cooperation. We shall answer the false allegations that
are used to justify war against us. Iraq reaffirms that
peaceful means, dialogue and cooperation are the
quickest and best means to resolve the current crisis.
My delegation, through the Council, calls upon
the international community to prevent a catastrophe
that has now become imminent. We call upon the
Security Council and the Secretary-General to shoulder
their responsibilities, in accordance with the provisions
of the Charter, to thwart any aggression against Iraq.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Kuwait. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to say what a pleasure it is to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month. I wish
you every success in guiding the work of the Council
during this critical period.
I would also like to thank your predecessor, Mr.
Gunter Pleuger, Permanent Representative of Germany,
for his commendable efforts as President of the Council
last month.
The Council is meeting today to continue its
consideration of developments in the crisis between
Iraq and the United Nations. This is the third occasion
on which such an open meeting has been convened at
short notice in response to a request by the chairman of
the
Non-Aligned
Movement.
The
Council’s
responsiveness
demonstrates
its
concern
for
transparency in its working methods and its interest in
enabling all members to participate in debates on

decision-making matters relating to international peace
and security.
Today’s debate is being held at a particularly
severe and sensitive time for the Gulf region as a result
of the intransigent policies of the Iraqi Government,
which has not fulfilled its obligations under relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution
687 (1991), 1284 (1999) and 1441 (2002), thereby
creating the acute tension that now prevails within the
international community. The Iraqi Government alone
bears full responsibility for the suffering of the
brotherly Iraqi people over the difficult past 12 years.
The Iraqi people could have enjoyed more pleasant
times and directed all their efforts to building peace
and prosperity had it not been for those events.
Kuwait has already expressed, at the international
and regional levels, its clear position with regard to the
current crisis between Iraq and the United Nations.
Today’s meeting provides a further opportunity for us
to reaffirm our position, which I would like to sum up
in a number of points.
First, Kuwait fully supports the efforts being
made to find a peaceful resolution of the issue of
disarming Iraq of its weapons of mass destruction, in
keeping with international law. We would like to point
out that the resolutions and final declarations adopted
at summit meetings of the Non-Aligned Movement, the
League of Arab States and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference not only express a preference for a
peaceful settlement of the problem, through the
international community, but have outlined the path
that is to be followed by asking Iraq to implement all
the relevant Security Council resolutions and to
cooperate fully, immediately and unconditionally with
the inspectors, in implementation of resolution 1441
(2002).
Secondly, the draft resolution that the Council is
considering would furnish the Iraqi Government with
additional time during which it could reveal its
weapons of mass destruction and hand them over to the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission. Kuwait hopes that the Iraqi Government
will avail itself of that opportunity and accept the
international community’s appeals, thereby protecting
the Iraqi people and the region from suffering the
consequences of war.
Thirdly, the draft resolution reflects the Council’s
determination with respect to Iraq’s current challenge

5

S/PV.4717

to the international community, and therefore deserves
full support.
Fourthly, although we hope that it will not be
necessary to use military force, we reaffirm our belief
that it is for the Iraqi Government to protect the Iraqi
people and the people of the region as a whole from the
dangers and other negative repercussions resulting
from military action by altering its behaviour and
changing the direction in which it is moving as quickly
as possible and by actively and substantively
cooperating, instead of pretending to do so — merely
acting in a procedural and nominal manner.
Fifthly, unity within the Security Council must be
preserved. Such unity is an indispensable factor for
securing the implementation of the provisions of
Council resolutions, in particular if they are supported
by effective force. Council unity, backed by concrete
will, is the message that must be sent, very clearly, to
the Iraqi leadership. Past experience in the Council
with respect to Iraq shows that only common will,
resolve and a united front on the part of members will
be able effectively to bring about the desired results.
The obligations imposed on the Iraqi Government
by the Security Council are not confined to the
elimination of weapons of mass destruction. Although
that is an important and crucial aspect of securing
international peace and security, it is not the only
obligation imposed on Iraq. There are also important
matters that have remained unresolved since the
liberation of Kuwait from the invasion in 1990. It is
unfortunate that the approach taken by the Iraqi
Government since 1991 with regard to the inspectors
and the task of eliminating its weapons of mass
destruction — an approach with which we are all
familiar — is the same as that taken by Iraq when
dealing with humanitarian matters, such as the issue of
the Kuwaiti prisoners of war and detainees, and with
regard to returning Kuwaiti property. This shows how
evasiveness, procrastination and deceit are a fixed part
of Iraq’s way of dealing with international resolutions.
Iraq has, since, last January, been participating in the
Technical Committee, which forms part of the
Tripartite Committee presided over by the International
Committee of the Red Cross. The Technical Committee
has met four times to date in Amman, Jordan.
However, no concrete results have yet been
forthcoming. During those meetings Iraq showed no
sincere willingness to follow through on those issues.
Again, Iraq dissembled, used delaying tactics and

6

failed to live up to its promises. Superficial and
procedural forms of cooperation have been employed
by the Iraqi Government for many years when dealing
with those humanitarian matters. That flies in the face
of the obligations set out in Security Council
resolutions 686 (1991), 687 (1991) and 1284 (1999).
The same behaviour is evident with regard to
restoring Kuwaiti property, documents and archives.
Some documents were recently given back, but upon
examination it became clear that they were ordinary
forms of correspondence, not the official archives of
the Kuwaiti State, which were stolen by the Iraqi
Government.
Finally, Kuwait hopes that the Council will be
able to overcome its differences of opinion and its
internal divisions that threaten it authority and
jeopardize its basic responsibility to maintain
international peace and security. We also hope that the
Council will be able to reach an agreement that truly
reflects the common will of the international
community and its firm resolve to confront any
political manoeuvring by the Iraqi leadership. The Iraqi
leadership commonly employs that sort of
manoeuvring whenever political military pressure is
intensified. As we have seen in the past, Iraq is the sole
winner whenever there is division. In fact, differences
of opinion are a goal sought by the Iraqi leadership.
They do everything in their power to bring about such
differences, as that is how they can shirk their
obligations, weaken the Council’s resolve and prevent
it from following up and implementing its resolutions.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Kuwait for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Malaysia. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia): First of all, allow me,
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
We also wish to pay tribute to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Germany, for his
excellent stewardship of the Council last month.
We would also like to express our appreciation to
the members of the Security Council for having
convened this open debate. Most of all, we wish to

S/PV.4717

commend the Security Council for its commitment to
multilateral diplomacy and for continuing the role of
the Council as the ideal forum to explore all options in
addressing the situation between Iraq and Kuwait.
We, the 116 member States of the Non-Aligned
Movement, which represent two-thirds of humanity,
have called for this open debate at this crucial and
challenging moment so that the views of the larger
membership of the United Nations on this important
issue can be heard in the Security Council.
At the outset, we are also pleased to inform the
Council that the XIII Conference of Heads of State or
Government of the Non-Aligned Movement, which was
held from 24 to 25 February 2003 at Kuala Lumpur,
was a major success. The Conference served as an
extremely useful venue to exchange views covering
many subjects of importance to the Movement, which
embodies the hopes and aspirations for economic
prosperity in a world that is peaceful, secure and just.
It was also clear that the well-being of the world
would be better served by a strong multilateral system
revolving around a United Nations that is more
representative and democratic, rather than by a
unilateral system based on the dominance of one
Power, however benign that Power may be. We need to
strengthen and promote the multilateral process in the
preservation and promotion of world peace through
dialogue and diplomacy and by avoiding resorting to
war to resolve conflicts. Apart from the adoption of the
Kuala Lumpur declaration, which reaffirmed the
Movement’s commitment to the pursuit of a peaceful
and prosperous world order based on the principles of
the Bandung Conference and the Charter of the United
Nations, the summit at Kuala Lumpur also adopted two
statements, namely, concerning Iraq and Palestine.
As the Council is aware, the Prime Minister of
Malaysia, Dr. Mahathir Mohamad, in his capacity as
the Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement, wrote on
3 March 2003 to all the heads of State and Government
sitting on the Security Council to convey the position
and concerns of the Non-Aligned Movement on the
matter of Iraq. I wish to reiterate that position and
those concerns at today’s open debate.
The Non-Aligned Movement is gravely
concerned over the precarious and rapidly deteriorating
situation arising from the looming threat of war. We
believe that war against Iraq will be a destabilizing
factor for the region and for the whole world, as it will

have far-reaching political, economic and humanitarian
consequences for all. We, the Non-Aligned Movement,
are committed to the fundamental principles of the
non-use of force and of respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence and security
of all Member States of the United Nations.
We welcome and support all efforts exerted to
avert war against Iraq, and call for the persistent
continuation of such efforts based on multilateral
diplomacy, as opposed to unilateral actions. We also
reaffirm the central role of the United Nations and the
Security Council in maintaining international peace
and security. It would be abusive to obtain the
legitimacy of unilateral purpose under the pretext of a
multilateral cause. It will be a sad day for the world
when the credibility and integrity of the Security
Council and of the United Nations are challenged, and
more so if they are threatened in any way.
We welcome the decision by Iraq to actively
cooperate with United Nations inspectors in accordance
with Security Council resolution 1441 (2002), which
will assure the world of a peaceful manner of
disarming Iraq of weapons of mass destruction. In that
regard, we call on Iraq to continue to actively comply
with resolution 1441 (2002) and all other relevant
Security Council resolutions, as well as to remain
engaged in the process. We believe that would be an
important step towards opening up the way to a
comprehensive and peaceful resolution of all pending
issues between Iraq and the United Nations that takes
into account the concerns of all affected parties,
including Iraq’s neighbours.
We wish to emphasize that the current
disarmament efforts in Iraq should not be an end in
themselves, but that they should also constitute a step
towards the lifting of sanctions in accordance with
Security Council resolution 687 (1991).
We believe that the peaceful resolution of the
Iraqi crisis will ensure that the Security Council is also
in a position to ensure Iraq’s sovereignty and the
inviolability of its territorial integrity, political
independence and security, in compliance with
paragraph 14 of Security Council resolution 687
(1991), on the establishment in the Middle East of a
zone free from weapons of mass destruction that
includes Israel.
We would like to extend our utmost appreciation
to the tireless efforts exerted by the weapons

7

S/PV.4717

inspectors, headed by Mr. Hans Blix and Mr.
Mohammad ElBaradei. Based on the recent reports
they presented to the Council just last week, on 7
March 2003, it is gratifying to note that there has been
substantial progress in the work of the weapons
inspectors. Mr. Blix personally acknowledged that
when he said that the destruction of the Al Samoud 2
missiles was regarded as a “substantial measure of
disarmament”. He also categorically stated that there
was no evidence to support the claim that Iraq was
hiding biological and chemical weapons in mobile
laboratories and underground shelters. In his report Mr.
ElBaradei also alluded that the allegation that Iraq had
tried to purchase uranium from Niger were based on
documents that were inauthentic. The submission of
false reports to the United Nations regarding Iraq’s
alleged nuclear weapons programme is a worrisome
and an irresponsible act. It is important that
information provided by all Member States to assist
weapons inspectors in carrying out their tasks
successfully in accordance with resolution 1441 (2002)
be credible.
We believe that the problem of Iraq can be
resolved peacefully through the United Nations. That
view is held by the majority of the members of the
Security Council, permanent and non-permanent
members alike, a fact that best reflects the views of the
global community. The Council must strive to find a
peaceful solution to the current crisis. We believe that
this is possible without resorting to war. The Council
should remain aware of the untold misery that war will
inflict on the countries and the people in the region.
The Middle East, already a flashpoint of conflict —
primarily because of Israeli aggression and occupation
of Palestinian and Arab lands — cannot afford any
more turmoil. History has taught us that it is easy to
start a war, but ending it is often an arduous and
complex task that, in many recent cases, has been
inconclusive.
It is our earnest hope that the Council will give
serious consideration to the views of the Non-Aligned
Movement. In the name of humanity, we appeal to the
members of the Council not to resort to military action
against Iraq. There is no dishonour in responding to the
appeals of the international community to prevent the
use of force against Iraq.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Malaysia for the kind words he
addressed to me.

8

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of South Africa. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): My delegation
would like to congratulate Guinea on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March. Your stewardship, Mr. President, comes at a
most difficult time for the Council and indeed for the
whole world. We hope that your leadership and wisdom
can bridge the divisions that prevail in the Council. My
delegation associates itself with the statement made by
Malaysia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
We come before the Security Council under the
gathering clouds of war. Millions of people around the
world have openly rejected this war and believe, as we
do, that it is not necessary. A war against Iraq will be
deadly and destabilizing and will have far-reaching
political,
socio-economic
and
humanitarian
consequences for all the countries of the world. For us
in Africa, the impact of this pending war will indeed be
crippling. It is for that reason that we appreciate the
opportunity to share our views with the Council at this
critical time.
The decision that the Security Council is about to
take will undoubtedly transcend the immediate issue of
Iraq. It appears to us that we are no longer debating the
situation in Iraq and that country’s full compliance
with Security Council resolution 1441 (2002), but that
we are currently defining a new international order that
will determine how the international community
addresses conflict situations in the future. This is an
extremely serious issue that needs our careful
consideration and that will have far-reaching
implications as we progress into this new millennium.
We have to remind ourselves that the founders of
the United Nations were motivated by an abhorrence of
war and by a commitment to resolving international
conflicts peacefully and through collective action. The
Charter of the United Nations states that the
Organization was founded “to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, which twice in
our lifetime has brought untold sorrow to mankind”. It
is that objective that we should keep central to our
deliberations as we carefully progress in finding
solutions to the current crisis so that we can ensure that
weapons of mass destruction are completely removed
from Iraq and so that we can thereby avoid war.

S/PV.4717

Our overall concern is premised on the belief that
the members of the Security Council, who act on behalf
of all Members of the United Nations, should discharge
their duty in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations. The devastation of
war — which threatens the lives of innocent civilians
whose voices are rarely listened to, and which is also
staring into the eyes of the young men and women who
are called upon to serve on the front lines — should
always be a matter of last resort. War should not be a
means of attaining objectives that contradict the
Charter of the United Nations.
The Security Council must uphold the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Member States, in
conformity with the Charter, and must remain sensitive
to cultural, ethnic and religious differences. For us, the
fundamental issue is the peaceful disarmament of Iraq.
Resolution 1441 (2002) is about disarming Iraq
through inspections. It is not a declaration of war.
Neither is the use of military force the best way to
bring about democracy or to improve human rights in
any country.
The Security Council has recently heard from
Mr. Hans Blix, Executive Chairman of the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC), and from Mr. Mohamed
ElBaradei, Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), that Iraq has been
actively cooperating and that substantial progress has
been made during the past month. The Al Samoud 2
missiles are being destroyed as we speak, and Iraq is in
the process of accounting for past biological and
chemical weapons programmes.
As the Council is aware, President Thabo Mbeki
has reported to the Secretary-General on the visit to
Iraq by a South African team of experts in the nuclear,
biological, chemical and missile disarmament fields.
South Africa sent its experts after several members of
the Security Council had sought to draw a comparison
between our own voluntary disarmament process and
Iraq’s compliance in terms of Security Council
resolutions.
President Mbeki reported that, despite the
difference in South Africa’s experience with
disarmament, our team stressed to the Iraqis the
importance not only of taking the necessary steps to
disarm, but also of building confidence in the
credibility of their process through full compliance in

terms of resolution 1441 (2002). South Africa indicated
its willingness to interact further with the SecretaryGeneral, UNMOVIC and the IAEA and to
communicate to them such detail about the visit as may
be considered necessary.
We wish to reaffirm our full confidence in the
work of Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei and to support the
professional work that they do. We believe that the
Council can strengthen the work of the inspectors by
endorsing a programme and a timeline for inspections,
which Mr. Blix has already offered to present to the
Council. We believe that any timetable developed
without taking into account the programme of the
inspectors can only lead to an unnecessary ultimatum
for war. Furthermore, we believe that a deadline by the
Council would be counterproductive and contradict
both resolutions 1284 (1999) and 1441 (2002). As a
result, we fail to see any need for a further resolution
until all the provisions of resolutions 1284 (1999) and
1441 (2002) have been exhausted.
In conclusion, we wish to remind the Council that
the peoples of the world are opposed to this war.
Recently, the heads of State or Government of the
African Union, the Summit of the Non-Aligned
Movement and other international organizations
reiterated their support for the full implementation of
all relevant Security Council resolutions, and, at the
same time, reiterated their opposition to a war against
Iraq. Together with millions of people around the
world, they want to see that Iraq is peacefully disarmed
of any weapons of mass destruction.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of South Africa for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is Mr.
Yahya Mahmassani, Permanent Observer for the
League of Arab States to the United Nations, to whom
the Council has extended an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Mahmassani (League of Arab States) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I should like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. We have full confidence in your
leadership and your wisdom, which eminently qualify
you to conduct the work of the Security Council. I wish
also to thank your predecessor, the Ambassador of
Germany, who presided over the Security Council

9

S/PV.4717

during the month of February, with great effectiveness
and competence, and whose efforts were crowned with
success and accomplishments.
The decision taken at the Arab Summit, held at
Sharm el-Sheikh on 1 March, categorically rejected any
attack against Iraq or threat against the security or
territorial integrity of any Arab State. It considered that
any such attack would constitute a threat to the national
security of all Arab States, and reaffirmed the need to
find a peaceful solution to the Iraqi crisis in the context
of international legitimacy, as represented by the
Security Council.
That decision also called on all States to support
Arab efforts aimed at averting the war and stated that
that goal would be achieved through Iraq’s full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1441
(2002) and by granting the inspectors sufficient time to
complete their mission.
The Arab Summit also recalled Iraq’s assurances
of its respect for the independence, sovereignty and
security of the State of Kuwait. It also called on Iraq to
cooperate in finding a rapid solution to the question of
prisoners and detainees, in accordance with the
relevant United Nations resolutions; to return the
remaining archives and properties; and to pursue
policies of goodwill.
The report of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC),
presented by Mr. Blix, and the report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
presented by Mr. ElBaradei, to the Council on 7 March,
stated that positive achievements had been recorded in
the conduct of the inspection process and noted the
responsiveness and cooperation shown by Iraq. For this
reason, we would reiterate the need to continue the
inspections in order to close the Iraqi file and lift the
sanctions imposed on it, in accordance with
paragraph 22 of resolution 687 (1991).
Mr. ElBaradei’s report of 7 March stated that:
(spoke in English)
“The IAEA has made important progress …
there is no indication of resumed nuclear
activities … there is no indication that Iraq has
attempted to import uranium since 1990 … there
is no indication that Iraq has attempted to import
aluminium tubes for use in centrifuge
enrichment.” (S/PV.4714, p. 8)

10

(spoke in Arabic)
Mr. Blix stated the following:
(spoke in English)
“We are able to perform professional no-notice
inspections all over Iraq and to increase aerial
surveillance. … [The Al Samoud 2 missile]
destruction undertaken constitutes a substantial
measure of disarmament. … Lethal weapons are
being destroyed. … initiatives that are now taken
by the Iraqi side … can be seen as active or even
proactive. … UNMOVIC is currently drafting the
work programme. … How much time would it
take to resolve the key remaining disarmament
tasks? … It would not take years, nor weeks, but
months [just months]. (supra, pps. 3-6).
(spoke in Arabic)
In the light of the conclusions of the report of the
inspectors, there is absolutely no justification for
waging war against Iraq. We therefore wonder, why
war? What present danger or looming threat make war
imperative? The insistence on waging war at a time
when inspections are proceeding vigorously towards
the verification of the elimination of weapons of mass
destruction in Iraq poses questions as to whether the
actual objective of such a war would be the elimination
of weapons of mass destruction, or whether there are
other aims and schemes.
The affairs of the Arab homeland and the
development of its systems of government are to be
decided by the peoples of the region, in accordance
with their national and regional interests, free from any
foreign intervention. Reports of changes to be imposed
on the region and of intervention in its domestic affairs
are offensive and unacceptable.
While we were hoping and waiting for the
initiation of good offices to put an end to the Israeli
occupation of the Arab territories and to the ArabIsraeli conflict, in accordance with the Arab initiative
and relevant United Nations resolutions, we were
surprised at the massing of armies in preparation for
the invasion and occupation of Iraq. The danger that
threatens the security and safety of the Arab nations is
Israel’s possession of weapons of mass destruction —
chemical, biological and nuclear — and their delivery
systems; Israel’s continued occupation of the Arab
territories; its policy of destruction against the
Palestinian people; its rejection of Security Council

S/PV.4717

resolution 487 (1981), which provides for the
placement of its nuclear programmes and capabilities
under IAEA safeguards; and its rejection of the
implementation of paragraph 14 of Security Council
resolution 687 (1991), which provides for the
declaration of the Middle East as a zone free from
weapons of mass destruction.
Why, then, be silent about the Israeli arsenal,
Israel’s violation of Security Council resolutions and
its threat to the security and safety of Arab States?
The inspectors have asked for a few months to
complete their task, in order to finalize their
verification of the peaceful elimination of weapons of
mass destruction in Iraq. Such a request is an
insignificant price for averting a hideous and uneven
war that will sow devastation and destruction, incite
rage and violence and destabilize the Arab region and
the entire world.
We are at a historic juncture that will determine
the destiny of succeeding generations and the future of
international legitimacy for a long time to come. The
war that is being planned against Iraq will be a prelude
to other wars. Humanity will revert to the pre-1939
period: principles and values will collapse, the strong
will dominate the weak and chaos will reign supreme.
The Preamble of the Charter states that
“We the peoples of the United Nations
determined to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime
has brought untold sorrow to mankind”.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States for
his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Algeria. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): Tension is
now at its height and the international community is
holding its breath as the Security Council prepares to
take a painful and wrenching decision, fraught with
consequences both for international peace and
security — since the issue at hand is nothing less than
the authorization of the use of force against a country
whose people have for the past 25 years suffered the
horrors of war and all types of privation — and for the
Organization itself, which was committed at birth by its

founding Charter to “save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war”. In these circumstances, it would
have been improper, to say the very least, if not
contrary to the spirit and the letter of the Charter, for
this Council to take its decision alone and in a veiled
manner, without hearing the voices of those who do not
sit in this Chamber but who still have something to say
on an issue of the gravest concern to them.
Yes, the Council must hear us — we the States
Members of the United Nations above all — and, we
hope, listen to us, because, in carrying out its duties
with respect to international peace and security, it does
so, ultimately and by the very provisions of the Charter
that endows it with its daunting responsibility, on
behalf of us all. Its decisions therefore commit us
collectively and in solidarity, for better or for worse.
This is even more true now that doubt has gripped
some of its non-permanent members, who are being
subjected to unbearable pressure and who, faced with
an impossible choice and caught up in a relentless
machine, are seeking to find their bearings and to take
a decision that would best serve the interests of the
international community and the cause of peace and
security throughout the world.
Yes, the Council must also hear the regional
organizations and other groupings that have spoken out
in recent weeks with remarkable unity at the level of
their heads of State and Government — be it the
European Union, the African Union, the Non-Aligned
Movement, the League of Arab States or the
Organization of the Islamic Conference — for a
peaceful settlement to the crisis, the primacy of the role
of the United Nations and respect for international
legality.
It is all the more duty-bound to listen to do so
because close cooperation between the Security
Council and regional organizations is desirable,
encouraged and clearly provided for by the very
Charter of our Organization and, just this once, because
all these bodies and regional groupings, the importance
of which is hardly negligible, are calling on the
Security Council in a remarkable outburst of unanimity
to ensure that the logic of peace prevails over that of
war.
Yes, the Security Council must lend an ear to
international public opinion and civil society, which, in
recent months, have tirelessly expressed, with force
and conviction, their rejection of war and their

11

S/PV.4717

devotion to peace. This message has been sent with
fervour by all religious leaders throughout the world,
including His Holiness the Pope.
Indeed, in a world where borders are falling and
humanity is coming in the face of adversity to see that
it is both a single entity and highly vulnerable, this
glass house in which we meet today has become the
crucible of our common hopes and aspirations and
cannot ignore the outcry of the outside world, but
contrarily is duty-bound to legitimize its actions and
enhance its authority by paying heed to world opinion.
Yes, finally and above all, the Security Council
cannot reject with a mere wave of the hand the reports
of the inspection missions that it itself created,
dispatched
and
instructed
to
oversee
the
implementation of its resolutions. Indeed, what are Mr.
Blix and Mr. ElBaradei — to whom we pay a welldeserved tribute for their courage, selflessness and
professionalism — asking for if not for just a few more
months — not a few weeks, nor yet a few years — in
which to conclude their work by obtaining Iraq’s
peaceful disarmament?
“After a period of somewhat reluctant
cooperation, there has been an acceleration of
initiatives from the Iraqi side” (S/PV.4714, p. 5),
Mr. Blix has said before this Council. This assessment
was made by a man in whom we have placed our
confidence and of whom we should therefore be proud.
In fact, important developments have taken place
in recent days, all of which testify to a healthy change
of attitude in Iraq. These include the destruction of Al
Samoud 2 missiles; the handing over of fragments of
R-400 aerial bombs; the opportunity to analyse soil
samples in areas where, according to the Iraqi
authorities, VX gas and anthrax cultures have been
destroyed; the remission of dozens of new documents;
interviews with scientists without the presence of
minders; and the overflight of Iraqi territory by United
Nations aircraft.
Moreover, Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei have given
clear denials of accusations and allegations made
against Iraq, which only enhance the conviction of
Member States, which have no choice but to trust the
United Nations, that only impartial inspections, outside
the play of power, can establish the facts beyond any
doubt and lead, with clarity and respect for the law, to
the disarmament of Iraq.

12

To be sure, such progress has been achieved only
because the international community demonstrated its
unity and resolve in unanimously adopting resolution
1441 (2002) and, through direct and ongoing
supervision of the inspections, by keeping the pressure
on all those who must cooperate with the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency.
To be sure, Iraq must do more to convince the
inspectors that it has indeed eliminated the weapons of
mass destruction that it had in the past. It must do so
promptly and unambiguously in the interest of the Iraqi
people, the peoples of the region and international
peace and security. Pressure must therefore be
maintained and the inspectors should be given more
human and material resources and, above all, be able to
count on increased cooperation from the Iraqi
authorities.
Paradoxically, however, at the very moment when
the hope is growing that Iraq will commit itself
decisively to disarmament, the threat of an armed
conflict has suddenly imposed itself and we now fear
the worst.
The burning question that arises today is: Now
that the inspections are beginning to bear fruit and that
Iraq has entered into a phase of proactive cooperation
with the inspectors, as required by resolution 1441
(2002), is it reasonable that the inspections should be
abruptly cut short and that Iraq should be disarmed by
force, at the risk of sacrificing hundreds of thousands
of human lives; causing the ruin and destruction of the
country; jeopardizing its unity and territorial integrity,
and thus the stability and security of an entire region
that is already highly unstable; and perhaps unleashing
evil forces that may promote or provoke extreme
actions by which we shall all suffer?
We feel that the answer is self-evident:
Everything should be done to avoid the use of force.
There are proposals on the table here in the Security
Council that can enable the Council to solve this crisis
threatening the very future of our Organization — if
only the political will exists and if those who disagree
with the manner of disarming Iraq make the effort to
talk among themselves to understand one another. This
can happen in rediscovered unity and in accordance
with the provisions of the United Nations Charter,

S/PV.4717

which are incumbent upon us all and which no one has
the right to disregard.
In the face of such perils, Algeria once again
expresses its deep concern at the threat of war now
emerging. It hopes and prays for a peaceful settlement
of the crisis and for respect by all for international
legality. Algeria supports without reservation the
efforts to achieve the disarmament of Iraq by peaceful
means. In other words, disarmament should be carried
out through inspections, no doubt enhanced, of targeted
objectives, a more precise timetable, and the
establishment by the head of UNMOVIC of a list of
disarmament tasks that remain to be fulfilled.
Disarmament also requires the effective cooperation of
Iraq, which Algeria urges once more to comply
scrupulously with the relevant Security Council
resolutions.
What is at stake is the stability and security of the
entire Middle East and, beyond that, international
peace and security. Also at stake is the credibility and
authority of the Security Council, which remains for us
all, both large and small nations, the keystone of the
system of collective security to which we have all
freely adhered by becoming Members of the United
Nations — credibility and authority that must be
safeguarded at all costs. For there are other dangers and
challenges, undoubtedly more imminent and more
urgent, that threaten us. Who better than the Council
can face them with the necessary legitimacy and
wished-for success?
That credibility and authority will obviously be
better safeguarded and enhanced if the Security
Council
finally
undertakes,
with
the
same
determination and rigour, to see that its resolutions are
respected everywhere and in all circumstances,
beginning in that part of the world where Israel, a serial
aggressor of its neighbours, flouts international legality
and is quietly amassing in complete impunity the most
deadly weapons of mass destruction and regularly
threatens the States in the region. By demonstrating
firmness with regard to that country and by
endeavouring resolutely to achieve a just and final
settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, The
Security Council will demonstrate to all that it is truly
an irreplaceable tool in the service of peace, justice and
security throughout the world.

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Algeria for his kinds words addressed
to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Once again, for the third time in the past few months,
the Security Council is taking up the issue of Iraq. The
opportunity has been given to all Member States of the
United Nations to express their points of view and
opinions on this grave situation surrounding Iraq. This
indeed underlines the gravity and timeliness of the
issue, which threatens stability in the Arab Gulf region
and which will have adverse effects and unpredictable
repercussions for international peace and security.
The entire international community, represented
by its Governments and peoples, has followed the
reports by Mr. Blix, Executive Chairman of the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC), and Mr. ElBaradei,
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). We have heard their opinions in many
press conferences since then, and have seen their media
appearances on television screens around the world.
The two reports have specific elements that we
wish to underline. First, inspections are making
concrete progress towards the genuine elimination of
weapons of mass destruction. A second element is the
call for giving the inspectors more time — not years or
weeks, but some months. That call was reaffirmed by
the Arab Summit held at Sharm-el-Sheikh, which
called for giving the inspection teams a sufficient
period of time to complete their mission in Iraq. The
Summit also called for those inspection teams to
continue to act objectively in carrying out their
mission. Thirdly, the IAEA did not come to the
conclusion that Iraq has revived its nuclear programme
in the past four years.
That is the overall point of view of those
internationally respected and credible international
officials and professionals. We have confidence in
them, and we call on Iraq to complete the
implementation of resolution 1441 (2002).
I do not believe that it is necessary to state that
today the Security Council stands at a pivotal and
critical juncture. The way the Council deals with this

13

S/PV.4717

vital issue will have deep repercussions on
international relations, now and for decades to come.
We therefore urge the Council members to reaffirm
their commitment to the Charter and the resolutions of
the United Nations. We call on them to settle
international disputes by peaceful means in order to
avoid a war that would have negative repercussions for
all.

suffered for so long and has known much tragedy. War
would have serious consequences. Humanity and
international relations would suffer from war. This
makes it a duty for all to work seriously to avoid war,
save lives, to protect interests and safeguard the noble
principles that mankind has built on the rubble of the
tragedy of the Second World War, when humanity said,
“Never again”.

The Arab Summit held in Egypt on 1 March
rejected any attack on Iraq. It rejected the use of threats
to the security and integrity of any Arab State. It called
on all States to support Arab efforts to avoid war. The
Arab States called for giving sufficient time to
inspection teams to complete their mission in Iraq.
Finally, the Arab Summit stressed the Council’s
responsibility to avoid harming Iraq and its people and
to maintain the independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Iraq.

The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of India. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.

Egypt reaffirms its adherence to those Arab
positions. In that context, Egypt has been active in the
ministerial committee created by the Summit, which
last week undertook intense contacts in New York. The
committee will visit Baghdad in the next few days in
order to ensure Iraq’s continued constructive
cooperation with the United Nations within the
framework of all relevant resolutions, the latest of
which is resolution 1441 (2002).
The Middle East, whether in the Gulf region or in
Palestine, needs to attain the objectives of peace and
stability. It must give its peoples the opportunity for
economic and social development and growth in order
that they may all enjoy well-being. No doubt the
deteriorating, even dire, circumstances in Palestine and
the attempts to break the will of the Palestinian people,
who resist occupation, will not help in realizing those
hopes for growth and development. They will not give
freedom and independence to this people, who have
long suffered and whose rights have been usurped.
We advocate a just and comprehensive peace in
that sensitive part of the world. We call for all
conditions to be provided to reach that end. The right
of peoples to self-determination must be protected. As
proposed by my President, Hosni Mubarak, weapons of
mass destruction must be eliminated. The Charter and
United Nations resolutions must be respected.
Therefore, we urge the international community
to give the inspection regime the necessary opportunity
to achieve security and peace in the region, which has

14

Mr. Nambiar (India): We congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of March and express our appreciation to
you for convening this open debate on an issue that has
continued to engage the anxious attention of the
Council, as it has of the entire world community. My
delegation addressed this issue a fortnight ago in the
Council. Therefore, I shall be brief today.
We are grateful to the Mr. Hans Blix and Mr.
Mohamed ElBaradei, the heads of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), respectively, for their briefings on
7 March on the progress of inspections since their last
report to the Council. The reports do indicate progress
in cooperation extended by Iraq to UNMOVIC and
IAEA.
We recognize the growing atmosphere of
foreboding tension within the Council as it comes to
grips with how to proceed with the matter in the
immediate future. As the discussions enter a critical
phase, it is important to underline that our focus should
be on the need to secure the disarmament of Iraq
without resorting to armed force as far as possible.
That this requires full, active and immediate
compliance by Iraq with resolution 1441 (2002) and
earlier resolutions is obvious. But it also requires a
strong unity of purpose on the part of the Security
Council so that the credibility of the United Nations is
not weakened.
We believe that the universe of discourse should
remain the implementation of the relevant resolutions
of the Council. Iraq must cooperate actively with the
inspection process and comply fully with those
resolutions. Of course, the international community has
to strike a balance between the objective of achieving

S/PV.4717

Iraq’s full compliance with United Nations resolutions
and the means adopted to reach that goal. This balance
can best be achieved through a collective decision of
the international community through the United
Nations. There is a need to persevere in this direction
by establishing clear thresholds, if necessary. If giving
more time and laying down clearer criteria would help
the process of United Nations-based decision-making,
that should be given a chance.
India has consistently advocated a peaceful
resolution of the Iraq issue. We are as conscious as any
other delegation of the incalculable costs in human and
material terms that a war would impose on the region
and beyond. We maintain that force should be resorted
to only as the very last, unavoidable option, and only
as authorized by the Security Council. We have also
called for steps to ensure that any measures taken by
the Council would not have an adverse impact on the
humanitarian situation, which is already extremely
difficult. The Council should also bear in mind the
alleviation of the situation of the Iraqi people. Finally,
the measures taken by the Security Council should
ensure the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq.
As we stated on 17 October 2002, what the
Council does at this juncture could well represent a
defining moment in the way the relations among States
are ordered. At that time we called for the active
exploration, under United Nations auspices, of possible
alternatives to avoid recourse to military action or the
use of force. We stressed the need to safeguard the
interests of the countries of the region as well as of
those who have vital stakes in the region. These
considerations remain as valid today, since very little
has changed in the situation.
If the actions of the Council are to be seen to
possess legitimacy, they must issue from a body that is
united and that acts responsibly to ensure compliance
by the regime in Iraq, ensures stability in the
immediate neighbourhood and safeguards international
peace and security in the region as a whole.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Own (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, allow me to say what a pleasure
it is to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the current month. I wish

you every success in your work. I would also like to
acknowledge the tremendous efforts made by your
predecessor, the representative of Germany, during his
presidency of the Council last month.
Once again, for the third time, we are meeting in
the Council Chamber, which represents international
legitimacy, to take up the Iraqi crisis. This is the single
most serious crisis faced by the world since the end of
the cold war. We are also witnessing for the first time
since then the emergence of a clear will by the
international community to reject the methods that
were applied throughout that period of imposing
decisions on this Council and using it as a cover for
actions that run counter to the purposes and principles
of international legitimacy.
The international community has spoken
unambiguously, at the State and Government levels —
at the high-level meetings of Non-Aligned Countries,
the Organization of the Islamic Conference, the League
of Arab States, the African Union and the European
Union — or at the grass-roots level, through mass
demonstrations, especially in Europe and America, and
has thus shown that it rejects war or the threat of war
against the people of Iraq. It has done so, because it has
found the case for war unconvincing and views it as
unjust and unwarranted. This is particularly true given
that Iraq has accepted resolution 1441 (2002)
unconditionally and without restrictions and with clear
political will — a will expressed at the highest level —
and begun to implement it in full. Iraq has provided
effective cooperation, as is borne out by the reports
submitted by Mr. Hans Blix, Executive Chairman of
the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission, and Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei,
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency. Those reports affirmed the importance and
benefit of continued inspections and called upon the
Council to provide more time — not weeks or years,
but months.
I would like to take this opportunity to appeal to
Mr. Blix to promptly supply a list of the outstanding
questions with regard to weapons of mass destruction
in Iraq, given the substantive importance of this
question.
In spite of these positive developments, it seems
that some States are still marching — indeed,
rushing — towards war. They are carrying out an
unwarranted media campaign aimed at distorting the

15

S/PV.4717

facts and providing information to justify such an
approach — information that has been shown to be
invalid by the inspections. Such States are also acting
outside the scope of international law when they
declare their desire to change the regime in Iraq. Such
an objective is outside the purview of resolution 1441
(2002). That resolution did not set out a specific time
frame for the monitoring and inspection process; that
process will eventually lead to the peaceful disarming
of Iraq of its weapons of mass destruction.
This is a historic moment; it is the first time since
the end of the cold war that the international
community has firmly stood up to those who have gone
against its collective will. In this regard, we express
our appreciation for the States members of the Security
Council that have refused, despite blackmail and threat,
to acquiesce to the orders that some States have
become accustomed to issuing in the Council whenever
they want the cover of legitimacy for acts aimed at the
preservation of their and their allies’ economic and
political interest, even at the cost of causing
devastation and suffering for other peoples. We are
certain that history and the international community
will not forget this brave and sincere stand on the part
of those States in the interests of consecrating
international legitimacy in the service of the principles
and purposes of the United Nations Charter and the
promotion of international peace and security.
While strongly affirming the decisions taken at
the summit meetings of the Non-Aligned Movement in
Kuala Lumpur, of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and of the Arab League, as well as the
declarations by the African Union and the European
Union regarding Iraq, we strongly reject war as an
option for eliminating proscribed Iraqi weapons. We
would like to issue a warning about the tragedies and
human suffering that would result from such a war for
all parties and the repercussions that would widen the
circle of violence and terrorism and create instability,
not only in the Middle East but throughout the world.
Such a war would have adverse effects that would
undermine the strength and coherence of the
international alliance established to combat global
terrorism. The fact that some are insisting on moving
towards war, even without a mandate from the Security
Council, sets a dangerous precedent for the United
Nations and endangers the very survival of this great
international Organization, which has maintained

16

international peace and security for the past five
decades.
In conclusion, we are confident that the
promotion of peace and security in the Middle East
region and neighbouring areas can be achieved only
through a just and comprehensive settlement of all
outstanding problems and issues through resort to
reason, which has been given by God to man alone of
all His creatures; the renunciation of the use of force
and the voluntary and full renunciation of all weapons
of mass destruction; the transformation of the region
into one free from weapons of mass destruction,
through effective international arrangements and
actions without discrimination or exception; the
granting to the Palestinian people of their full rights,
the establishment of an independent State on all their
national soil and the withdrawal of all forces from
Arab territories under Israeli occupation; support for
the inspections and the efforts of the inspectors, whose
success is undeniable; and the immediate lifting of the
sanctions imposed against Iraq since 1991.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would like
to join earlier speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, expressing appreciation to your
predecessor and thanking you for having convened this
meeting. I should also like to associate my delegation
with the statement made by the representative of
Malaysia, reflecting the views of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
I would also like to thank the United Nations
weapons inspectors, skilfully led by Mr. Hans Blix and
Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei, for their professionalism and
the comprehensive reports that they have thus far
presented to the Security Council.
The unanimous decision taken by the Security
Council and the deployment of international weapons
inspectors in Iraq demonstrated that the international
community, represented by this Council, was able to
act together in the interests of attaining a common goal.
The big question mark hanging over us now relates to
why the course the Security Council so wisely
embarked upon should be so prematurely aborted. At a
time when the chief inspectors have recommended that

S/PV.4717

they be given a relatively short time to complete the
work mandated by the Council, the persistent question
of the entire international community is why there
should be a rush to war.
It is true that the disarmament of Iraq should not
have dragged on for 12 years. It is also true that the
Iraqi Government should have fulfilled its obligations
much earlier. The fragmentary cooperation on the part
of Iraq is a main cause of — or at least a main pretext
for — the current crisis. As the victim of one of the
two wars of aggression, the major victim of the
harbouring of terrorism and the only State victim of
these weapons of mass destruction, we certainly
understand the frustration of the international
community. By the same token, as a country that in the
span of two decades has suffered directly as a result of
one war and faced the enormous consequences of
another, we know that yet another war in the Persian
Gulf region is not something that should be easily and
hurriedly resorted to. Two wrongs will not make a
right. When it comes to a devastating war in which
thousands upon thousands of innocent Iraqi civilians
will undoubtedly perish, it would be morally and
politically unacceptable if considerations such as hot
weather, moonless nights, troop fatigue and the like
were to take precedence.
I do not think that I need to recall how high the
stakes are. We all have an idea of the unparalleled
disaster that a possible war could bring about. The
humanitarian crisis in Iraq and in neighbouring
countries may take on catastrophic dimensions. The
threat of Iraq’s disintegration and of instability in the
region is significant. The fact that extremism stands to
benefit the most from a war is undeniable. There are
worrying signs that the right of the Iraqi people to selfdetermination may be among the first casualties of a
possible war. Neither the Iraqi people nor the
international community can accept any encroachment
on the sovereignty and independence of a Member
State of the United Nations, no matter how short some
may claim that encroachment to be at the outset.
Moreover, the stakes have already gone far
beyond Iraq. The rush to war has already placed the
current functioning international system on the line. It
is quite irresponsible to rejoice over the fantasy of a
post-United Nations world, as a hawkish columnist did
yesterday. We fully support the warning issued by the
Secretary-General yesterday, and again today in his
thoughtful article in the Wall Street Journal. My

Government is equally gravely concerned over the
outright attempts under way to undermine the United
Nations system and the achievements that humankind
has incrementally accomplished over a very long
period of time to institutionalize the rule of law at the
international level.
Against the backdrop of any realistic scenario, all
of which would amount to no less than a real
nightmare, any chance, as slim as it may appear, should
be seized. War is such a dangerously imperceptive
solution, particularly when innovative proposals and
ideas to strengthen inspections, to set clear targets, to
remove regional and international anxieties about Iraqi
behaviour and to guarantee the right of the Iraqi people
to self-determination, while sparing the region from
another war and maintaining Iraq’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity, are already on the table.
In that context, it is first and foremost incumbent
upon the Iraqi Government to take irreversible steps to
reassure its neighbours and the international
community that it genuinely wishes to live in peace and
to fully implement all its obligations under various
Security Council resolutions, starting with continuing
and expanding active cooperation with weapons
inspectors.
While members of the international community,
including my Government, are unanimous about the
need to fully implement the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, the rush to war is clearly
undermining the momentum built up to bring this crisis
to a successful conclusion. The division and tension
that rush creates is alienating world public opinion and
the great majority of Governments, thus creating
serious doubts about the agenda behind it. The
different, and sometimes conflicting, reasons invoked
to justify a premature recourse to military action cannot
but significantly strengthen doubts. And that is a new
layer of doubts that are added to the previous layers
that resulted from selectivity in enforcing United
Nations resolutions, particularly on Palestine, and
treaties on non-proliferation, more specifically as
regards Israel. Allowing the Security Council to have
the final word in bringing the current crisis to a
successful conclusion, in conformity with the Charter
of the United Nations and international law, would
certainly be a significant step in the right direction.

17

S/PV.4717

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran for his
kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Australia. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Dauth (Australia): Allow me to reiterate, Mr.
President, the words that I was fortunate enough to be
able to offer yesterday in congratulating you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, as well as to express Australia’s
pleasure at the steady hand that we know you will
bring to the Council at this crucial time.
We are at a historic moment for the Council and
for international security. The architecture of
international peace and security, in which we — all of
us — have invested so much over the past 50 years,
hangs in the balance. The Council’s decisions could
either strengthen that architecture or gravely undermine
it. Members of this body face a weighty responsibility
to ensure both the disarmament of Iraq and the
continuing relevance of the Security Council in global
affairs.
Four months after the adoption of resolution 1441
(2002), Australia does not believe that Iraq has shown
a change of heart that will lead to its full and verifiable
disarmament. In his report to this body on 7 March, Mr.
Blix was unable to state that Iraq had taken the
fundamental decision to disarm. In fact, no one,
including United Nations weapons inspectors, has been
able to describe Iraq’s cooperation as immediate,
unconditional and active.
We believe that Iraq has therefore fallen short of
what resolution 1441 (2002) required it to do. Its
actions so far do not permit any other conclusion. The
key question for the Council, as the primary
multilateral instrument of international peace and
security, is what it will do about this situation. Will it
accept the small, belated steps taken by Iraq as
adequate? We believe it should not. The
commencement of the destruction of Al Samoud 2
missiles is not a reason to relinquish the pressure on
Iraq to disarm. Developing missiles with a range
beyond 150 kilometres is something Iraq should never
have done in the first place: this very body expressly
forbade it. Iraq’s belated discoveries of the R-400
bombs raise questions about why it was suddenly able
to find weapons. Other developments, such as the

18

handing over of some documents, are redolent of Iraq’s
tired tactic of seeking to pacify the international
community, rather than signalling the beginning of true
cooperation.
Those reluctant offerings were only brought about
through the enormous pressure on Iraq created by the
massing of military forces in the region. Even that
minimum cooperation would stop if the pressure were
removed. We have seen that pattern before, and no
doubt will see it again unless the Security Council is
united and acts decisively.
The point is that the international community did
not ask that Iraq should put on a display of piecemeal
cooperation. The international community has
demanded Iraq’s unconditional disarmament, verified
by inspectors. Very few outstanding disarmament
questions have been resolved and many remain. We
still do not know what Iraq has done with 6,500
chemical munitions, with a potential agent content of
1,000 tonnes of chemical agent; 8,500 litres of anthrax;
650 kilograms of bacterial growth media, which could
be used to make 5,000 litres of anthrax; 360 tonnes of
bulk chemical agent; 1.5 tonnes of VX and 3,000
tonnes of precursor chemicals. Without full Iraqi
cooperation, none of those and other questions will be
adequately resolved. The inspectors will never be able
to do their job properly. It is time that all the members
of the Security Council acknowledge that. Giving
inspectors more time, or giving them additional
capabilities, will mean nothing unless Iraq genuinely
cooperates.
We all have a fundamental interest in
strengthening the architecture of international security.
We want to see the Security Council reinvigorated, not
sidelined by the situation it faces. Avoiding a decision
or delaying a decision will undermine that objective.
The Security Council must recognize that threats
to international security have changed. It must deal
with the borderless scourge of international terrorism
and with the risk of illicit trade in prohibited and dualuse items. The threat of terrorism is made worse by the
possibility that terrorists could get hold of chemical
and biological weapons. For that reason, it is urgent
that the Council confront this risk by disarming nations
that build those weapons and defy international nonproliferation norms. Failure to do so will both increase
the immediate threat and set a precedent that we will
all come to regret.

S/PV.4717

Creating a more secure world and underpinning
our system of non-proliferation require resolve. The
Security Council must mean what it says, and countries
must live up to their obligations. The Council
expressed its resolve when, in its eighteenth resolution
on the issue, it decided to give Iraq one last chance in
resolution 1441 (2002). Iraq has failed to take that
chance. But even now, the best and perhaps last hope
of achieving a peaceful solution is for the Security
Council to send a clear message to Iraq through a new
resolution that it must disarm fully.
In September last year the Secretary-General
addressed the General Assembly, urging Iraq to comply
with its obligations and stressing that, if its defiance
continued, the Security Council must face its
responsibilities. Six months have gone by. Iraq has not
complied with its obligations. Difficult though it is, it
is time for the Council to face its responsibilities.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Australia for the kind words he
addressed to me.
Before giving the floor to the next speaker, I
should like to draw members’ attention to the fact that
there are still 42 speakers inscribed on my list. After
two hours of debate, we have been able to hear only 11.
My hope is that we shall be able to hear the maximum
number of speakers this evening so that we can
conclude a bit earlier tomorrow. I renew the appeal I
made at the outset: I should like statements not to
exceed seven minutes’ time. I thank members for their
understanding.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Canada. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French):
Thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
important meeting. It is entirely appropriate that
members of the Security Council are meeting today
with all Members of the United Nations. It is difficult
to exaggerate the stakes that today’s Council
deliberations represent for all the States gathered in
this Chamber. Peace and war hang in the balance.
The peoples that we represent have invested their
hopes in the integrity and the usefulness of this
institution. They are counting on its wisdom, its
experience, its resolve and, above all, its willingness to
decide — humanely, in their names — on a response to

the challenge posed by the Iraqi situation. It is
therefore in their names that we call upon the Council
to acquit its solemn obligations to them, to examine
every compromise and every possibility, and to spare
no effort to solve this problem together.
(spoke in English)
The first step to regaining the unity that is
indispensable to success is to recognize that positions
on both sides are held with deep conviction and that
both sides have valid arguments.
An open-ended inspection process would relieve
the pressure on Iraq to disarm. The record leaves no
doubt that the Iraqi authorities have begun to cooperate
only because they face heavy outside pressure,
including the indispensable build-up of military force
by the United States, the United Kingdom, Australia
and others, and the willingness of the international
community to back diplomacy with force if necessary.
On the other hand, a foreshortened inspections
process would create worrying doubt as to whether war
were indeed the last resort. And military action without
a Security Council mandate in this case would risk
undermining respect for international law and would
raise questions about the future viability of this crucial
body, its authority and its efficacy.
The division of the Council has, regrettably,
drawn the focus of the world away from the crucial
issue of disarming Iraq and has shifted it, instead, onto
diplomatic competition. That serves no one’s interests
but Saddam Hussain’s.
On 18 February, the Government of Canada
proposed a set of ideas to bridge this very destructive
divide. We suggested that the key remaining
disarmament tasks be established and prioritized by the
weapons inspectors and that a deadline be established
for Iraq to implement them. We agree with Mr. Blix
that, while cooperation by Iraq must be immediate and
proactive, disarmament and verification cannot be
instantaneous. More time is needed for the inspectors
to do the job that this body has given them to do so that
we can all judge whether Iraqi cooperation goes
beyond process to substance. More time for
inspections, however, will be useful only if Iraq
implements resolution 1441 (2002) and preceding
resolutions, and that means a deadline.
Since the Council last met with the general
membership to discuss the situation in Iraq, there has

19

S/PV.4717

undeniably been some progress, including on the
nuclear file. We have seen encouraging instances of
actual disarmament, particularly with respect to missile
stocks. United Nations inspectors continue to verify the
destruction of proscribed missiles, munitions are being
unearthed, interviews on the inspectors’ terms are
beginning to take place, unimpeded and immediate
access to any and all sites is now a matter of course, no
nuclear materials have been found, and apparently no
nuclear weapons programme has been reconstituted.
But we have also seen signs of Iraqi business as
usual, and we have been disturbed that Iraq has not
done much more, much sooner. If Iraq has nothing to
hide, it has nothing to fear from facilitating private
meetings of its scientists and officials with weapons
inspectors outside Iraq. We still do not have the
answers we must have to crucial questions about Iraq’s
past chemical and biological weapons production and
destruction and about its residual capabilities and
possible current programmes. We have yet to see the
evidence that would convince us that Iraq no longer
possesses or intends to reacquire weapons of mass
destruction, and we still fear that the opposite may be
true.
The Government of Canada believes that a
message of absolute clarity and urgency needs to be
sent from the Security Council to the Government of
Iraq as to what is required of it, and when.
First, we believe that Iraq’s leadership should be
asked to publicly direct all levels of the Iraqi
Government to take all necessary disarmament
decisions in the interests of the Iraqi people and of the
region. Saddam Hussain has seemed to stand apart
from the disarmament process, in apparent disdain of
Council decisions. That cannot continue if Iraqi
protestations of cooperation are to be believed.
Secondly, the Council should ask Mr. Blix to
bring forward the programme of work urgently, within
the week, including the list of key remaining
disarmament tasks that the Government of Iraq must
perform. Mr. Blix should establish the priorities among
those tasks, particularly the biological and chemical
weapons priorities, especially concerning bulk
quantities of anthrax, the disposition of the chemical
agent VX and evidence regarding chemical weapons
shells and bombs and other biological and chemical
munitions. He should also stipulate the urgent and

20

imperative steps required of the Government of Iraq to
implement those tasks.
Thirdly, at the same time, it is obvious that
disarmament and verification cannot be instantaneous.
We believe, therefore, that the Council should set a
deadline of three weeks for Iraq to demonstrate
conclusively that it is implementing these tasks and is
cooperating actively and effectively on substance, on
real disarmament, and not only on process.
Fourthly, to keep the pressure on Iraq, the
Council should consider authorizing Member States
now to eventually use all necessary means to force
compliance, unless, on the basis of ongoing inspectors’
reports, it concludes that the Government of Iraq is
complying.
We are convinced that Iraq is substantially
contained and that, if it cooperates, the disarmament of
Iraq can be had without a shot being fired.
If, by the deadline, the Government of Iraq were
found by the Security Council to be cooperating fully
and actively with the inspectors and disarming or
otherwise complying with United Nations resolutions,
a further deadline could be set. These deadlines could
be repeated until the disarmament goals of resolutions
1441 (2002) and 1284 (1999) were met and we were all
confident that enhanced, ongoing verification and
monitoring were likely to be effective.
Finally, a sustained inspection and monitoring
system would need to be put in place after verified
disarmament in order to give the international
community confidence and to alert it immediately if
the Government of Iraq were to seek to re-establish
proscribed weapons programmes.
The United Nations and the Security Council are
at a watershed.
The Council’s decision on Iraq will not only
affect the lives and well-being of the Iraqi people and
of their neighbours, but also have an impact on
regional stability and the security of all of us.
The Government and the people of Canada want a
peaceful resolution to this crisis. Like the vast majority
of the United Nations membership, we oppose military
intervention, except as a last resort.
We understand the challenge the Council faces.
We ask only that it spare no effort to unite to meet this
crucial challenge and to ensure that the Government of

S/PV.4717

Iraq is no longer a threat to its neighbours and to
international peace and security.
The Council’s decision will determine whether
the peoples of the countries represented in this
Chamber will have been justified in putting their faith
in the promise of the founding ideas of the United
Nations.
May the Council find the wisdom and the will to
ensure, as well, that the United Nations emerges from
this crisis enhanced, not diminished, so that it can, to
quote the opening line of the Charter, “save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war”, which is its most
solemn purpose.
For our part, the people and the Government of
Canada will support the judgments of the weapons
inspectors, and we will respect the decisions of the
Council.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Switzerland. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
should like to take this opportunity, Sir, to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of March and to wish you every
success in your work. I wish also to thank Ambassador
Pleuger for the excellent work he did last month.
Switzerland has taken note of the report presented
by Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei to the public meeting of
the Security Council held on 7 March. It can be
concluded from this interim report that, despite
undeniable gaps with regard to the cooperation
between the Iraqi Government and the United Nations,
real progress has recently been recorded in the
identification and destruction of prohibited arms in
Iraq’s possession.
The process of destroying the Al Samoud 2
missiles, which has just begun, under the supervision
of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC), is a concrete
result of the diplomatic and military pressure currently
being exerted on the Iraqi Government. Furthermore,
Switzerland notes that UNMOVIC and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) do not
have, at this moment, conclusive information about
Iraq’s continued possession or production of weapons
of mass destruction.

Concerning the provisions of Security Council
resolution 1284 (1999), which continues to guide a
considerable part of the inspectors’ work, Switzerland
welcomes the proposal of the UNMOVIC Executive
Director to submit to the Security Council, within a
very short time, a list of all outstanding questions
concerning disarmament, as well as a programme of
work aimed at achieving, within a reasonable timeframe, the objectives of Security Council resolution
1441 (2002).
In current circumstances — that is to say, for as
long as, according to United Nations experts, the
inspections continue to yield results — Switzerland
considers that priority must be given to disarming Iraq
by peaceful means.
At this stage, Switzerland can only support
initiatives that aim to grant the UNMOVIC and IAEA
inspectors a reasonable amount of time to complete
their work of inspection, verification and destruction of
arms which have been proscribed by the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
If all attempts to disarm Iraq by peaceful means
fail, Switzerland invites the members of the Security
Council to see to it that any decision taken on the basis
of Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
includes the unconditional demand on all parties to a
possible conflict to respect, and to ensure respect for,
international humanitarian law.
Moreover, Switzerland recalls the paramount
importance it accords to the humanitarian aspects of
the crisis which has affected the Iraqi people for the
past 12 years, and it reiterates its concern about the
potentially destructive effects of a possible military
conflict, in particular in the humanitarian and social
spheres. The dependence of some 60 per cent of the
Iraqi population on food and medical supplies through
the oil-for-food programme; the worrisome moral and
physical condition of millions of Iraqis, in particular of
women, children and the elderly; and the run-down
state of medical and sanitation infrastructure in Iraq
also argue in favour of the continuation and
strengthening of the inspections, with a view to
achieving the disarmament of Iraq by peaceful means.
Finally, Switzerland once again strongly urges the
Iraqi authorities to cooperate fully, actively and
unconditionally with the United Nations inspectors. In
view of the fact that the inspections cannot be
continued indefinitely, a resolute and immediate

21

S/PV.4717

commitment by Iraq is absolutely indispensable in
order fully to shed light, in the near future, on the stillunanswered questions concerning disarmament.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Switzerland for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Turkey. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Cengizer (Turkey): I wish to congratulate
you, Sir, on Guinea’s assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council at such a crucial juncture and to
wish you every success in this important duty. Our
appreciation goes to your predecessor, the German
presidency, for bringing its task to completion with
care and diligence throughout, at an equally critical
period.
Turkey is happy to align itself with the statement
of the European Union. On the other hand, Turkey, for
a number of reasons, be it our principled approach to
the ongoing crisis as a neighbour of Iraq or be it the
vote cast by the Turkish Parliament, has been at the
forefront of the news during the three weeks since we
last gathered in this Chamber. Hence, the reason for us
to avail ourselves of this opportunity to reiterate the
basic considerations that are still behind our considered
action in this instance and to clarify at the same time
what has been the subject of some speculation lately.
Before I do so, let me first say that Turkey
understands the many difficulties Mr. Blix and Mr.
ElBaradei have encountered, along with the actual
intricacies they have to address while fulfilling their
mandate. It is a fact that considerable progress has been
registered in the inspection process since 18 February,
when we last spoke before this Council. Yet we note
with dismay and foreboding that Iraq, even at this hour,
has yet to show full, immediate, active and
unconditional cooperation with the United Nations
weapons inspectors. Regrettably, the course of action
Iraq has chosen to follow — disgruntled rather than
cooperative — lies at the centre of the present
difficulties this Council is faced with, threatening its
vital unity at this crucial time.
However entrenched the differences that bar the
Council from reaching a united stand may seemingly
be, we call upon the members once again to recognize
that cohesion in this Council will not only serve the

22

legitimacy of any action that may ensue upon these
deliberations, but will reinforce the credibility of the
United Nations. The Council’s cohesion will ensure
that the decisions reached by this body are heard loud
and clear in every part of the globe. Diplomacy must
offer its best at this very critical moment.
Turkey has been earnestly seeking a peaceful
solution to the present crisis, which has been caused by
the non-compliance of Iraq with the many relevant
decisions taken by this Council over the course of no
less than 12 years. As a matter of fact, Turkey has done
everything in its power to let wisdom and foresight
reign. Indeed, we have every reason to seek a peaceful
outcome as a neighbouring country which has felt the
vicious impact of the instability in our region,
especially after the Gulf War.
Yet, for exactly the same reasons — that is,
because of the very fact that we are a neighbouring
country to Iraq, destined to seek friendship and
cooperation with its people — we have been taking
precautionary measures that are geared to lessen and
mitigate the many adverse affects of a looming armed
conflict. Understandably, we have many preoccupations
that continue to occupy the forefront of our minds.
These are manifold in nature and stem from a number
of geostrategic, political, military and economic
considerations, all based on lived-through, real-time
experience. These we should not be expected to let
fester and assume that they will somehow take care of
themselves. These are issues that do not lend
themselves to be treated, at least by us, merely as
different outcomes of different scenarios. We are not
only very near to the area of conflict — we are side-byside with it. Hence, we cannot readily contemplate just
any outcome.
Likewise,
presenting
these
manifold
considerations out of their true context, and depicting
Turkey as haggling over a price tag as if this has been a
pecuniary affair, has been a gross disservice to a
country and its people that have been a bastion of
stability in that region. Those scribblers around the
world who have done so have in fact diminished
themselves and their arguments, but Turkey has arisen
once again to the fore in its true colours.
It is in the context that I have tried to describe
that Turkey has been unequivocal in pronouncing the
principles that guide us vis-à-vis Iraq during these
difficult times. We have been following a transparent

S/PV.4717

and open policy and we have repeatedly made clear the
basic tenets of our policy, which we will continue to
safeguard. Let me reiterate these once more to this
body.
First, the territorial integrity, national sovereignty
and political unity of Iraq should be kept intact.
Secondly, the future of Iraq should be decided by the
Iraqi people in their entirety, not by some of them.
Thirdly, the natural riches of Iraq belong to Iraq and
the Iraqi people as a whole — again, not to some of
them. It is these basic principles that we will continue
to safeguard.
It is because of our open adherence to these
principles that I say this here today: There is no
concealed agenda on our part. I can also say this: As
we have nothing to hide, we do not wish others to hide
anything from us. It is because of our adherence to
these principles that we are set against any attempts at
faits accomplis and other actions that may hinder or
run counter to the emergence of the required
democratic process in Iraq. No one should try to
prejudge the democratic process that these principles
guard and embody at one and at the same time. It is
because of these, yet again, that I can say that any
decision reached by the Iraqi people is acceptable to
Turkey as long as it is reached democratically and
through the participation of all.
I should make it especially clear that Turkey does
not intend to shut out the Kurds living in northern Iraq.
With them, we enjoy a multitude of human bonds,
including kinship and history. We have wrought a
shared wisdom and moral and cultural values. We have
been living together for 1,000 years. Shame on those
soothsayers that pray for enmity in the belief that such
outright conflict would serve their parochial designs!
Let me say just this: Even when terror was rampant in
Turkey, the Turks and Kurds showed that their timehonoured ties are strong enough to resist any
provocation whatsoever.
We look forward to the day when this crisis ends
and when we can reach lasting and viable grounds on
which the peoples of the region and Iraq — including
Arabs, Kurds and Turkmen — can start to benefit from
the fruits of stability. We wish to see Iraq start forging
a future in which it will become a respected member of
the international community whose human, cultural
and natural riches benefit its people and the region.

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Turkey for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Norway. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Kolby (Norway): Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei
have again presented a thorough and detailed report of
the work of the weapons inspectors and their findings.
It is positive that Iraq is now cooperating more
actively and that there has been some progress in the
inspections. The destruction of the Al Samoud 2
missiles is encouraging. This progress is a result of a
united and firm stand by the international community.
It confirms that the pressure on Iraq must be
maintained.
We deeply regret, however, that Iraq has not been
cooperating with the inspectors, as required by
resolution 1441 (2002). The Iraqi cooperation with the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has not been
immediate, unconditional and active. The inspectors
have not received the information necessary to draw
conclusions about Iraqi possession of weapons of mass
destruction.
In this situation, the inspections should continue,
as long as they can produce meaningful and concrete
results. At the same time, it is important to set a time
limit and clear criteria for Iraq to comply with
resolution 1441 (2002). The inspections cannot go on
indefinitely. The time limit must be short and precise,
but achievable.
There is still a possibility to achieve the peaceful
disarmament of Iraq. That is what Norway will
continue to work for. Much is at stake. The onus is now
on Iraq. This is the last opportunity to reach a peaceful
outcome. Iraq must not miss this opportunity.
We know that the United Nations agencies are
preparing for a possible humanitarian crisis in Iraq in
the event of a military conflict. Norway stands ready to
fully contribute to those efforts. In such humanitarian
operations, the United Nations must be given a leading
and coordinating role.
In the present situation it is essential that the
Security Council stands united in its efforts to disarm

23

S/PV.4717

Iraq of its weapons of mass destruction. We urge all
members of the Council to stand up to their
responsibility. This is crucial for the role of this
Council, for the people of Iraq and for the maintenance
of international peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Brazil. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Moura (Brazil): The position of the
Brazilian people and Government is well known. Iraq
must be disarmed peacefully. Iraq should fully abide by
Security Council resolutions. Force should be used
only as a last resort and only when fully authorized by
the Council.
Today, the Brazilian Minister of Foreign
Relations, Mr. Celso Amorim, met with SecretaryGeneral Kofi Annan in The Hague. He delivered to him
a letter from President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, in
which the President restates that Brazil stands ready to
cooperate with any initiative towards finding a
peaceful solution to the crisis.
As we said before, as there is still hope for peace,
we must insist on it.
As stated by many speakers at last Friday’s
debate, the decisions to be taken by the Council have
acquired a dimension that goes beyond the question of
Iraq. They could have adverse and longstanding effects
on the structures of international peace and security.
It is thus essential that the voice of Member
States non-members of the Security Council be heard
once again. Brazil is following the situation with great
concern. As indications mount that we are heading
towards a war, we are compelled to consider the
enormous costs involved.
War always takes a heavy toll on human life and
is not, at this stage, a plausible alternative to
diplomacy. Any military conflict will require the
expenditure of an immense amount of resources. In
global economic terms, a war will certainly aggravate
the recession, which is already victimizing economies
worldwide, especially those of the most vulnerable
developing nations. In humanitarian terms, a war could
bring enormous desolation and suffering. A war could
also further destabilize the volatile situation in the
region.

24

Our collective effort in the war against the
scourge of terrorism would be severely hampered by
radical reactions. Even more so if actions are taken
without regard for decisions arrived at by the Council.
The reports presented to the Council by Mr. Blix
and Mr. ElBaradei indicate that some progress has been
achieved. The presentations also stressed the fact that
more time — not an indefinite period of time — is
needed to properly carry out the responsibilities
entrusted to them by the Security Council. Some
proposals have been put forward in this regard and
should be fully explored so that inspectors can finalize
their work and present their conclusions to the Council.
The members of the Security Council have upon
them a very crucial decision to take. We can only hope
that once a decision is taken, it will be respected by all
of us. It is the only way to ensure the authority of the
Organization.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
New Zealand. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Mackay (New Zealand): Three weeks ago,
the New Zealand Government’s statement to the
Council urged that the diplomatic process be allowed to
run its course with respect to the crisis over Iraq. It
also urged that Iraq move rapidly to provide the
information and cooperation required of it to avert the
catastrophe which war would bring to its people.
The New Zealand Government has placed
considerable weight on the weapons inspection process
as providing a route to the disarmament of Iraq. As
long as the weapons inspectors report that they are
making genuine progress, the New Zealand
Government believes that their work should continue.
Since the open debate in the Council on 18
February, the inspectors have reported again. Their
reports make it clear that while many questions remain
to be answered, real progress is also being made. As
Mr. Blix has said, the destruction of the Al Samoud 2
missiles is not a matter of breaking toothpicks.
On this basis, the New Zealand Government
position remains as it was stated on 18 February. We do
not support military action against Iraq without a
mandate from the Security Council, and we do not
believe that the Council would be justified in giving

S/PV.4717

that mandate at this time. As Mr. Blix has stated, the
inspection process needs months rather than days.
We share the frustration of other members of the
Council and the international community at the slow
pace of Iraqi disarmament over a long period of time.
But now, when the inspection and disarmament process
is finally gaining traction, is not, in our view, the time
to abandon it in favour of the use of force.
The use of force can be authorized by the
Security Council as a last resort to uphold its
resolutions. But in view of the recent reports that this
Council has received from both the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), this is not a time of last resort.
All members of the Council share the same
objective: the disarmament of Iraq. Debate has raged
not over the objective, but over the timetable for and
the means of achieving it. It is distressing to my
Government that the debate has strained longstanding
friendships between nations. That strain will be
magnified if the next steps taken to resolve the crisis
do not have broad international support. The New
Zealand Government therefore urges the Security
Council to continue to support the inspection and
disarmament process it has in place while it is getting
results.
Iraq should not mistake the strong preference of
countries like New Zealand for a diplomatic solution
for tolerance of its failure to comply in full. This is not
a time for Iraq to be practising the diplomacy of
brinkmanship. Iraq should act immediately to comply
in full with all requirements laid down by the Security
Council and the weapons inspectors. Only by so doing
can it be certain that the catastrophe of war will not be
visited on its people.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Cuba. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): We are deeply honoured to see Guinea
preside over the Security Council on this historic
occasion.
The significance of the United Nations is beyond
any doubt. That is not what is being decided at this
table. Nobody can seriously claim that humanity could

do without the collective security system and
international law and live under an increasingly
unipolar, unjust and unsustainable world order and in
the midst of a world economic crisis.
Paradoxically, some of the circumstances that led
to a war, in which 50 million people died, including
hundreds of thousands of young men from the United
States, seem to be recurring today.
President Fidel Castro declared on 6 March:
“Never before have all the nations of the
world found themselves subjugated by the power
and the whims of those who lead a super-Power
with seemingly unrestrained power, while no one
has the slightest idea of their philosophy, their
political ideas and their notions of ethics. Their
decisions are practically impossible to predict or
to challenge. Their strength and capacity to
destroy and kill seem to permeate every statement
they make. This logically leads to fear and
restlessness in many State leaders, especially in
view of the immense military power that
accompanies the political, economic and
technological power of those who cannot stand to
be disobeyed. The dream of a world ruled by
certain norms and of an organization that would
represent the will and the desires of all of the
peoples is quickly evaporating.”
“We the peoples of the United Nations”, as the
Charter states, are today an overwhelming majority of
countries, powerful and weak, developed and
underdeveloped, large and small, from all latitudes and
from both hemispheres. We are a powerful coalition of
States and nations, of political forces and ideologies, of
cultures, ethnicities and religions and of Governments
and civil society, which are growing in awareness and
rebelling to defend the peace, preserve the United
Nations and put a timely halt to this world dictatorship
which threatens us all.
There has been an early mobilization against the
war and its rejection by public opinion is
unprecedented. All of those who feel profound
solidarity with the American people admire their
opposition to unilateral war, even though the real
reasons, including casualty estimates and costs, are
being concealed from them.
A unilateral war, the one we are promised, would
have devastating consequences worldwide. It would be

25

S/PV.4717

the end of democracy in international relations. It
would cause inestimable harm to the economies of
developing countries, have terrible social consequences
and would totally destabilize the Middle East.
The United Nations and the Security Council
would be dealt a lethal blow that would annihilate their
role and prerogatives as guarantors for international
peace and security. It would put their existence in
jeopardy and place all States, with no exception, at
risk, facing the unpredictable vagaries of a universal
tyranny and putting them at the mercy of new preemptive wars.
A war against Iraq would be unjust and totally
unnecessary. These months of debate, meticulous
inspections by the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
which have been discrediting evidence and refuting
accusations, the unquestionable cooperation of Iraq and
the disarmament activities it has been carrying out in
compliance with Security Council resolutions have
proved that there is no credible threat or risk to the
national security of the United States. We know this is
not, from any point of view, an act of self-defence.
Instead it is an act of predatory war.
It has now been announced, with astounding
cruelty, that new weapons are to be used and that there
will be an unprecedented intensity of bombing. It is
declared that the magnitude of civilian losses is
incalculable
and
the
terrible
humanitarian
consequences are being disguised.
The path to the full implementation of the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council is based on
the preservation of peace, cooperation and the good
faith of all parties to dispel any doubts about the
possession of weapons of mass destruction, the
continuing work of UNMOVIC and IAEA and a
comprehensive settlement on the question of Iraq,
including the lifting of sanctions, to guarantee regional
stability and full respect for sovereignty, territorial
integrity and the political independence of Iraq, Kuwait
and all the countries in the region.
The Non-Aligned Summit, held in Kuala Lumpur,
loyal to its founding principles, has crafted a broadranging and relevant statement.

26

A unilateral attack against Iraq, as the SecretaryGeneral has warned, would constitute a violation of the
Charter. It would be an act of aggression.
The draft resolution being discussed is a
declaration of war. Its objective is to deceive public
opinion. Its contents and deadlines are impossible to
implement. Even if it is dressed up with new
benchmarks, or if the ultimatum is postponed for a few
days, it remains essentially the same.
The opposition to war and the defence of the
United Nations and the Charter by the majority of the
members of the Security Council, including three of the
permanent members, is commendable. Pressured by the
empire, they enjoy the almost unanimous support of
Member States, of international public opinion and of
their own peoples.
Nothing could be more serious or have worse
consequences than to surrender, and nothing could
make the Security Council more irrelevant. The veto,
so often used in an indiscriminate and illegitimate way,
despite its obsolete and anti-democratic nature, would
be, in this case, justified by the exceptional
circumstances in which we are living. It would take
limitless cynicism to criticize it.
The non-permanent members now have a special
opportunity to make their own voices heard, as
sovereign and equal nations that can rely on the
enormous legitimacy of our votes. We have elected
them precisely for moments like these. They know they
are acting on our behalf and that we know the risks and
challenges they face; they have our full support. The
Non-Aligned caucus also counts on the solidarity of the
whole Movement.
Whatever happens, if the Security Council fails to
truly and legitimately fulfil its mandate, the General
Assembly should exercise, in this emergency, all the
authority and power granted by the Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Iceland. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Ingolfsson (Iceland): Let me at the outset
refer to my statement in the Council some three weeks
ago stating the general views of the Government of
Iceland on the serious issue under consideration today.

S/PV.4717

My Government is deeply concerned about the
situation prevailing in Iraq, and still hopes that the
Security Council will manage to reunite in following
up resolution 1441 (2002). No effort must be spared to
maintain the resolve of the Council. A failure in this
respect would have unforeseeable consequences for the
crucial role the Council has in maintaining peace and
security in the world.
Speaking in the General Assembly last
September, my Foreign Minister underlined that full
implementation of Security Council resolutions is
imperative. He also commended the consensus that was
emerging in the Council about how to deal with
defiance of Security Council resolutions. A
constructive approach from the Council is desperately
needed again today.
It is the view of my Government that the Iraqi
Government has not actively cooperated with the
inspectors and is thus in violation of resolution 1441
(2002). The international community has tolerated the
relentless obstruction of inspections for 12 years now.
It is therefore high time for the United Nations to show
determination; the credibility of the United Nations is
at stake.
The Government of Iceland reiterates its hope for
a peaceful solution. A war in Iraq is a last resort. It is
up to the Iraqi Government to avoid conflict by
disarming quickly and in a credible manner.
The international community must show its
resolve and the United Nations its strength. The
handling of this matter must leave no one in doubt
about the authority and ability of our Organization to
enforce its decisions.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Singapore. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): This is the first
time that I have addressed the Council since our term
ended. It gives me great personal pleasure to
congratulate an old friend and colleague on the
assumption of the presidency. As you know, Sir, you
are presiding at a crucial moment in the Council’s
history; we have full confidence in you. I would also
like to congratulate Ambassador Pleuger and his team
for the tremendous job they did last month.

Today’s meeting is both timely and critical. The
Security Council is at a crucial decision-making point
on Iraq. We all agree that the preference is for a
peaceful resolution of the issue of Iraq. We also agree
that war must always be a last resort. And of course all
of us would like to see a second Security Council
resolution adopted.
At the same time, we must not overlook certain
fundamentals. The primary responsibility remains with
the Government of Iraq, not the international
community, to demonstrate compliance. It is imperative
that Iraq disarm immediately and comply fully with all
Security Council resolutions. During Singapore’s term
on the Security Council, we consistently took the
position that the Iraqi authorities must comply with all
Security Council resolutions. This position was based
on the important point of principle that international
law must be observed. On 8 November 2002 Singapore
voted in favour of Security Council resolution 1441
(2002) in the expectation that international law and
order would be preserved.
It is important to bear in mind that resolution
1441 (2002) was not the Council’s first resolution on
this issue. Iraq has had, unfortunately, a miserable
record of complying with Security Council resolutions.
In fact, resolution 1441 (2002) was the Council’s
seventeenth resolution on the issue since resolution 678
(1990) of 29 November 1990, which was designed to
restore international peace and security in the area
following Iraq’s illegal invasion of Kuwait.
Subsequently, the ceasefire terms adopted by the
Council in resolution 687 (1991) of April 1991
required Iraq to end its weapons of mass destruction
programmes, recognize Kuwait, account for missing
Kuwaitis and third-party nationals, return Kuwaiti
property and end support for international terrorism.
Resolution 687 (1991) was designed as a
comprehensive framework to restore peace and
maintain the security of the region. Regrettably, Iraq
has not complied with many of the terms of resolution
687 (1991), even though almost 12 years have passed.
When we negotiated resolution 1441 (2002), our
understanding was that Iraq was in material breach of
its obligations and that it would be the final
opportunity for Iraq to comply or face serious
consequences. Resolution 1441 (2002) was specifically
designed to discourage Iraq from reverting to its past
patterns of non-cooperation and evasion.

27

S/PV.4717

It has become increasingly clear that Iraq has
only a few more days to comply with resolution 1441
(2002) or face the consequences. We therefore hope
that it will comply immediately, actively, fully and
unconditionally with the United Nations weapons
inspectors. As Mr. Hans Blix said in his most recent
statement to the Council on 7 March 2003,
“It is obvious that, while the numerous
initiatives, which are now taken by the Iraqi side
with a view to resolving some longstanding open
disarmament issues can be seen as active, or even
proactive, these initiatives, three to four months
into the new resolution, cannot be said to
constitute immediate cooperation, nor do they
necessarily cover all areas of relevance.”
(S/PV.4714, p.5)
Clearly, many unanswered questions remain to be
addressed by the Iraqi authorities. The Financial Times
today contains a report of an interview with Mr.
Mohamed ElBaradei. He made a suggestion to a
delegation of Arab foreign ministers travelling to Iraq
that they urge dramatic action by Baghdad. We agree
with Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei’s comments that, “what
is required is a dramatic change in spirit and sincerity”.
He added that
“the Iraqi president [could] himself announce on
television that he is prepared for complete
cooperation and that he is giving directives to all
Iraqi officials to cooperate completely and
present all the documents they have, or even if
they have weapons, to reveal them”.
It is our hope that the Security Council will act in
a way that will preserve the unity we achieved by
resolution 1441 (2002). A unified position will send a
clear message to Iraq from the Council that continued
defiance of its obligations will not be tolerated.
It will also send the signal to the rest of the world
that the development and proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction pose a grave threat to international
order that cannot be ignored. Indeed, the issue under
discussion today is only one example in a broader
problem of weapons of mass destruction proliferation.
But even as we focus on these important
questions, we must never lose sight of the human
dimension of the Iraq issue. Singapore attaches great
importance to improving the humanitarian situation of
the people of Iraq. They have already suffered greatly

28

as a result of the Government of Iraq’s failure to
comply with its disarmament obligations. Their
suffering should not be prolonged. Once again, we urge
the Government of Iraq to make the right decision.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Singapore for his kind words
addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Republic of Korea. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea): In
tackling the challenges posed by Iraq’s programme of
weapons of mass destruction, the Government of the
Republic of Korea believes that all unanswered
questions concerning Iraq’s programme of such
weapons must be fully resolved by Iraq’s immediate
and full compliance with all relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 1441 (2002).
We note that, under strong pressure from the
international community, Iraq has offered some degree
of cooperation to the United Nations weapons
inspectors since the resumption of the inspections in
November 2002. However, the Government of the
Republic of Korea remains gravely concerned that Iraq
has not yet shown immediate, unconditional and active
cooperation, as provided for in resolution 1441 (2002),
and that many proscribed weapons and items still
remain unaccounted for.
My Government is of the view that the findings
of the inspection teams, including the most recent
reports given last Friday by Executive Chairman Blix
of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission and Director General
ElBaradei of the International Atomic Energy Agency,
have indicated neither full and voluntary cooperation
on the part of Iraq nor any full resolution of remaining
disarmament issues.
Given Iraq’s persistent failure to comply with
successive resolutions of the Security Council during
the past 12 years, the inspections cannot continue
indefinitely. There should be a clear deadline for Iraq’s
disarmament. Without a genuine intention to disarm on
the part of Iraq, the continued inspection process will
not lead to a full resolution of the remaining questions
with regard to Iraq’s programme of weapons of mass
destruction. The responsibility to disarm clearly

S/PV.4717

belongs to Iraq. Given the absence of Iraq’s genuine
will to disarm, it is essential that the Security Council
send a unified and resolute message to Iraq. It is time
for the Security Council, as the principal organ for the
maintenance of international peace and security, to act
on Iraq’s failure to comply fully with its disarmament
obligations.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Kittikhoun (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic) (spoke in French): I would first like to
congratulate you most warmly, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. My delegation expresses the hope that under
your competent guidance at this difficult time our
current deliberations will yield positive results. My
delegation would also like to thank Germany, which
presided so tactfully over the Council’s work last
month.
My country, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, has very closely followed the developments
in the situation in Iraq. At their summit meeting, held
on 24 and 25 February at Kuala Lumpur, the heads of
State or Government of the Non-Aligned Movement
welcomed the decision of the Government of Iraq to
authorize the unconditional return of United Nations
inspectors pursuant to the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council. In that regard, they encouraged Iraq
and the United Nations to intensify their efforts to find
a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to all
pending issues. They also emphasized that it was
urgently important to find a peaceful solution to the
question of Iraq in order to preserve the authority and
credibility of the Charter of the United Nations and of
international law, as well as to preserve peace and
stability in the region and throughout the world.
The question of Iraq affects peace, security,
cooperation and development in the crucial Middle
East region. My delegation believes that we should do
our utmost to ensure that this matter is resolved rapidly
and, above all, peacefully. In today’s world, where
peace remains fragile, it is important that the
international community come out resolutely in favour
of settling disputes through peaceful means, however
complex those disputes may be. The use of force to
settle this conflict will cause material damage and great

loss of human life and leave deep scars for a long time
to come. In our opinion, we should do everything
possible to avoid the outbreak of war, which can only
cause greater suffering to the Iraqi people.
The work of United Nations inspectors began
after Iraq unconditionally agreed to Security Council
resolution 1441 (2002). Despite problems and
difficulties, we have seen from the latest reports of Mr.
Blix and Mr. ElBaradei that there has been some
progress and that some positive results have been
achieved. Like the majority of Member States of the
Organization, we think that the inspection work has
begun to bear fruit, and we are of the view that a
peaceful way to disarm Iraq can still be realized.
We have arrived at a crucial moment in history.
The Security Council, the major body responsible for
maintaining international peace and security, faces a
historic choice. Peoples throughout the world are
looking to us with great concern. In the light of the
fragility of world peace and the uncertainty over our
world’s future that continues to hang over us, do we
not think that the peaceful settlement of disputes must
surely take first place in international relations?
Any solution to the problem through political
means and within the framework of the United Nations
prevents material damage, but also, and above all,
saves innocent human lives. The Iraqi people, which
has committed no crime, has already suffered too much
and does not deserve to suffer even more. Like all the
other peoples of this world, that long-suffering people
is entitled to peace — a condition in which it can
recover and prosper. The world will be doing a great
service to the Iraqi people by opting for a peaceful
settlement of the current crisis.
Those are some modest thoughts that my
delegation wished to share with this gathering.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Indonesia. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia): My delegation
associates itself with the statement made earlier by
Malaysia in its capacity as Chair of the Non-Aligned
Movement, at whose request this meeting was
convened.

29

S/PV.4717

The delegation of Indonesia is gratified that, once
again, the Security Council is meeting in an open
format to examine this contentious agenda item. It is a
sign that, despite differences of opinion within the
Council concerning the way forward, the doors to
consultation and debate are still open. Indeed,
negotiation is at the heart of the multilateral process, of
which we continue to be a staunch supporter and
advocate.
When my delegation addressed the Council three
weeks ago, we were of the same opinion as those
Member States that were convinced that, on this issue,
the diplomatic option had not been exhausted towards
meeting the objectives of resolution 1441 (2002).
Although events have moved forward since then, we
still firmly believe that the option is still on the table
and that the Council can resolve this matter in a
peaceful manner.
It is also important to be certain that we are
seriously undertaking the responsibilities of peace in
the spirit in which the Charter of the United Nations
intends it, and not just as a series of steps leading to
war. To that end, my delegation feels that the
inspections being conducted by the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) have yielded a good result and
therefore that they should be given a fair chance,
measured in terms of additional time as well as
personnel and resources.
We do not think that anyone denies the fact that
there has been some progress in the inspections process
so far, or questions whether UNMOVIC and the IAEA
are capable of the task before their inspectors. The
general concern is that the inspections have not turned
up evidence of violations of United Nations resolutions
by Iraq. Unfortunately, that assessment can hardly be
considered conclusive, since the inspectors are still
working.
In that connection, Indonesia will support a
strengthened inspection regime. We advocate a
strengthened regime that is cognizant of the importance
of its assignment and is able to execute that assignment
responsibly, fairly and quickly. In that context, it is
understood that, as of today, Iraq has provided its
cooperation to enable the inspectors to work
effectively. However, in view of the gravity and
urgency of the situation, it is critically important that

30

Iraq continue to actively and immediately cooperate
with them, as mandated by resolution 1441 (2002).
We continue to believe that there can be no
solution to the situation in the Middle East that ignores
the reality of the entire region. I state this with
particular reference to the situation in Palestine, which
continues to deteriorate daily, although that may
conveniently — but unwisely — be ignored. It is the
belief of my delegation that the solution to the core
issue of Palestine would, accordingly, contribute to the
comprehensive settlement of all aspects of the
problems in the Middle East and that we should never
concentrate so much on other issues in the region that
we overlook that fact.
Finally, we will call tirelessly on the Security
Council to fully adhere to the provisions of the
Charter — that is, to promote peace and security. In
that context, therefore, Council members must bear in
mind that peace is their obligation to the world. It is
important to take into account that every member of the
Council represents all Members of the United Nations.
War must be a final entry in the dictionary of their
deliberations: a decision to be made by the Council
only as a last, inescapable recourse.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Albania. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Nesho (Albania): For quite a long time now,
the Security Council has been fully committed to
disarming Iraq of weapons of mass destruction.
Resolution 1441 (2002), unanimously adopted,
demonstrated not only the determination of the
international community to fully disarm the Iraqi
regime, but also its resolve to penalize a regime that
possesses weapons of mass destruction and thus
endangers peace and security in the region and even
beyond.
In spite of the considerable efforts and the
commendable work of the United Nations inspectors,
we are of the opinion that they cannot achieve the
required disarmament, because of the Baghdad
regime’s lack of willingness to cooperate by disarming
immediately, actively and unconditionally.
The time for disarming Iraq is running out. The
new draft resolution to be presented by the United
States of America, Great Britain and Spain clearly and

S/PV.4717

firmly redefines the determination of the international
community to preserve peace and security in the world.
It ensures and maintains the authority of the
international community and of the Security Council in
their joint actions against such regimes, which present
a threat to our common future and values.
Therefore, Albania supports the determined
position of the United States of America and is in
favour of this draft resolution. Albania has been part of
the international coalition for disarming Iraq, and today
we reaffirm our participation in the future coalition of
the willing.
The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Albania, Mr. Ilir Meta, emphasized,
in his most recent statement:
“For many years now, this regime has
continuously ignored the efforts of the
international community, and of the Security
Council in particular, for a diplomatic and
peaceful solution, and has not collaborated in the
elimination of the weapons of mass destruction.
On this basis, we believe that intervention is
inevitable in order to avoid the worst scenario of
legitimizing a regime that would hold hostage
regional and global security and that would
challenge the authority of the Security Council as
well as that of the United Nations, of which our
country is a Member.”
Peace and security cannot be achieved through
endless meetings and unproductive discussions
motivated by fear and uncertainty about the future, or
by standing by and not taking action. Extending the
process of the disarmament of Iraq will give its regime
an opportunity once again to defy the international
community and the United Nations, and, moreover,
would seriously call into question the very credibility
of this Organization. The United Nations should
shoulder its responsibilities and act accordingly.
Therefore, we must stand united and determined. In
conclusion, allow me to reiterate before this body that
peace is not the mere absence of war.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Viet Nam. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Ngo Duc Thang (Viet Nam): At this crucial
stage in the consideration of the Iraqi issue, I would

like to reiterate our country’s position that this crisis
can be resolved through political and peaceful means,
in conformity with the United Nations Charter,
international law and the prevailing aspiration of
peace-loving peoples all over the world. Such a
solution calls for the utmost effort to be made in order
to avert war and to maintain peace, security and
stability in the world.
We believe that the option of finding political and
diplomatic solutions to the question of Iraq has not
been fully exhausted. Therefore, the cooperation of all
concerned parties in the search for a peaceful
settlement should be encouraged, and all diplomatic
initiatives to this end should be given serious
consideration.
Viet Nam welcomes the results of the work of the
United Nations inspectors in Iraq. Last Friday’s
briefing, at which quarterly reports were presented by
Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei, showed that very
encouraging progress is being made in the inspection
process in Iraq, and that Iraq has demonstrated more
active cooperation. There has been real progress in the
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. Iraq has informed the inspectors about its
Al Samoud missiles, and it has begun to destroy them
within the prescribed time frame set by Mr. Blix.
This positive development shows that a peaceful
settlement is possible and that there is a real alternative
to war. Regarding Iraq’s nuclear potential, Mr.
ElBaradei has also confirmed that great progress has
been made; and that, as accounts presented by Iraq are
plausible and verifiable and cooperation with the
inspections is good, the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) is confident about reaching final
conclusions soon.
Iraq has also announced the presentation of a
comprehensive report on outstanding issues in the field
of biological and chemical weapons. Given the current
situation and the ongoing progress, we share the view
that there is no need for a second resolution and that
the inspections should continue as long as they can
yield viable results.
We also believe that the inspections cannot go on
forever. With this in mind, the inspectors should be
asked by the Council to present, for the Council’s
consideration, a list of criteria to determine Iraq’s
cooperation, or a list of specified and prioritized tasks
that Iraq should accomplish within a reasonable time

31

S/PV.4717

frame. In this regard, we welcome all proposals to set
benchmarks for Iraq’s cooperation, and we call on the
Security Council to give more serious consideration to
the proposals presented by France, Russia and
Germany in their memorandum to the Security Council
of 24 February 2003.

must be achieved peacefully, as set forth by the
Security Council. We believe that there is absolutely no
justification for waging a military campaign against
Iraq that would affect not only the region but the
world. We have also called for the need to respect the
unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq.

The Government of Viet Nam continues to
believe that there is still a chance for a peaceful
solution to the Iraqi crisis and therefore strongly
appeals to the Security Council and all parties involved
to do all they can to avert war. By working together
and acting together on the basis of the relevant United
Nations resolutions, we will strengthen the credibility
and relevance of the United Nations and that of the
Security Council in the fulfilment of its mandate of
maintaining international peace and security.

The position opposed to war against Iraq enjoys
overwhelming and unprecedented popular support, as
highlighted by the many rallies and demonstrations
held in hundreds of cities and towns throughout the
world and as expressed in many resolutions adopted
and recommendations made by governmental and intergovernmental organizations in many countries.

The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is Mr. Mokhtar Lamani, Permanent
Observer for the Organization of the Islamic
Conference to the United Nations, to whom the
Council has extended an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Lamani (Organization of the Islamic
Conference) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset
to express my sincerest congratulations to you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We are fully confident that the deliberations
of the Council will be crowned with success under your
wise leadership.
Let me also take this opportunity to express our
appreciation to Ambassador Gunter Pleuger and to the
German delegation for their successful and effective
presidency of the Council last month.
Let me also thank you, Sir, for convening this
open meeting. I should like also to thank the delegation
of sisterly Malaysia and to the Non-Aligned Movement
for their initiative to call for the convening of this
meeting.
This meeting is being held as grave challenges
face us from every side and as the clouds of war gather
on the horizon, promising evil, grave and unforeseeable
consequences and repercussions. The Organization of
the Islamic Conference (OIC) has in the past repeatedly
expressed its clear and forthright position on the threats
facing Iraq. We have stressed that the resolution of the
issue of disarmament of weapons of mass destruction

32

The heads of State and Government of members
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference held an
emergency summit in Doha, Qatar, on 5 March 2003.
They issued a declaration expressing their outright
rejection of an assault on Iraq and of any threat to the
security and safety of any Islamic State. They stressed
the need for a peaceful settlement to the Iraqi issue
within the framework of the United Nations and in
accordance with the relevant international resolutions.
They reiterated their solidarity with the Iraqi people
and called for the lifting, within international
legitimacy, of the embargo imposed on that people.
They rejected all attempts to change the region and to
interfere in its internal affairs, as well as any disregard
for its interests and just causes.
We believe that the use of military force against
Iraq in the current circumstances, in which that country
is cooperating with the demands of the Security
Council and with the international inspectors — as
indicated in the reports of Mr. Blix and
Mr. ElBaradei — would be rejected and unjustified,
and represents an assault on the pan-Arab and Islamic
world. It would be a serious attack on the central role
of the United Nations, which is entrusted with
maintaining international peace and security. It would
be a grave threat to international relations, stability and
security throughout the world. It would weaken the
global campaign against terrorism and, indeed,
encourage extremism and violence instead of
eliminating them.
Faced with these grave circumstances, we cannot
fail to urge Iraq to continue cooperating fully and
positively with the international inspectors. We call on
Iraq to facilitate the inspectors’ mission and fully to
implement relevant Security Council resolutions. We

S/PV.4717

continue to stress the need to respect the independence,
sovereignty and security of all States, as well as the
principles of good-neighbourliness. We emphasize the
need for substantive and concrete progress on the issue
of Kuwaiti detainees and prisoners of war, the State
archives and other property of the State of Kuwait. We
also call on Mr. Blix to respond to the request put
forward by a number of Council members and nonCouncil members to list the remaining disarmament
tasks in order to enhance efforts at implementing
resolution 687 (1991).
It is sad indeed that the noise surrounding the
possibility of war in Iraq is distracting from the
aggressive and illegitimate practices of the extremist
Israeli Government against the Palestinian people. The
increasing pace of assassinations, the demolition of
homes, acts of destruction and other forms of collective
punishment continue unabated. The Security Council
stands with its arms folded as it witnesses Israel’s war
crimes. It is unable to provide security and protection
to the Palestinian people, which is languishing under a
brutal and illegitimate occupation.
We wonder how long this double standard with
respect to the norms governing international issues will
continue, given the current international situation, in
which Iraq is being threatened with destruction and
annihilation and the killing of tens of thousands of
innocent citizens, while the State of Israel is allowed to
acquire all types and categories of weapons of mass
destruction, openly and in large quantities. It is also
allowed to perpetrate all forms of war crimes
proscribed by international law and international norms
and conventions against the Palestinian people —
whose rights, freedoms and lands have been raped;
whose economy has been destroyed; and which has
been dispersed in refugee camps and exile.
We hope that the Security Council will, at this
critical juncture, shoulder its historic responsibilities,
address the difficult situation facing it and overcome
its deficit of wisdom. Let it prove to the international
community that it is worthy of the trust placed in it to
maintain international peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Permanent Observer of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Lebanon. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.

Mr. Diab (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): We
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
thank you for convening this meeting. We also thank
your predecessor from Germany and his delegation for
all their efforts last month.
In the past few days, we have seen all the peoples
of the world supporting the United Nations and
defending the international system it represents.
Unilateral use of force is a violation of the United
Nations Charter, impairs its legitimacy and jeopardizes
the present world system. Most of the statements made
by States members of the Security Council at its last
meeting on this topic, like those made today, reflect the
positions of various geographic groups, including those
adopted at the Arab Summit at Sharm el-Sheikh, the
Islamic Summit at Doha, the Non-Aligned Movement
Summit in Kuala Lumpur and the French-African
summit in Paris, along with the position of the Holy
See. All these positions reject the war and express
serious concern about its extremely dangerous potential
impact on the political, social, security and the
humanitarian situation, not only in the Middle East, but
in the world as a whole.
In this context, the ministerial committee created
at the fifteenth Arab Summit in Sharm el-Sheikh came
to New York last week to convey the Arab position on
the Iraqi crisis to the Security Council. It has four main
points. It reaffirms the outcome of the summit held in
Beirut in 2002, which can be summarized as follows.
First, it totally rejects any attack on Iraq and any
threat to the integrity and security of any Arab State
and national Arab security as a whole. Secondly, it
reaffirms the need to respect international legitimacy
and to implement resolution 1441 (2002), which does
not authorize war against Iraq or provide an automatic
trigger for military action. Thirdly, it calls for the
inspection teams to be given sufficient time to fulfil
their mandate and to finish their tasks and affirms that
Iraq must cooperate. Fourthly, it reaffirms international
obligation for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence of Iraq. The Security Council is
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security and must play its role in dealing with the
Iraqi crisis in all its aspects.
The reports of Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei note
that continual and clear progress is being made in
several areas, thanks to Iraqi cooperation with the

33

S/PV.4717

inspections. The reports submitted to the Council on
Friday state that Iraq has actively and proactively
cooperated. The proactive cooperation of Iraq includes
the gradual destruction of its Al Samoud 2 missiles and
other ballistic vectors and interviews with Iraqi
scientists in accordance with the inspectors’ conditions.
It goes without saying that this level of cooperation is a
qualitative leap forward in compliance with Security
Council resolutions 1441 (2002), related to the
verification of Iraq’s disarmament of weapons of mass
destruction.
Insistence on the military option has led the
international community to discuss the possibility of
whether or not to adopt another resolution. That has
weakened the Council’s unity and affected efforts to
strengthen the role of the inspections of the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Those efforts should
have enabled the two agencies to ensure by peaceful
means the elimination of weapons of mass destruction
so that the sanctions that have caused so much
suffering and tragedy to the Iraqi people could be
lifted.
The draft resolution before the Council would
authorize the automatic use of force. It sets an
unrealistic deadline, contrary to the time line proposed
by Mr. Blix himself. As a result, the main tasks that
will be defined by the work programme, which is
expected to be issued soon, would be subject to the
deadline for war, thus preventing the implementation of
the programme.
It is the clear the interest of the international
community to strengthen the mandate of the inspectors
so that they can eliminate weapons of mass destruction,
not only in Iraq but in the Middle East as a whole,
including in Israel, in keeping with paragraph 14 of
Security Council resolution 687 (1991).
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Belarus. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Ivanou (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): Allow
me to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. Let
me express our belief that under your able guidance,
the Council will successfully deal with the difficult
tasks before it.

34

The delegation of the Republic of Belarus
reiterates its firm and unswerving commitment to the
process of the peaceful disarmament of Iraq based on
scrupulous compliance with the demands of the
Security Council under the United Nations Charter and
on unconditional compliance with all its relevant
decisions. The President and the Government of the
Republic of Belarus believe that the consistent efforts
of the inspectors of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in
Iraq have yielded concrete, practical results that
reaffirm the effectiveness and the correctness of the
policy chosen by the Security Council in resolution
1441 (2002), that of the disarmament of Iraq by
political and diplomatic means, in the interest of all
members of the international community. Those results,
as well as Iraq’s gradually increasing cooperation with
UNMOVIC and the IAEA, cannot be disregarded or
groundlessly used to justify the choice of armed force.
We are resolutely against any kind of ultimatum
imposing a limiting time frame on the activities of the
inspectors or on the process for Iraq’s compliance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions. The Republic
of Belarus advocates the further intensification of
inspection activities in Iraq and calls upon the
Government of Iraq to use all resources available to it
to ensure maximum, active cooperation with
UNMOVIC and the IAEA.
The continuing stirring of tensions around Iraq
and unabashedly warlike intentions cause the President
and Government of the Republic of Belarus deep
concern. In solidarity with the majority of the members
of the international community, Belarus sees no
alternative to a peaceful disarmament process in Iraq
and calls upon the members of the Security Council to
show firmness and wisdom in order to maintain peace
and to spare the Iraqi people and the entire region the
ills of war.
The President (spoke in French): Of the 47
speakers on our list, 28 have spoken. Because of the
lateness of the hour, I propose, with the agreement of
the Council, that we suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
tomorrow.
The meeting was suspended at 7 p.m.
