S/PRST/2014/13

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 July 2014
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7225th meeting of the Security Council, held on 28 July 2014, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
the Middle East including the Palestinian question”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses grave concern regarding the
deterioration in the situation as a result of the crisis related to Gaza and the
loss of civilian lives and casualties.
“The Security Council calls for full respect of international humanitarian
law, including the protection of civilian population, and reiterates the need to
take appropriate steps to ensure the safety and well-being of civilians and their
protection.
“The Security Council expresses strong support for the call by
international partners and the Secretary-General of the United Nations for an
immediate and unconditional humanitarian ceasefire, allowing for the delivery
of urgently needed assistance, and they urged all parties to accept and fully
implement the humanitarian ceasefire into the Eid period and beyond. The
Security Council commends the Secretary-General of the United Nations and
the U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry for their efforts in this regard.
“The Security Council also calls on parties to engage in efforts to achieve
a durable and fully respected ceasefire, based on the Egyptian initiative. In this
regard, the Security Council welcomes the efforts of internati onal partners and
the convening of the international meeting to support the ceasefire held in
Paris on July 26, 2014 and urges all concerned regional and international
parties to vigorously support efforts to consolidate an agreement between the
parties.
“The Security Council emphasizes that civilian and humanitarian
facilities, including those of the UN, must be respected and protected, and
called on all parties to act consistently with this principle.
“The Security Council calls for the full implementation of resolution
1860 (2009) and stressed the need for immediate provision of humanitarian
assistance to the Palestinian civilian population in the Gaza Strip, including
through urgent additional contribution to UNRWA. The Security Council
recognizes and commends the vital role played by the Agency, along with

14-58372 (E)

280714

*1458372*

S/PRST/2014/13

other United Nations agencies and humanitarian organizations, in addressing
the critical humanitarian needs in Gaza.
“The Security Council urges the parties and the international community to
achieve a comprehensive peace based on the vision of a region where two
democratic states, Israel and Palestine, live side by side in peace with secure and
recognized borders as envisioned in Security Council resolution 1850 (2008).”

2/2

14-58372
