United Nations

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9327th meeting
Tuesday, 23 May 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hauri/Mrs. Chanda. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Switzerland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Prizreni
Mr. Silveira Braoios
Mr. He Zhiqiang
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Ms. Lebatteux
Mr. Nanga
Mrs. Corquaye
Mr. Magosaki
Mr. De Bono Sant Cassia
Mr. Bambissa
Mr. Vorobiev
Mr. Alolama
Ms. Alldridge
Ms. Hoey

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Ensuring the security and dignity of civilians in conflict: addressing food
insecurity and protecting essential services
Letter dated 1 May 2023 from the Permanent Representative of Switzerland to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2023/307)
Report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2023/345)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-14550 (E)
*2314550*

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President (spoke in French): I would like to
remind all speakers to limit their statements to no more
than three minutes in order to enable the Council to
carry out its work expeditiously. Flashing lights on the
collar of the microphone will prompt speakers to bring
their remarks to a close after three minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): Ukraine highly
appreciates the initiative of the Swiss presidency to hold
this important debate and would like to thank the briefers
for their statements.
As the Secretary-General said today, war means
hunger. It is indeed an outrage that more than 117 million
people faced acute hunger because of war and insecurity.
Hundreds of civilians were killed recently in the Sudan,
and 43,000 people, half of them children, died in Somalia
last year as a result of drought. That is horrendous.
Five years since resolution 2417 (2018) was adopted,
the task of breaking the vicious cycle of armed conflict
and food insecurity remains a goal rather than a reality.
The Russian war against Ukraine is one of the
most powerful examples. It is not the first time that
Ukraine has withstood Moscow’s inhumane practice
of the weaponization of food. This year, my country is
commemorating the ninetieth anniversary of the Great
Famine caused by Stalin’s regime, which took the lives
of millions in Ukraine. Those painful memories are now
among the main sources of Ukrainian resistance to the
modern-day invaders.
There are several lessons from the Russian war that
would be useful for further deliberation on the nexus
between conflict and food insecurity.
First, starvation remains an essential element in the
aggressive toolbox to undermine the defensive capacities
of the attacked State and to suppress the civilian
population in occupied areas. Since the beginning of the
invasion, Moscow has resorted to blocking humanitarian
corridors and humanitarian access to besieged and
occupied areas. Severe restrictions on movement
imposed by the Russian troops on the local residents in
the occupied territories have deprived the civilians of
adequate access to food and water. Starvation has also
been used as torture against detainees in the occupied
territories and Ukrainian prisoners of war.
2/57

23/05/2023

Secondly, the aggressor tries to convert global
food-related concerns into resentment against the
victim of aggression and to discredit his legitimate selfdefence by referring to the needs of affected countries
and regions. It is an element of the aggressor’s efforts to
persuade the world to accept its vision of a resolution that
is an invitation for the attacked State to surrender. To
that end, the aggressor tries to undermine multilateral
initiatives to respond to crises, such as the Black Sea
Grain Initiative in the case of the Russian war. In
the framework of that initiative, Moscow is trying to
blackmail, impede and diminish the contribution of
Ukraine to global food security.
Thirdly, we must address the long-lasting impact
of armed conflict on food security, which includes
mine contamination of agricultural lands, as well as the
destruction of critical infrastructure, undermining food
production, distribution and access to food and water.
Fourthly, the United Nations should be an
indispensable part of the global efforts to address the
grave consequences of war for civilian populations. In
our case, that includes brokering by the United Nations,
along with Türkiye, the Black Sea Grain Initiative, as
well as its humanitarian response, to provide life-saving
support to Ukrainian civilians on the ground in
extremely dangerous conditions.
My fifth point is that a comprehensive solution can
only be ensured when respect for the United Nations
Charter is restored. We urge the States Members of the
United Nations to contribute to the implementation of
the General Assembly resolution on a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in Ukraine consistent with the
principles set forth in the United Nations Charter
(General Assembly resolution ES-11/6). We also believe
that only by holding the perpetrators of the crime of
aggression accountable will we be able to prevent armed
conflicts in future and, as a result, prevent civilians
from further suffering.
(spoke in French)
I would like to conclude my statement by thanking
the Swiss presidency for its exceptional leadership in the
work of the Council, which has allowed us to tackle the
topics that require our urgent and common action. I am
convinced that the citizens of the Swiss Confederation
should be proud of the way their leaders and diplomats
represent their country on the international stage in
terms of promoting the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter.
23-14550

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Hwang (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank the Secretary-General and the other briefers for
their informative remarks.
The Security Council has, under its agenda,
addressed the protection of civilians in armed conflict
for more than 20 years. In particular, in its resolution
2417 (2018), the Council emphasized the causal link
between armed conflict and food insecurity and the
threat of famine. However, five years after the adoption
of this resolution, the recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2023/345) paints a much grimmer picture.
Conflict remains the primary driver of hunger. More
than 100 million people are experiencing high levels
of acute food insecurity in 19 countries and territories.
Essential services can be destroyed or rendered useless
by armed conflicts. Hostilities have driven farmers out
and destroyed farmland and food-related infrastructure
in Mali and Somalia. Conflicts have aggravated water
scarcity by damaging water resources in the Horn of
Africa. Electricity and health systems are no exception.
Keeping these bleak pictures in mind, my
delegation would like to make a few points. First and
foremost, ensuring safe, unimpeded and unconditional
humanitarian access is crucial to addressing the
imperative needs caused by food shortages in
conflict-affected regions. In this vein, United
Nations peacekeeping missions, with their protection
mandates, need to be more proactive in safeguarding
humanitarian space and strengthening coordination
with humanitarian actors on the ground through the
timely sharing of information.
Secondly, the Security Council should consider
introducing a monitoring-and-reporting mechanism
that already exists in the context of children and armed
conflict. Such a mechanism could provide us with a
clearer picture of any violations related to conflictinduced food insecurity and damage to essential
services. This will contribute to pursuing accountability
and ensuring compliance with relevant international
humanitarian law.
Thirdly, parties to armed conflict should act in a
manner that avoids or at least minimizes the impact of
their operations on essential services. As the disruption
of essential services is not beneficial even to warring
parties, they need to consider cooperating with each

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

other to protect them. The actual impact of hostilities
on such systems could be analysed and included in
reports of the Secretary-General.
It is time to translate all the commitments for the
protection of civilians into meaningful action. The
President of the Republic of Korea has a firm belief that
we can overcome various global crises with the spirit of
cooperation and solidarity in the international community. On the occasion of the Group of Seven summit in
Hiroshima last weekend, President Yoon pledged that
my Government will double the amount of rice aid from
the current 50,000 tons to 100,000 tons annually to six
food-crisis-ridden countries. In addition, he announced
the new K-Rice Belt project, which will contribute to
increasing the long-term rice-producing capacity of
seven African countries with a view to providing rice
to 30 million people in five years in a stable manner.
The Republic of Korea stands ready to engage
further with the international community to enhance
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, especially
those confronting food insecurity.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): I take this opportunity to
convey best wishes from my Prime Minister to the
President of the Swiss Confederation.
The level of food insecurity in the world has indeed
reached alarming proportions. It is projected that the
number of people who will be food-insecure this year
will be double the number it was in 2020. The ongoing
conflicts in many parts of the world, including in Ukraine
and Afghanistan — in our neighbourhood — have only
exacerbated the crisis.
The steps we need to take are therefore clear.
Allow me to make four quick points. First, collective
and common solutions through dialogue and diplomacy
are the need of the hour. We support the efforts of the
Secretary-General to find ways to address the challenge
of global food insecurity. In this way, we welcome the
extension of the Black Sea Grain Initiative. As the
Chair of the Group of 20 this year, India is making
efforts to address the current challenges to food and
energy security and ensure that humanitarian needs of
vulnerable communities are met without delay.
Secondly, rapid humanitarian access to people in
need in all areas affected by conflict and violence is
critical. We also need to avoid linking humanitarian

23-145503/57

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

assistance with political issues. I will say in this regard
that India has provided critical humanitarian assistance,
in particular by supplying food grains to countries
facing conflicts, including Ukraine, Afghanistan,
Yemen and Myanmar.
Thirdly, armed conflict and terrorism, combined
with extreme weather, crop pests, food-price volatility,
exclusion and economic shocks can devastate any fragile
economy, leading to food insecurity and an increased
threat of famine. Capacity-building support to countries
facing such threats in designing, implementing and
monitoring policies and programmes related to food
security is therefore extremely critical.
Fourthly, it is imperative for all of us to adequately
appreciate the importance of equity, affordability and
accessibility when it comes to food grains. Open markets
should not become an argument to perpetuate inequity,
which would only discriminate against the global South.
Finally, confronted with growing challenges
throughout the world, India will never be found wanting
in extending a helping hand to those who may be in
distress. We will continue to walk the talk when it comes
to assisting our partners in need.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Albanai (Kuwait): I am honoured to take the
floor on behalf of the Group of Friends of the Protection
of Civilians in Armed Conflict, a cross-regional network
of 27 States Members of the United Nations.
At the outset, and on behalf of the Group of Friends, I
would like to extend warm congratulations to Switzerland
on its historic and first-ever presidency of the Security
Council. The Group of Friends is most pleased to see
one of its own presiding over the Council this month.
Switzerland has steered the work of the Council in the
most efficient manner, and we wish it the best of luck for
the remaining days of its presidency.
The Security Council must redouble its efforts aimed
at breaking the cycle of armed conflict, which drives and
sustains many humanitarian crises around the world.
Together, as the United Nations, we must do all we can
to use the full range of tools at our disposal to prevent
and end conflicts.
Civilians are consistently shouldering the
burden of conflicts around the world. Today 2 billion
people — a quarter of humankind — live in places
4/57

23/05/2023

affected by armed conflict. Record numbers of civilians
are facing the humanitarian consequences of conflict,
including displacement and food and nutrition insecurity.
Among all civilians affected by armed conflict, those
in vulnerable situations who are disproportionally
prone to suffering, especially children, require our
particular attention.
This year’s report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians (S/2023/345) focuses sharply on
conflict and hunger. The report identifies a continuously
high number of persons facing crisis levels of acute
food and nutrition insecurity, primarily caused by the
consequences of armed conflicts. It notes that, in 2022,
more than a quarter of a billion people faced acute hunger
in 58 countries and territories, many of which were in
situations of armed conflict. Furthermore, conflict and
insecurity were the most significant drivers of high
levels of acute food insecurity for around 117 million
people in 19 countries and territories.
Stronger efforts are required to prevent and alleviate
hunger in armed conflicts, including by protecting food
sources and respecting and protecting humanitarian
relief objects and personnel, in line with obligations
under international humanitarian law. As enshrined in
international humanitarian law and reaffirmed by the
relevant Council resolutions, such as resolutions 2417
(2018) and 2573 (2021), the use of starvation of civilians,
including children, as a method of warfare is prohibited.
The Group of Friends calls on all parties to
armed conflict to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law with regard to respecting
and protecting civilians and taking constant care to
spare civilian objects, including those necessary for
food production and distribution such as farms, markets,
water systems, mills, food processing and storage sites
and hubs and means for food transportation, as well
as refraining from attacking, destroying, removing or
rendering useless objects that are indispensable to the
survival of the civilian population.
Furthermore, reporting and evidence of food and
nutrition insecurity and famine risk must be swift and
timely, and the Council must respond with rapid and
decisive action. Too often our response is too little and
too late. It is timely to recall that tomorrow, 24 May,
marks the fifth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
2417 (2018). Yet much more needs to be done to ensure
respect for international humanitarian law and the full
implementation of that resolution.
23-14550

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Armed conflicts also inevitably contribute to the
degradation of the environment, which in turn affects
essential services such as those related to the delivery
of food and water. The consequences for civilians are
compounded by the effects of climate change, as well as
the collapse of food systems and supply chains.
Armed conflicts are increasingly being fought in
urban areas, where countless civilians are killed and
injured. The Group of Friends echoes the SecretaryGeneral’s concern, as described in his report, about
the humanitarian consequences resulting from armed
conflicts involving the use of explosive weapons in
populated areas. The Group repeats its urgent call to all
parties to conflict to respect international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, and to those
with influence over them to ensure such respect. The
Group of Friends notes the recent adoption, in Dublin
on 18 November 2022, of the Political Declaration on
Strengthening the Protection of Civilians from the
Humanitarian Consequences Arising from the Use of
Explosive Weapons in Populated Areas.
Furthermore, forced displacement exacerbates food
and nutrition insecurity. As people flee the fighting,
they also abandon their crops, and often their livestock,
undermining the food supply for entire regions. When
they return, it is often no longer possible to cultivate
the fields, as they can be riddled with mines or other
explosive remnants.
The protection of civilians must also be strengthened
through the protection of objects indispensable for
the survival of the population, including civilian
infrastructure critical for the delivery of interconnected
and essential basic services. Too often, a lack of
electricity, water and other basic commodities hampers
the delivery of the most essential services, such as
education and medical care, placing the health and
welfare of civilians at risk.
It is important to recall that the Council has adopted
resolution 2286 (2016), which strongly condemns attacks
against medical facilities and personnel in conflict
situations; resolution 2573 (2022), on the protection of
civilian infrastructure; and resolution 2601 (2021), on the
protection of schools, educational facilities and civilians
connected with schools, including children and teachers.
The Group of Friends calls on Member States and other
relevant actors to advance the implementation of those
important Council resolutions and the international
humanitarian law obligations that underpin them.

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Humanitarian organizations work tirelessly to
preserve and re-establish access to essential services
for the affected civilian population. There is an urgent
need to redouble efforts, including in the Council, to
allow and facilitate full, safe, timely and unhindered
humanitarian access, as well as the safety and security
of all humanitarian personnel, in accordance with
international humanitarian law.
The Group of Friends commends the Security
Council on the adoption of resolution 2664 (2022),
regarding humanitarian exemptions to assets freezes
under United Nations sanctions regimes. That is
a pivotal step for the facilitation of humanitarian
assistance in some of the most complex circumstances.
We are deeply concerned about the growing number
of missing persons as a result of armed conflict. Efforts
to prevent family separation and disappearances, to
search for and identify missing and deceased persons
and to address the needs of affected families should be
an integral part of our response. Taking early action at
the onset of an armed conflict is crucial. The regional
and national implementation of the relevant obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, as well as of resolution 2474 (2019),
on missing persons, is key.
Lastly, the use of new technologies is becoming
increasingly important for efficient and effective
humanitarian operations and the protection of
civilians. However, modern technologies, including
social media, are all too often misused for false
narratives about humanitarian organizations and their
work, as well as the work of United Nations missions.
Misinformation and disinformation endanger the
security of humanitarian and United Nations mission
staff, as well as that of the people they are supposed
to serve. That must be vigorously combatted, including
by advocating for international humanitarian law and
humanitarian principles.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Lagdameo (Philippines): We congratulate
Switzerland for holding this annual open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict as one of the
signature events of its Security Council presidency. We
also thank the Secretary-General, the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the other
briefers for their briefings and insightful views.

23-145505/57

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

In today’s Security Council open debate, which
coincides with the sixth edition of Protection of
Civilians week, we have been invited to share our
views on both challenges and good practices, including
preventive and preparedness measures on how to better
ensure the survival, security and dignity of the civilian
population in times of conflict. Indeed, civilians
continue to bear the brunt of armed conflicts. We note
the assessment of the World Food Programme and the
Food and Agriculture Organization that 70 per cent of
the world’s population experiencing acute hunger are in
conflict-affected areas.
The Philippines supports all efforts, including those
led by the United Nations, to protect civilians affected
by armed conflict. Our commitment is anchored in our
devotion to international humanitarian law and our firm
belief that international human rights law also applies
in situations of armed conflict. We therefore support
the view that respect for international humanitarian law
and international human rights law is crucial to prevent
hunger and further suffering in conflict situations and
protect the civilian population and civilian objects in
general. We also agree that international humanitarian
law provides the legal framework to strategically
mitigate the impacts of armed conflict and is applicable
to the use of explosive weapons in populated areas.
While international humanitarian law applies to both
States and armed non-State actors in times of armed
conflict, our national experience demonstrates that
armed non-State actors have a greater propensity to
violate international humanitarian law, owing to either
a demonstrable lack of understanding or incentives to
comply. Accountability mechanisms that exist in States
are also often absent among non-State actors. We
welcome the condemnation by both States and armed
non-State actors of tactics that exploit the proximity of
civilians and civilian objects to military objectives in
populated areas. We reaffirm our common commitment
to end impunity and welcome the affirmation of
obligations to hold accountable those responsible for
violations of international humanitarian law.
The protection of civilians is front and centre of
peacekeeping operations. The Philippines believes that
success in peacekeeping operations must be measured
by how well we protect civilians and how effectively we
ensure the sustainment of the environments for peace to
flourish. Throughout the years, whether at a substantive
session of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations or a Security Council open debate, we have
6/57

23/05/2023

been consistent in our position on the protection of
civilians. Expectations regarding protection tasks must
be succinct and clear, connected to political strategies
in the field and focused on prevention. A people-centred
New Agenda for Peace should promote and enhance the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts, supported by
strong adherence to international humanitarian law and
the Charter of the United Nations.
The protection of civilians in situations of armed
conflict is a priority for the Philippines, in line with laws
like the Philippine Act on Crimes Against International
Humanitarian Law, Genocide and Other Crimes Against
Humanity and the Special Protection of Children in
Situations of Armed Conflict Law. Next year, we
hope to further enhance our active participation in the
protection of civilians affected by armed conflicts,
with the projected increase of Filipino peacekeepers
on the ground. We also reiterate our support for the
Convention on Cluster Munitions, as their prohibition
protects civilians and civilian infrastructure, especially
in urban conflict areas.
Lastly, today’s open debate and the week-long
protection of civilian side events are important avenues
to discuss key issues and trends, share best practices
and reflect on required policy and normative changes to
ensure that civilians are protected in times of conflict.
We can really do more by working hard together.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Popowski.
Mr. Popowski: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Montenegro, Serbia,
Albania, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Bosnia
and Herzegovina; and the potential candidate country
Georgia, as well as Monaco and San Marino, align
themselves with this statement.
Let me start by stressing our deep concern about the
number and scale of conflicts across the globe. Among
others, Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine and
the crisis in the Sudan have dramatically impacted the
lives of millions of civilians. Those and other conflicts
also impact food security, even in countries not affected
by the violence. The protection of civilian infrastructure
is key to ensuring food security in time of conflict.
The EU remains concerned about the humanitarian
consequences resulting from armed conflicts
involving the use of explosive weapons in populated
areas, which destroy such objects. In that regard, we
23-14550

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

welcome the adoption of the Political Declaration on
Strengthening the Protection of Civilians from the
Humanitarian Consequences Arising from the Use of
Explosive Weapons in Populated Areas. The European
Union recalls that full compliance with international
humanitarian law remains key for the protection of
civilians affected by armed conflicts, as well as for the
protection of civilian infrastructure. The EU remains
committed to keeping international humanitarian
law at the heart of its external action by continuing
to advocate for compliance with it, accountability for
its violation and the systematic implementation of
resolution 2417 (2018).
In addition to protecting those important principles,
the EU is committed to continue its funding in response
to the global food crisis. As the needs and funding gap
stretches further, we call for increased contributions
from other donors, including the private sector and
international financial institutions. We also call for
additional complementarity among humanitarian,
development and peace actions to protect essential
resources, address root causes and prevent the onset
of humanitarian crises. In today’s complex operating
environment, we need to support humanitarians to stay
and deliver in a principled and efficient way. On top of
that, the humanitarian space for female humanitarian
workers is shrinking. Afghanistan and Yemen are the
most striking examples, as female humanitarian workers
have been deprived from doing their jobs effectively
there, resulting in limited services for women and
girls. Humanitarian access is a priority for the EU. We
therefore commend the work of the Secretariat, notably
the Office for the Coordination for Humanitarian Affairs,
in developing a more systematic approach to coordinate
emergency relief and ensure access for the rapid provision
of emergency assistance.
Persons in vulnerable situations require our
particular attention. Children remain disproportionally
affected by armed conflict. We have observed an
alarming increase in conflict-related sexual violence
against children. Attacks against schools are also on
the rise. Combined with the disastrous ramifications of
the economic crisis, it poses a serious threat to the right
to education. The EU welcomes the efforts of United
Nations Member States that have endorsed the Safe
Schools Declaration. The negative impact of conflict on
gender inequality also requires our attention. Women
and girls often eat least and last when food is scarce,
and their voices are too often silenced. Conflicts also
exacerbate gender-based violence and interrupt access

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

to sexual and reproductive health-care services. We
remain committed to providing principled humanitarian
assistance to those most in need and to ensuring that
the voices of all affected populations are heard. Only
in that way, can aid be efficient and effective. The EU
also remains committed to implementing resolution
2475 (2019) and making humanitarian aid inclusive and
accessible to persons with disabilities.
Lastly, while people impacted by conflict continue
to face grave risks and challenges, the European Union
remains committed to support concrete actions to protect
their lives and dignity.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We are grateful for the very timely convening
of this debate to shed light on the challenges posed by
food insecurity in relation to the protection of civilians
in contemporary situations. The unanimous adoption
of resolution 2417 (2018), five years ago, placed the
relationship between hunger and conflict at the centre
of the debate. The most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2023/345) on protection of civilians makes it
clear that, while armed conflict remains the main cause
of food insecurity, other factors often exacerbate it.
I will limit myself to discussing two of them that are
of particular concern for my country.
The first is the indiscriminate use of explosive
weapons
that
impact
civilian
infrastructure,
contaminate agricultural land, destroy crops and
seriously affect food supply. In that regard, resolution
2573 (2021) recognizes that interconnectedness can be
counted among the damage caused to infrastructure
and that such damage can consequently affect the
provision of basic services. And it therefore reiterates
the call to comply with obligations under international
humanitarian law related to the protection of civilians.
That call will continue to be made, and it must be
strengthened through a renewed political commitment.
Mexico therefore welcomes the adoption of the Political
Declaration on Strengthening the Protection of Civilians
from the Humanitarian Consequences Arising from
the Use of Explosive Weapons in Populated Areas,
whose negotiation my country actively participated
in as a member of the core group. We believe that the
Declaration will be very useful in strengthening national
practices for the benefit of the civilian population. We
urge all States that have not yet done so to join it.

23-145507/57

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Secondly, environmental protection must be
strengthened to prevent and mitigate the impact of
conflicts on both food production and distribution. The
General Assembly’s adoption of its resolution 77/104,
on the protection of the environment in relation to
armed conflicts, drafted by the International Law
Commission, represents a significant step forward in
that regard. In addition to those I have mentioned, other
relevant instruments include the Geneva Conventions
and their Protocols Additional, as well as the resolutions
adopted by the Security Council on the protection of
civilians. In view of that progress, it is now time to
implement the political commitments.
Breaking the vicious circle of conflict and food
insecurity is essential for protecting the civilian
population from the harmful effects of war and for
punishing those responsible for using hunger as a
weapon of war — which is unacceptable.
On behalf of Mexico, let me conclude by welcoming
the recent renewal of the Black Sea Grain Initiative,
which will undoubtedly help to stabilize food prices
and, above all else, to ensure that the food effectively
reaches the most vulnerable populations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Ms.
Oehri
(Liechtenstein):
We
applaud
Switzerland’s long-standing and principled leadership
of the protection of civilians agenda, including respect
for international humanitarian law, which is of the
essence for today’s open debate.
International humanitarian law prohibits starvation
as a method of warfare and grants special protection
to objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian
population, as reflected in resolution 2417 (2018), the
fifth anniversary of which will be marked tomorrow.
We also acknowledge the relevance in today’s debate
of resolution 2573 (2021), which condemns unlawful
attacks against, and the misuse of, objects critical to
the delivery of essential services, including food and
water. International humanitarian law states clearly that
such attacks on civilian infrastructure — carried out
kinetically or with cyber weapons — are illegal. They
are war crimes and must be investigated and prosecuted
as such, including at the International Criminal Court
when national judiciaries are unwilling or unable to do
so themselves.
8/57

23/05/2023

Unfortunately, food insecurity remains a major
factor across many of the crises on the Security Council’s
agenda. The Sudan faces a severe humanitarian
catastrophe, exacerbating food insecurity in a country
in which 15 million people were already food insecure
before the outbreak of the conflict. We join others
in calling for a permanent ceasefire and respect for
international humanitarian law at all times and support
efforts to facilitate a dialogue that respects the peaceful
democratic transition called for by the people of the
Sudan in 2019, with the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women.
The people of Yemen continue to face unprecedented
levels of hunger, which has long been a feature of the
conflict. We are grateful for the work of humanitarian
organizations and support their calls for unimpeded
access. We also urge the parties to the conflict to
redouble their efforts and seize the opportunity for
peace that has emerged in recent months.
The aggression against Ukraine, including the
attacks against civilians and civilian objects, has had
devastating humanitarian consequences, with 6 million
people struggling to access safe drinking water and an
alarming increase in food insecurity worldwide. The
extension of the Black Sea Grain Initiative represents
a lifeline for people around the globe and demonstrates
the relevance of diplomacy even in the most acute of
conflicts, including when the Council is deadlocked.
Ensuring
compliance
with
the
relevant
provisions of international humanitarian law and a
comprehensive, impartial and sustainably funded
system of international justice must remain a priority
for the international community. In that regard, we are
grateful for Switzerland’s leadership in spearheading
an amendment to the Rome Statute to include the
war crime of the intentional starvation of civilians in
non-international armed conflicts, and we encourage
all States to join us in ratifying it.
We also encourage the Council to better
acknowledge the preventive dimension of the protection
of civilians agenda, including by ensuring the credible
prospect of accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law that are a result of cyberoperations.
The report on the application of the Rome Statute
to cyberwarfare that we published together with an
eminent council of advisers provides relevant guidance
in that regard.
23-14550

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I am honoured to deliver this
statement on behalf of the Group of Friends of Action
on Conflict and Hunger, comprising the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, France, Germany, Ireland,
Mexico, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Niger,
Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and
the United States of America, and which is co-chaired
this year by Ireland and Ecuador.
We would first like to thank Switzerland for
convening today’s important open debate, as well as
all the briefers for their remarks. They have clearly
outlined the devastating impact of conflict on food
and nutrition.
Tomorrow we will mark five years since the
Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 2417
(2018). That was a significant achievement and a clear
expression of our collective political will to end conflictinduced hunger. With that landmark resolution, the
Council acknowledged the undisputable link between
conflict and food insecurity and condemned the use
of the starvation of civilians as a method of warfare.
The Group of Friends echoes the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to give full effect to resolution 2417
(2018). In the five years since its adoption, the urgency
of the resolution has only become clearer. Nearly
258 million people, in 58 countries and territories, were
experiencing acute food insecurity in 2022 — up from
193 million, in 53 countries and territories in 2021. For
the vast majority of affected people, conflict is the main
driver of hunger. A global crisis of such magnitude
and complexity demands collective, immediate and
coherent action. Today we have an opportunity to do
just that. The members of the Group of Friends of Action
on Conflict and Hunger would like to raise three points.
First, action by the Council on conflict and hunger
is essential. The Council has a responsibility to take
clear and decisive action. To do so, the Council relies
on timely information on the driving factors of hunger,
including through white notes produced by Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and the
regular reports of the World Food Programme and
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations. In that context, the Group of Friends welcomes
the latest report on the protection of civilians by the
Secretary-General (S/2023/345) and its emphasis on
the interaction between armed conflicts and hunger

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

this year. The United Nations and its agencies and
civil society working on the ground play a critical
role in gathering empirical evidence on acute food
insecurity and its impact in multiple contexts. When
that information is brought to the Council’s attention, it
has a duty to take appropriate action.
Secondly, conflict and food insecurity are deeply
connected issues. As Russia’s military aggression
against Ukraine has made very clear, our food systems
are interconnected; conflicts in one part of the world
can have knock-on effects for millions across the globe.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative represents a vital effort
to mitigate those impacts. We implore all the parties
to continue to implement its provisions fully and to
continue discussions to find sustainable solutions that
allow for its effective and predictable operation.
Thirdly, the Group of Friends calls for steps to
ensure accountability for attacks on civilian targets.
From Haiti to Burkina Faso to the Sudan, we are
witnessing how food and food supplies are being
targeted in conflict, with food delivery trucks looted,
farmland burned and farmers forced to flee and
humanitarian aid denied to displaced populations. That
is quite simply a matter of life and death. Civilians
bear the burden of conflict, with women and children
disproportionately affected by such flagrant violations
of international humanitarian law. On the occasion of
Protection of Civilians Week, we all have to recommit
to ensuring accountability.
There are promising examples of actions being
taken to alleviate hunger in many parts of the world, but
much more needs to be done. Ultimately, humanitarian
action alone cannot be the answer. Ending conflictinduced hunger requires ending conflict, and for that
we require political will. And we encourage all actors
to find pathways to peace that can end the suffering
caused by conflict across the world. Until hunger is a
thing of the past, until we have broken the vicious cycle
between armed conflict and food insecurity, we must
redouble our efforts. The Group of Friends of Action on
Conflict and Hunger and partners will continue to keep
that issue at the forefront of the Council’s agenda for as
long as it takes. I shall now make some brief additional
remarks in my national capacity.
First, with regard to the issue of the protection
of civilians, there is an obligation to protect objects
indispensable to the survival of the civilian population.
The Secretary-General has emphasized that the use of

23-145509/57

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

explosive weapons in populated areas causes harm to
civilians, harm that lasts long after their use and the
conflicts themselves. For civilians in cities at war,
explosive weapons threaten death, injury and disability.
Equally, when critical civilian infrastructure — food,
water and sanitation systems — is damaged or destroyed,
the provision of the most basic human needs and
essential services is disrupted. The effects can echo
down generations, eroding prospects for peace,
undermining respect for human rights and making the
rebuilding of societies even more challenging.
We must urgently reverse that pattern. That is why
Ireland led the negotiations on a political declaration
to address the humanitarian consequences arising from
the use of explosive weapons in populated areas. We
strongly welcomed the November 2022 adoption of the
Political Declaration on Strengthening the Protection of
Civilians from the Humanitarian Consequences Arising
from the Use of Explosive Weapons in Populated Areas
and echo the Secretary-General’s call on all States to
join it. It is also vital that we maintain our momentum
in implementing the Declaration. The Oslo Conference
will provide a critical opportunity to make progress on
that objective, and Ireland offers its continued support
to Norway in those efforts.
My final point concerns conflict and hunger. In spite
of the adoption of resolution 2417 (2018) five years ago,
we are failing to counter conflict-induced hunger. To its
shame, the Council has too often turned a blind eye and
shirked its responsibility. Armed conflict remains the
most significant driver of acute food insecurity across
the globe. That is true in the Sudan. It is true in Haiti.
It is true in Somalia, Ethiopia, South Sudan, Yemen
and Syria. The list goes on. Our responsibility is clear.
We must urgently break the perverse cycle of conflictinduced food insecurity. Resolution 2417 (2018) gives us
the tools. What we need now is the collective political
will to use them. While we cannot undo the damage
already done, we can ensure that the mistakes of the
past do not continue to haunt our future. The Council
must take concrete action and leave no stone unturned
in its efforts to seek peaceful resolutions of conflicts.
The lives of millions of people are at stake.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Austria.
Mr. Almoslechner (Austria): I would first like
to express my gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s open debate, and to the briefers
10/57

23/05/2023

for their insightful remarks. After two years, it was
good to hear once again from the Secretariat and the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) at the
highest level.
Austria aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the representative of the European Union and by
the representative of Kuwait, speaking on behalf of
the Group of Friends of the Protection of Civilians in
Armed Conflict.
Permit me to briefly address four points in my
national capacity.
First, a simple rule, but one that bears repeating,
is that civilians and civilian objects cannot be targets.
International humanitarian law is clear and needs to
be upheld by all parties to armed conflict and under
all circumstances. The ICRC has a key role in that
respect — working with States and non-State armed
groups to disseminate international humanitarian law
and seek compliance with it, including through its
bilateral confidential dialogues — as does the Security
Council, by condemning violations of international
humanitarian law, including direct attacks on civilians
and civilian objects whenever and wherever they occur,
and by doing its part in ensuring accountability for them.
That was why, during Austria’s last membership of the
Security Council, we placed particular emphasis on
the protection of civilians. And it was under Austria’s
presidency of the Council in November 2009 that we
adopted resolution 1894 (2009), on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
Secondly, resolution 2573 (2021), on the protection
of essential services, was a further step by the Security
Council in its efforts to rethink the protection of civilians
agenda in a holistic way. Unfortunately, however, its
implementation has lagged behind. In that regard, we
want to highlight once more the direct and reverberating
effects of the use of explosive weapons in populated
areas. When such arms are used, not only are more than
90 per cent of their casualties civilians, but they also
devastate a wide range of essential services, especially
water and sanitation and electricity, hampering social
and economic development. The adoption of the Political
Declaration on Strengthening the Protection of Civilians
from the Humanitarian Consequences Arising from the
Use of Explosive Weapons in Populated Areas and its
endorsement by 83 States represent a milestone. We
call on all other States to endorse the Declaration and
implement it faithfully in order to prevent or reduce
harm to civilians, as well as protect essential services.
23-14550

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Thirdly, resolution 2417 (2018) was adopted five
years ago and we urgently need to do better to protect
civilians from conflict-induced hunger. The earlywarning mechanism contained in the resolution has
been used more frequently in recent years, and that is a
positive. We encourage the Secretary-General to make
increased use of it to enable the Council and all States to
act pre-emptively. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
efforts to mitigate the food insecurity exacerbated by
Russia’s war of aggression on Ukraine, which it continues
to wage in violation of the Charter of the United Nations.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative has been a success
story and Austria welcomed its extension last week.
My final point is that we can no longer pretend
that the Security Council should not be a forum for
discussing climate change. We need to face facts.
Climate change exacerbates vulnerabilities and can
fuel armed conflict. Climate change therefore needs to
be addressed in the Chamber. We owe it to the civilians
whom the Council should protect.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): I thank the Swiss
Confederation for organizing today’s very timely
event and our briefers for their frank assessment of the
dire situation.
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect,
consisting of 55 member States and the European
Union, this year co-chaired by Botswana, Costa Rica
and Croatia.
Resolutions 2417 (2018) and 2573 (2021) reiterate
the primary responsibility of States to protect their
populations throughout their territory and highlight the
links between armed conflict and violence and conflictinduced food insecurity and the threat of famine. We
would like to commend Switzerland for organizing
today’s important open debate to draw attention to
that aspect.
All Member States have committed to the
responsibility to protect their populations from genocide,
war crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic
cleansing. Nevertheless, today we are bearing witness
to the pervasive erosion of respect for civilian lives
and objects and an appalling disregard in some regions
for the norms and laws that States have established
to reduce the effects of armed conflict and protect

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

their populations from atrocity crimes. The starvation
of civilians as a method of warfare is a violation of
international humanitarian law and can constitute a war
crime. However, in multiple conflicts, we are seeing the
weaponization of access to clean water and food, which
are crucial to the survival of civilian populations.
Moreover, we have increasingly seen evidence of States
and other parties to conflicts engaging in the denial of
humanitarian access, including by blocking the passage
of aid or targeting humanitarian and medical workers
and assets. Such unconscionable acts have an alarming
impact on the vulnerable civilian population.
Furthermore, international and intra-State conflicts
have exacerbated food insecurity and malnutrition,
driven up global food prices and have impacted
the Organization’s ability to deliver aid to the most
vulnerable communities around the world.
It is in that context that the Group of Friends of
the Responsibility to Protect would like to stress the
following points:
First, the Group of Friends calls on all parties to
armed conflicts to allow and facilitate, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of international
humanitarian law and with humanitarian principles,
rapid and unimpeded access to humanitarian personnel,
equipment and supplies and the timely delivery of
humanitarian assistance to populations in need. That
means lifting arbitrary bureaucratic impediments
to humanitarian operations, allowing the flow of
humanitarian aid and services into conflict areas and
protecting medical personnel and civilians, including
humanitarian actors, from attacks.
We commend the adoption of resolution 2664
(2022) regarding humanitarian exemptions to assets
freezes under United Nations sanctions regimes.
When allowing and facilitating humanitarian access
to all people in need in conflict settings is a matter
of international peace and security, the Security
Council should continue to play a constructive role in
encouraging the protection of humanitarian access.
Secondly, the international community needs to urge
and support States where civilians are facing conflictinduced hunger to realign spending priorities and
commit resources to fulfilling the population’s needs.
Globally, humanitarian needs are rising steeply.
The international community should enhance its efforts
to anticipate and, thus, prevent rising needs and reduce

23-1455011/57

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

global fragility. Providing the basic needs of people
affected by crises should be a shared responsibility
for all. Resource scarcity and threats to humanitarian
operations increase the risk of atrocities. In order to
mitigate that risk, Member States should urgently
respond to the Organization’s humanitarian appeals
and increase predictable and flexible funding.
Thirdly, efforts to prevent atrocities and protect
civilians must be responsive to demographic
considerations. Security Council resolutions on women
and peace and security note that armed conflicts and
emergencies have a disproportionate impact on women
and girls, whose rights must be respected and protected.
Their needs should be considered and addressed and
their full, equal, safe and meaningful participation in
all processes related to peace and security promoted,
including in the leadership and delivery of the
humanitarian response. Gender-based discrimination
and inequality, including the systematic oppression of
women and girls, are important risk factors that can
contribute to atrocity crimes. Addressing root causes
of gender-based discrimination and violence, as well as
meaningfully including and elevating women’s voices
on their unique experiences and needs in atrocity
situations, can enhance prevention strategies. The
Group urges the United Nations and other relevant
actors to ensure that affected populations, including
women and girls, are involved in the development,
implementation and monitoring of civilian protection
strategies and activities.
Lastly, the effective prevention of atrocities and the
timely and efficient response to them can be strengthened
if the United Nations system further improves its crossdepartmental collaboration and responds holistically
by using all the tools and mechanisms at its disposal,
including humanitarian assistance, and ensuring that
all relevant information and capacities generated by all
parts of the United Nations are shared and acted upon.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Elshandawily (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting, which is particularly important
in the light of the increasing number of crises in the
world today, the repercussions of which mainly affect
civilians. I also thank the briefers for the information
shared with the Council.
12/57

23/05/2023

This meeting is being held at a time of increasing
armed conflicts and other crises that cast a shadow over
the protection of civilians, pose further challenges to
the application of international humanitarian law and
exacerbate various repercussions such as displacement,
food insecurity and impeded access to basic services,
such as health care, food, water and education, thus
increasing the suffering of civilians, especially women
and girls.
Regrettably, the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2023/345) shows that the number of civilian casualties
has increased as a result of the continued armed conflicts
throughout the world, many of which are in the Middle
East. The report highlighted that last year was the
deadliest in the occupied Palestinian territories since
2005. Egypt renews its call for international protection
of the Palestinian people and for immediate action to
stop all violations suffered by the Palestinians, which
are a flagrant breach of international humanitarian law
and the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people under
international law.
Egypt stresses the close link between growing
hunger and food insecurity and the risk of armed
conflicts worldwide, especially in States that already
face multiple challenges. Accordingly, we must
redouble international efforts to expeditiously achieve
the second Sustainable Development Goal — to end
hunger and achieve food security — especially in the
light of the additional challenges in the aftermath of the
coronavirus disease pandemic and other international
crises that led to the unprecedented food insecurity
crisis that the world is witnessing today. This threatens
global instability and further crises and armed conflicts.
Accordingly, Egypt stresses the need to address the
root causes of food insecurity through a comprehensive
perspective that takes into consideration the need to
achieve complementarity between responding to famine
and providing more support to developing countries,
especially those that rely on food imports and food
items in order to achieve food security and promote
sustainable agriculture. Egypt also notes the risks of
water scarcity in a number of regions, especially North
Africa, and its direct impact on agricultural activities
and achieving food security, especially since a number
of estimates confirm that 2.5 billion people will be
affected by food scarcity and more than 700 million
people will be displaced by 2030. That underscores
the urgent need to strengthen effective transboundary
water cooperation.
23-14550

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The continued armed conflicts have also led
to multiple other crises related to the suspension of
basic services, including health care. The SecretaryGeneral’s report notes the continued exposure of healthcare workers in medical facilities to severe violations
in armed conflicts, which can result in their injury or
death, as well as the destruction of medical facilities,
thus casting a long shadow and reducing health care.
Accordingly, during its recent membership in the
Security Council, Egypt worked with other members
to promote resolution 2286 (2016), on the protection
of health-care personnel and facilities during armed
conflict. The resolution was based on existing legal
norms that are binding on parties to armed conflict and
called on States to adopt effective measures to protect
health-care workers and to guarantee unimpeded
access to medical care during armed conflict, pursuant
to international humanitarian law.
The persistence of armed conflicts underscores the
importance of adopting a comprehensive approach to
address this serious challenge that takes into account
the root causes of conflict, contributes to the longterm protection of civilians and ensures the promotion
of sustainable development, growth, employment
opportunities and poverty eradication, in parallel
with supporting political solutions to crises so as to
prevent their recurrence. Meanwhile, the increase in
conflicts means that we must promote investment in
national institutions relevant to addressing conflicts,
supporting stability and increasing compliance with
international law, especially as non-State actors are
playing an increasing role in fuelling armed conflicts,
targeting civilians and threatening stability and are
involved in arms smuggling and other illegal activities.
The aforementioned cannot be separated from the
critical role of peacekeeping operations in supporting
the efforts to protect civilians during armed conflict
through capacity-building and support for national
institutions, while respecting the principle of national
ownership. Accordingly, Egypt continues to support
United Nations efforts in that regard and to shoulder its
responsibilities as a major troop-contributing country
to peacekeeping operations, realizing the role of those
missions in pushing for stability and transitioning from
conflict to peace.
In conclusion, Egypt stresses the need to boost
all international efforts to guarantee compliance with
international humanitarian law during armed conflict
and the need to work in parallel to guarantee the

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

prevention of conflict and address its root causes and
its resolution through peaceful and effective means.
Moreover, we must cooperate for the promotion of
long-term growth and development activities to ensure
its sustainability. Egypt will remain committed to
supporting all efforts aimed at achieving peace and
stability at the regional and international levels.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Pakistan welcomes the
convening of this important debate on conflict and food
security by the Swiss presidency.
Today there are more than 250 million people who
go to bed hungry each day. Seventy per cent of them
are in areas of armed conflict. The majority of them
are children.
The nexus between hunger and conflict is well
established and vividly visible in so many recent and
contemporary conflict situations.
The imperative of preventing, resolving and ending
armed conflicts has never been so clear. Yet, new
conflict situations have continued to be added to old and
entrenched issues on the agenda of the Security Council;
and hunger has continued to grow, with the proliferation
of conflicts and other accompanying causes of poverty
and deprivation which encompass almost 1 billion
people — one in every eight humans — mostly in the
global South.
The primary endeavour in the Security Council and
other global forums must remain the promotion and
maintenance of peace and security and the resolution of
conflicts and disputes in accordance with the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.
Speaking for my own region, the key to securing
peace and stability in South Asia is the just and
early resolution of the Jammu and Kashmir dispute
in accordance with the provisions of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. Deprivation and hunger
are being imposed on the Kashmiri people by a
900,000-strong occupation army, massive violations of
their human rights and the progressive expropriation
of their properties and means of livelihood. It is
therefore sad to see some, but not all, of the Group
of 20 representatives allow themselves to be used in
India’s attempt to portray a false sense of normalcy
in occupied Jammu and Kashmir. The Human Rights
Council’s Special Rapporteur on minority issues,

23-1455013/57

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Mr. Fernand de Varennes, warned on 15 May of that
attempt to normalize military occupation. He said, “the
situation in Jammu and Kashmir should be decried and
condemned, not pushed under the rug”.
The consequences of 40 years of conflict are
also writ large in Afghanistan. Almost 95 per cent of
Afghanistan’s population exists in extreme poverty.
Even as we seek to ensure women’s rights and end
terrorism in and from Afghanistan the world cannot
allow the Afghan people to be consigned to prolonged
poverty. The Secretary-General’s humanitarian appeal
for Afghanistan should be fully funded. The Afghan
economy must be rapidly revived through the release
of Afghanistan’s assets abroad, its banking system
revived, reconstruction of its infrastructure resumed
and the agreed connectivity projects implemented.
Pakistan commends the Secretary-General’s
Black Sea Grain Initiative to ease the impact of the
Ukraine war and accompanying restrictions on food
security. We hope that agreement will be implemented
faithfully and fully. Above all, Pakistan desires an
early end of the war in Ukraine in accordance with
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
international agreements.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Gatete (Rwanda): Allow me to start by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. Let me also take this opportunity to thank all the
briefers for their insightful contributions to the debate.
This briefing comes at a time of heightened
and erupting conflicts around the world. While the
United Nations and Member States are occupied with
the resolution, the mitigation and the management of
those conflicts, we must remember that our primary
responsibility is the protection of innocent civilians
caught up in the middle.

23/05/2023

humanitarian aid, leaving civilians displaced, hungry
or purposely starved. More effort should instead be put
into efficiently and urgently providing protection to
civilians and making way for humanitarian aid.
Allow me to offer our thoughts.
First, to promote a more systematic implementation
of existing frameworks and instruments for the protection
of civilians, the Security Council must first commit to
an honest appraisal of the current mechanisms. That
involves acknowledging gaps in implementation and
proposing practical solutions that cater to respective
conflicts. For instance, a more rigorous monitoring
and evaluation system could be established to gauge
the efficiency and effectiveness of those mechanisms
and resolutions. In addition, promoting dialogue and
sharing best practices among Member States is critical.
Secondly, the survival and dignity of the civilian
population during armed conflict can be ensured
through a combination of measures. Challenges
include maintaining the neutrality of humanitarian aid,
ensuring safe and unimpeded access to conflict zones
and protecting aid workers.
The use of early warning systems can
alert populations to immediate danger while
resilience-building initiatives can equip communities
with the tools to withstand shocks.
According to the World Food Programme, over
70 per cent of hunger-affected populations live in
conflict zones. There needs to be a solid ecosystem
where the supply and distribution of food and essentials
for survival are timely and consistent.
Thirdly, women play a vital role as caregivers
and leaders in their communities, making their
contributions essential in addressing food insecurity
and protecting essential services. In the words of
Ms. Michelle Bachelet, former President of Chile and
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,

Not only is conflict deadly to civilians, but it also
strips victims and survivors of their humanity, their
livelihood and their dignity. Unfortunately, civilians
are increasingly subject to conflict and atrocities even
though international humanitarian law dictates that all
States must protect civilians in conflicts.

“A full understanding of women’s experience of
conflict is critical for inclusive responses and for
promoting an enabling environment for women and
girls in all their diversity to thrive and meaningfully
participate in peace processes, peacebuilding, and
recovery efforts.”

It makes matters worse when the Security Council,
States and parties to conflict take more time with
attempts at resolutions and intervention. That delays

Fourthly and finally, Member States, the United
Nations system, the Red Cross, regional organizations
and civil society organizations each have unique roles

14/57

23-14550

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

to play in ensuring the implementation of international
humanitarian law. These organizations and Member
States can also strengthen their partnerships and
increase coordination to tackle food insecurity and
the protection of essential services. For instance,
civil society organizations on the ground can provide
real-time insights into local needs, while regional
organizations can use their influence to promote
peaceful conflict resolution. These combined efforts
will protect facilities that are indispensable for the
civilian population’s survival.
As I conclude, let me reiterate that the primary role
of the Security Council is the protection of civilians
in conflict. This responsibility falls upon all of us
legally and morally. It is unfortunate that situations can
worsen while we spend more time focusing on debates
and resolutions instead of urgently putting measures in
place to adequately protect civilians and create corridors
for humanitarian aid. The Security Council and its
members should revise how protection and humanitarian
intervention are approached. However, what should
remain constant in intervention is a swift response.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
Switzerland for organizing this important debate and
by expressing my appreciation to all briefers and the
Secretary-General for their contributions.
We believe that the strong focus on conflict-induced
food insecurity and the protection of critical civilian
infrastructure and essential services is now of crucial
importance. Before I delve into the details, I would
like to emphasize once again that civilians and civilian
infrastructure during armed conflict are protected
under international humanitarian law. Therefore,
attacks targeting civilians and objects indispensable
to the survival of civilians constitute war crimes, and
their perpetrators should be held accountable. The
international community should take a firm stance
against this problem. Bearing that in mind, I would like
to address four points.
First, Poland highly values resolutions 2417 (2018)
and 2573 (2021). We call for their full implementation,
as, in our view, doing so could limit the risk of
conflict-induced famine and food insecurity, ensure
better protection of civilian infrastructure and lead to
the establishment of durable humanitarian pauses to
facilitate assistance in conflict-affected areas.

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Secondly, Poland stresses the importance of investing
in reliable, sustainable and resilient infrastructure as
an essential condition for securing the well-being and
safety of civilian populations facing armed conflicts.
In the General Assembly resolution initiated by Poland
and adopted just recently (General Assembly resolution
77/282), the Assembly emphasized the critical role of
infrastructure systems in safeguarding the delivery of
essential goods and services.
Thirdly, we underline that the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development sets out essential
preconditions for lasting peace and stability. It is vital
to get back on track with the implementation of the
2030 Agenda, in particular with regard to food security
and access to essential services, so as to mitigate and
end conflicts, rebuild institutions and infrastructure
and provide for well-being and respect for human rights
for individuals and societies.
Fourthly, Poland supports efforts aimed at ensuring
compliance with international humanitarian law by
all parties to armed conflicts and would like to see
the Security Council take concrete measures in this
regard. The international community’s unity on the
unconditional respect for international humanitarian law
should be strengthened. Particular responsibility for the
respect of the United Nations Charter and international
law lies with the permanent members of the Security
Council. Poland would welcome joint efforts to hold
all perpetrators accountable for serious violations of
humanitarian law and the Geneva Conventions.
At this point we need to keep repeating the following
question: how do we make the Security Council fulfil
the purpose for which it was created when one of its
permanent members shows an absolute disregard for
the basic provisions of international humanitarian law?
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine is an example of
weaponizing food and food production, in violation of
resolution 2417 (2018), which condemns the use of food
insecurity and starvation as a military tactic.
As was emphasized by the President of the Republic
of Poland at the general debate of the seventy-seventh
session of the General Assembly,
“From the very beginning of the invasion, Russia
has been deliberately and cynically destroying new
crops and farming equipment, and the invasion
itself has drastically reduced Ukrainian harvests...

23-1455015/57

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

23/05/2023

“Who will suffer from that? It will be those who
are most in need. It is an economic weapon; it is the
weaponization of food” (A/77/PV.5, p.28).

priorities for Poland. We remain committed to doing
our part and to contributing to initiatives and activities
aimed at the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

Although we welcome prolongation of the Black
Sea Grain Initiative and hope its implementation will
benefit many civilians who depend on grain from
Ukraine, we believe that only by ending the Russian
aggression and unblocking all Ukrainian ports on the
Black Sea coast will the export of grains from Ukraine
be ensured and the balance in the global food markets
restored. In this context, the clearance of explosives in
the contaminated areas, including agriculture lands in
various regions of Ukraine, poses a big challenge.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.

Poland continues its efforts to address effects
of war hostilities on civilians, food systems, energy
infrastructure and displacement. We are helping
Ukraine, continuing our humanitarian projects in
Middle East and responding to other crises around the
world. Poland continues its assistance to partners from
the Middle East that are affected by the consequences
of the refugee crisis caused by the war in Syria. Poland
will also continue to support populations of countries
affected by long-term crises, particularly those at risk
of famine, such as Yemen, Syria and Afghanistan.
As in previous years, Poland will also continue to
support those most in need through voluntary financial
contributions to international organizations. In recent
years Poland has financially supported the activities of
the World Food Programme in Afghanistan, Tajikistan,
Syria, Kenya, Lebanon and Yemen. In 2022, we
contributed $1 million to ease the food-security crisis
suffered by a number of African countries. We stand in
solidarity with countries and communities particularly
affected by the Russian aggression against Ukraine.
Although today’s debate focuses on food insecurity,
it also coincides with the seventh anniversary of the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2286 (2016) on the
protection of health care in conflict. The gap between
the principles of international humanitarian law and
reality is expanding. We therefore need to enhance
our support and advocacy towards full compliance
with international humanitarian law obligations that
protect the wounded and sick, medical personnel
and humanitarian personnel exclusively engaged in
medical duties.
In conclusion, let me emphasize that the protection
of civilians and the promotion of compliance with
international humanitarian law have been long-standing
16/57

Mr. Gaouaoui (Algeria): I would like to commend
Switzerland on its successful presidency of the Security
Council this month and wish the Swiss delegation
further success in the remaining period.
As Council members may be aware, Algeria
contributed to the very inception of international
humanitarian law. Henry Dunant was living in Algeria
when he travelled to witness the horror of the battle of
Solferino and decided to create the first humanitarian
organization. Emir Abdelkader inspired the core
rules that codified international humanitarian law,
in particular through the respect he showed in the
treatment of prisoners and in the distinction he made
between combatants and non-combatants.
International humanitarian law must be respected
by all, under all circumstances. No compromises are
allowed in this regard.
Algeria is alarmed by the rise of the level of acute
food insecurity around the world. My country calls for
strengthening international cooperation and solidarity
so as to face the scourge of hunger and food insecurity
and address their root causes, in particular, underdevelopment. Moreover, humanitarian assistance is crucial
in the context of humanitarian emergencies. We appeal for a smooth transition from relief to development
that takes into account the priorities of the affected
countries and the host communities that bear most of
the burden. We also stress the need to provide humanitarian assistance in line with humanitarian principles,
as stated in General Assembly resolution 46/182. Furthermore, obstructing or targeting aid workers is completely unacceptable. We condemn any act of that kind
and call for ensuring protection and accountability.
In commenting and interacting with the concept
note prepared for today’s discussion (S/2023/307,
annex), I would like to share the following points.
First, the effective implementation of Security
Council resolutions, including resolutions 2417 (2018)
and 2573 (2021), is key to preserving the safety and
security of United Nations and humanitarian personnel
23-14550

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

in armed conflict situations. The Security Council
must shoulder its responsibility for the implementation
of and respect for its resolutions.
Secondly, accountability is a key element to
guarantee full respect for international humanitarian
law. In that regard, legal frameworks should be
reinforced, thereby ensuring that all persons who
commit violations are brought to justice with an
effective zero-tolerance policy.
Thirdly, coordination with national authorities is
crucial in addressing food insecurity. We call for the
alignment of humanitarian and development assistance
with national development priorities and strategies to
better address the food insecurity issue.
Fourthly, strengthening cooperation and further
involving regional and subregional organizations will
contribute to achieving significant progress in ending
hunger, food insecurity and all forms of malnutrition.
Fifthly, the Security Council should enhance
its collaboration and cooperation with other United
Nations bodies and agencies such as the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Food and Agriculture Organization. Despite the impact
conflicts may have on food security, the latter remains a
development issue that requires a development-centred
approach.
We all agree that it is unacceptable for people to
die of hunger in this day and age. We must therefore
redouble our efforts to end hunger and food insecurity,
especially by implementing the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): We
commend Switzerland’s presidency for initiating this
open debate, and we thank the Secretary-General and
the other briefers for their incisive briefings.
Protecting civilians during conflict is critical,
as it has a devastating impact on their lives. Under
international humanitarian law, all parties to a conflict
are required to ensure that civilians have access to
essential goods and services, including food and
medical care. They are also prohibited from attacking
civilian objects such as food supplies, water sources
and hospitals.

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Despite the obligations outlined in international
humanitarian law, the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/345) indicates that armed conflicts in 2022
resulted in a significant number of casualties, including
deaths, injuries, enforced disappearances and immense
suffering. The United Nations documented a concerning
increase in civilian deaths, with at least 16,988 recorded
across 12 conflicts, marking a 53 per cent rise compared
to the previous year.
The report also highpoints the persistent and
devastating effects of armed conflicts on food security,
leading to continued hunger in many regions. The
disruption of agriculture and trade exacerbates the
situation, causing shortages of essential supplies
and agricultural products. Those alarming statistics
underline the urgent need for concrete efforts to address
the impact of armed conflicts on food security and to
protect civilian populations.
Yet in the Middle East — our critical
region — terrorism, occupation, illegal unilateral acts
and the presence of illegal foreign forces continue to
wreak havoc on civilians and their infrastructure.
In the occupied Palestinian territory, the Israeli
regime continues its oppressive, expansionist and
apartheid practices, systematically violating the human
rights of Palestinians. The Secretary-General’s report
underlines that last year witnessed the highest number of
Palestinian civilian fatalities in the West Bank since 2005.
Furthermore, the situation in Gaza is deeply distressing,
as it has effectively become the world’s largest prison.
The destruction of vital infrastructure compounds
the already dire humanitarian situation, leaving the
people of Gaza in a state of extreme vulnerability.
In the Syrian Arab Republic, the persistence of
unilateral sanctions imposed by the United States
and the European Union, as well as the plundering of
Syrian natural resources by illegal foreign forces, have
had a negative impact on the humanitarian situation in
Syria, exacerbating the challenges faced by the Syrian
people and impeding the Syrian Government’s ability to
provide essential services to those in need. Furthermore,
the Israeli regime continues its aggressions and terrorist
attacks against Syria’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity with impunity and no repercussions from the
international community. We strongly condemn those
heinous crimes, as they target civilian infrastructure and
violate international humanitarian law and the Charter
of the United Nations, posing a severe threat to regional
peace and stability.

23-1455017/57

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

In Afghanistan, to ensure that the Afghan people
receive the assistance they require, humanitarian
aid must remain impartial and unconditional. Any
politicization of humanitarian assistance will only
harm the Afghan people, who rely on such assistance
for their survival. Likewise, the frozen assets of the
Afghan people must be returned in full and without any
conditions. Meanwhile, the de facto authorities must
fulfil their commitments, particularly those concerning
the rights of women and girls.
To provide effective civilian protection, it is critical
to prioritize ending the conflict and securing a political
solution, in addition to scaling up humanitarian
operations. Effective humanitarian operations for
civilian protection rely on international cooperation,
proper and timely financing and access to resources.
Unfortunately, those elements are impeded by unilateral
coercive measures.
Unilateral coercive measures have severe
consequences, particularly for food insecurity,
affecting civilians, especially women, and children.
Those illegal measures also hamper health-care systems
and humanitarian organizations, restricting access to
medical supplies and impeding aid delivery. By lifting
unilateral sanctions, the international community
can foster an environment that enables swift and
effective humanitarian responses, ensuring that critical
assistance reaches those in need without unnecessary
delays or limitations.
Finally, we urge all parties to armed conflicts to
fully comply with their obligations under international
law, as well as to respect the humanitarian principles
of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence
in the provision of humanitarian assistance, including
medical assistance.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Türkiye.
Mrs. Özgür (Türkiye): We would like to express
our appreciation to Switzerland for convening this
important annual debate on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. This year’s theme could not be more
relevant nor timelier, given the scale of the grievances
caused by hunger and food insecurity in various parts
of the world in recent years.
First of all, it should be noted that conflicts
continue to pose major threats to global food
security. The situation has been further aggravated
18/57

23/05/2023

by the coronavirus disease pandemic, disruptions in
agricultural production and supply chains, and extreme
climate events.
The international community should take urgent
steps to break the vicious cycle between armed
conflict and food security. As a leading country in the
humanitarian field, Türkiye continues to do its part
to alleviate the human suffering caused by this cycle.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative has been a landmark
achievement in easing the pressure of food insecurity
for millions of people and reducing global food prices.
The Initiative has thus far facilitated the safe export of
over 30 million metric tons of grain and foodstuffs from
Ukraine. We will continue to support the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts and work closely with the parties for
the full implementation of the deal to help people in
need in different parts of the world.
In Syria, we are also pleased to be cooperating
with the United Nations on delivering life-saving
humanitarian assistance to millions of vulnerable
people through the United Nations cross-border aid
mechanism. Food security and nutrition, as well as
protection, are at the forefront of that assistance. The
devastating earthquakes that hit Türkiye and Syria in
February have further exacerbated the humanitarian
situation in Syria, especially in the north-west.
Ensuring the uninterrupted delivery of cross-border
humanitarian aid to Syria is more critical than ever. We
will continue to work in close dialogue with all parties
to extend the Security Council’s authorization in July.
The need for the protection of Palestinian civilians also
remains an imperative task facing the United Nations.
It is deeply concerning that the operations of the World
Food Programme in Palestine risk being suspended
owing to a funding shortfall. It is a disgrace that even
the symptoms of the longest-standing conflict on the
United Nations agenda cannot be cured, let alone its
root causes.
In the face of the ongoing threats to international
peace and security, primarily the expanded scale
and scope of armed conflicts, we should update our
conventional approaches and double our efforts to
protect civilians, especially women and children, who
bear the brunt of conflict. The protection of civilians
was recognized as a matter of international peace and
security nearly 25 years ago by the Security Council.
However, the global track record shows that in a quarter
of a century we should have done better. We therefore
urge everyone, and the Security Council most of all, to
23-14550

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

utilize the normative framework built up over the years,
punish serious violations of international law and keep
prevention and addressing the root causes of conflicts
at the top of our agenda.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): I thank, you, Sir, for
convening this important debate, and my delegation is
also grateful for the insights provided by the briefers this
morning.
Germany aligns itself with the statement made by the
Director-General for General European Civil Protection
and Humanitarian Aid Operations of the European
Commission on behalf of the European Union, and the
statements by the representatives of Ireland, Kuwait
and Croatia on behalf of the Group of Friends of Action
on Conflict and Hunger, the Group of Friends of the
Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict and the Group
of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect, respectively.
In 2018 the adoption of resolution 2417 (2018), on
conflict and hunger, raised high hopes. However, on its fifth
anniversary, there is little reason to celebrate. Acute food
insecurity has reached unprecedented levels, affecting a
record number of almost 350 million people — up from
135 million in 2019. The effects of Russia’s devastating
war of aggression against Ukraine on food and fertilizer
prices, the climate and biodiversity crises and other
factors therefore now make for a dangerous combination.
I would like to make three points in that context.
First, we already have strong instruments
for ensuring the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. They are international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. However, those universal
rules are infringed on far too often. A just and effective
multilateral system requires us to condemn such acts and
hold their perpetrators accountable through international
criminal justice mechanisms, but also politically, here
in the Security Council and the General Assembly. The
Call for Action to strengthen respect for international
humanitarian law and principled humanitarian action,
initiated by Germany and France in 2019, has become
a strong reference document for our efforts to promote
universal adherence to international humanitarian law.
Its signatories share a priority, that of preserving the
humanitarian space and ensuring access to people in
need. To date, the Call for Action has been signed by 52
States, and it is still open for more signatures. I hope that
many in this Chamber will join us.

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Secondly, we must become better at implementing
the existing instruments for the protection of civilians
and providing essential services. The Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, peacekeeping missions
and non-governmental organizations should therefore
continually monitor and report incidents. We also need
to identify and fill existing gaps. The number of civilians
killed or injured by bombing and shelling in urban areas
last year soared by 83 per cent. Germany therefore
urges Member States to join the Political Declaration
on Strengthening the Protection of Civilians from the
Humanitarian Consequences Arising from the Use of
Explosive Weapons in Populated Areas and commit to
a substantive follow-up process.
Thirdly, we urgently need to increase the resilience
and sustainability of agriculture and food systems
and invest in preparedness. Germany believes that
structural reform of our global food systems, including
supply chains and trade restrictions, as well as the
financial architecture supporting them, is vital.
Building on the Uniting for Global Food Security
conference held in Berlin on 24 June of last year, the
Global Alliance for Food Security, established during
the German presidency of the Group of Seven, recently
began its in-country engagements. Through them, we
support our partners to develop measures that make
their agriculture and food systems more resilient and
sustainable. Germany also actively promotes gendersensitive approaches. Addressing the root causes of
gender inequalities is critical to ensuring more effective
protection as well as equitable access to the instruments
for achieving food security.
Germany will continue to support efforts to prevent
and resolve conflicts, promote respect for international
humanitarian law and provide humanitarian assistance
and protection to those affected by conflict. We call on
all States Members of the United Nations, and especially
the Security Council, to work together to achieve the
goals and ensure that the protection of civilians remains
at the forefront of our collective efforts.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia.
Mr. Abesadze (Georgia): At the outset, I would like
to thank the presidency of Switzerland for convening
this important debate and to welcome the focus of
today’s discussion.

23-1455019/57

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union, and I
would like to make some additional comments in my
national capacity.
The landmark resolution 2417 (2018), which for
the first time addressed the link between conflict and
hunger, represents an important step towards preventing
food insecurity and addressing the humanitarian needs
of the millions of civilians trapped in conflict-affected
areas. International humanitarian law complements
human rights norms on the right to adequate food by
prohibiting certain kinds of behaviour in order to prevent
food shortages or denials of access to food in situations
of armed conflict. Unfortunately, we have witnessed a
complete disregard for international humanitarian law
by Russia during its war of aggression on Ukraine,
which we condemn in the strongest terms.
According to the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, between 702 and 828 million
people in the world may have faced hunger in 2021,
and nearly 30 per cent of the global population lacked
access to adequate food supplies. The outlook has been
even grimmer since Russia’s ongoing, premeditated,
unprovoked and unjustified aggression against Ukraine,
which has driven global food and fertilizer prices even
higher. To that end, we welcome the extension of the
Black Sea Grain Initiative for two additional months.
However, we can see how fragile the Initiative is,
since as it is its wont, Russia is using that important
agreement as another tool for putting pressure on the
international community.
The four 1949 Geneva Conventions and all their
Protocols Additional are part of Georgia’s domestic
legislation. Georgia’s Interagency Coordinating
Commission on International Humanitarian Law,
a standing governmental body, leads efforts and
coordinates the work of relevant entities aimed at
ensuring respect for international humanitarian law.
Among its main priorities is the implementation
of international humanitarian law programmes
and educational activities, in cooperation with the
International Committee of the Red Cross. Most of
the educational and training programmes provided
to Georgia’s military personnel incorporate special
courses on international humanitarian law, including
the key aspects of strengthening the protection of
civilians during armed conflict.
20/57

23/05/2023

However, despite the determination of the
Government of Georgia to protect its population
following Russia’s full-scale military aggression
against Georgia in August 2008, we have continued
to be prevented from extending protection to the
people residing in the Russian-occupied regions of
Georgia — Abkhazia and Tskhinvali — who have
been deprived of minimal safeguards for their security
and continue to suffer from ever-increasing human
rights violations, including kidnappings, arbitrary
detentions, torture, ill-treatment, the deprivation of
life, infringements on the right to property, violations
of their right to health, restrictions on education in their
native language and ethnic discrimination.
The date 19 May marked the tragic seventh
anniversary of the chasing and brutal murder of
a Georgian citizen, Giga Otkhozoria, by Russia’s
occupation regime in the Abkhazia region, but the
perpetrator is still at large. We have witnessed other
tragic consequences of detentions and kidnappings
as well. As we speak, Georgian citizens remain in
lengthy illegal detention in both regions occupied
by Russia. Russia’s pattern of behaviour, its ongoing
illegal occupation of both Georgian regions and steps
towards their factual annexation brazenly undermine
the fundamental principles of international law and
poses a grave threat to peace and security in the region
and beyond.
In conclusion, let me reiterate our full support for
the international community’s endeavour to strengthen
the protection of human rights of the civilian population
in armed conflicts. Georgia stands ready to contribute
to those efforts.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Latvia.
Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia): Let me start by thanking
Switzerland for organizing today’s open debate and the
Secretary-General and the briefers for their statements.
Latvia aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union.
I would like to note that as a consequence of the
more than 100 armed conflicts worldwide, civilians
continue to endure injury, enforced disappearance,
torture, rape, death and other suffering. That is
accompanied by the increase in prices of food, fuel
and other critical items, the negative effects of climate
change, the destruction of civilian infrastructure and
23-14550

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

exacerbated socioeconomic vulnerabilities. The recent
report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (S/2023/345) outlines that
grim reality and the fact that armed conflicts continue
to be a primary driver of hunger. It is our joint duty
to ensure a lifeline for civilians in armed conflicts to
access food and essential services. The joint report by
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and the World Food Programme, entitled
“Monitoring food security in countries with conflict
situations”, has listed Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Haiti,
Nigeria, South Sudan, Somalia and Yemen as hunger
hotspots of the highest concern, with populations facing
or projected to face starvation or at risk of deterioration
towards catastrophic conditions, as they already face
critical food insecurity.
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine also
demonstrates the connection between war, food
insecurity and critical civilian infrastructure. Russia
has systematically targeted water systems, the
agricultural sector and electrical plants and interrupted
power, heating, health care, the drinking water supply
and communications services in Ukraine. Those
attacks have resulted in significant civilian casualties
and growing food insecurity across the globe and have
denied access to essential services, including those
provided by humanitarian aid workers.
We are appalled by the recent reports by the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights regarding the possible execution in March
2022 of more than 500 hundred civilians by Malian
troops and foreign military personnel in Mali. There
are numerous reports of the involvement of Russia’s
military Wagner Group in crimes against humanity in
Mali, the Central African Republic and other countries,
which also corresponds to inhumane conduct by the
Wagner Group mercenaries in Syria and Ukraine. It
is paramount to ensure that all such crimes are being
thoroughly investigated and all perpetrators are
held accountable.
We have to pay special attention to the vulnerable
groups. In Ukraine and elsewhere, forcibly displaced
women and girls continuously face an increased risk of
gender-based and sexual violence. The reported forced
deportations and transfers of unaccompanied children
by Russia account to war crimes. Many persons with
disabilities have been unable to access food, medical
services and other types of humanitarian assistance.
Since the very first days of Russia’s war against Ukraine,

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Latvia rapidly allocated funds for the physical and
emotional rehabilitation of war victims, with a special
focus on women and girls who have suffered from the
sexual violence committed by Russian soldiers.
In that context, we highly value the work of the
United Nations and its agencies in their efforts to
provide humanitarian aid to people in Ukraine and
across the world. We are deeply concerned about the
fact that the space for female humanitarian workers is
rapidly shrinking, with Afghanistan and Yemen being
stark examples of that. In addition, we strongly condemn
the increasing attacks on humanitarian workers and
assets. Those acts should be stopped immediately, and
all perpetrators must be held accountable.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): We thank Switzerland
for convening today’s open debate and welcome the
Security Council’s continued attention to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict.
It can be observed from our own experience that
although the immediate impacts of conflicts are often
measured by the number of direct victims of violence,
it is the widespread damage to basic infrastructure and
services that has long-term consequences, especially
for women and children. Driven by that grave concern,
during our presidency of the Security Council in April
2021, Viet Nam worked closely with other Council
members for the unanimous adoption of resolution 2573
(2021), the first resolution of its kind on the protection
of objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian
population in conflict areas. Unfortunately, ongoing
armed conflicts continue to cause damage to critical
infrastructure and residential communities, disrupting
essential water, sanitation and health services, fuelling
hunger and forced displacement and compounding the
spread of infectious diseases. The problems lie not only
in the absence of regulations, but rather in the failure to
adhere to the established rules governing the conduct of
parties engaged in armed conflicts.
Viet Nam therefore calls on all parties to abide by
international humanitarian law, including resolution
2573 (2021). Civilian safety and their means of survival
must not be held hostage by any party in armed conflict.
Food, water supply and resources and related facilities
must not be used in any way as tools to gain military and
strategic advantages. Parties to armed conflicts bear the
primary responsibility for safeguarding civilians and

23-1455021/57

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

civilian objects under their authority, and devastating
consequences could be averted if they upheld their
obligations under international humanitarian law.
The Security Council, with its primary
responsibility endowed by the Charter of the United
Nations to maintain international peace and security,
must condemn indiscriminate or disproportionate
attacks against indispensable civilian objects and adopt
the measures necessary to address those violations. The
General Assembly, within its relevant mandate under
the Charter, needs to redouble its efforts to strengthen
the international humanitarian law system. The
United Nations should encourage and facilitate closer
coordination between Member States, international
organizations and humanitarian and development
partners, both in conflict resolution and post-conflict
peacebuilding, to support recovery and build resilience
for civilians.
To conclude, my delegation would like to reiterate
that the best way to protect civilians is to prevent
conflict and address its root causes. Peace to us, as
politicians, may mean many different things, but for
civilians, it takes shape in the most fundamental things:
food, water, shelter, health care and education. Viet
Nam strongly believes that only by working together
to uphold the Charter and international law can we put
an end to the devastation caused by armed conflicts
to the civilian population and create a foundation for
sustainable peace, security and development.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Sowa (Sierra Leone): It is my singular
honour to join the discourse today to address the
Security Council at this high-level open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict on the theme
of ensuring the security and dignity of civilians in
conflict and addressing food insecurity and protecting
essential services. At the outset, let me commend
you, Mr. President, for the way in which Switzerland
has conducted the affairs of the presidency of the
Security Council so far, and thank you for convening
today’s timely debate. We would also like to thank
the Secretary-General and our other briefers for their
insights earlier today.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
fundamental principle of international humanitarian
law. It is enshrined in the Geneva Conventions and
the Protocols Additional, as well as in customary
22/57

23/05/2023

international law. The principle requires all parties to an
armed conflict to take every possible concrete measure
to protect civilians from the effects of hostilities.
Despite that, civilians continue to be victims of armed
conflict. In 2022 alone, the United Nations recorded
more than 10,000 civilian casualties in armed conflict.
The United Nations in general, and the Security
Council in particular, have a responsibility to protect
civilians in armed conflict. That responsibility
can be fulfilled through a number of measures,
including ensuring that all parties to armed conflict
respect international humanitarian law, providing
humanitarian assistance to civilians affected by armed
conflict and holding the perpetrators of war crimes and
other serious violations of international humanitarian
law accountable. The protection of civilians in armed
conflict is a complex and challenging issue. However, it
is one that the United Nations must continue to work on
to ensure that civilians do not become victims of armed
conflict. In addition to the protection of civilians from
the effects of hostilities, the United Nations system and
the wider international community must also ensure
their security and welfare in conflict. That includes
ensuring that they have access to water, food, shelter and
health care. It also includes protecting them from sexual
violence and other forms of gender-based violence.
We are in an unprecedented and critical stage of a
global food crisis. The current food crisis is probably
the worst in a decade, and with the effects of climate
change coinciding with trade restrictions and conflicts,
years of progress in the battle against hunger and
poverty are being rapidly reversed. Food insecurity
and its consequences are more prevalent in countries
affected by conflict or disasters, and there can therefore
be no gainsaying that food security is a critical issue
for peace and security. In May of 2022, the SecretaryGeneral told the Security Council that “[w]hen war is
waged, people go hungry” (S/PV.9036, p.2). And he
also affirmed that feeding the hungry is an investment
in global peace and security. There is a heightened
level of food insecurity globally and Africa has been
very seriously affected because conflict and general
insecurity, as well as natural disasters, continue to
plague the continent.
Access to quality, nutritious food is fundamental
to human existence. Hunger and health are deeply
connected. For children, food insecurity is particularly
devastating. A lack of nutritious food can have serious
implications for a child’s physical and mental health.
23-14550

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The right to food is therefore a fundamental human
right, recognized under international law. The issue
of food insecurity is also a major concern in conflictaffected areas. In many cases, armed conflict disrupts
agricultural production and distribution, leading
to food shortages and malnutrition. The United
Nations system, including the Food and Agriculture
Organization and the World Food Programme, must
provide food assistance to civilians in need and work to
address the root causes of food insecurity in conflictaffected areas. Africa is experiencing one of the most
alarming food crises in decades. Millions of people
are suffering from acute food insecurity and require
urgent humanitarian assistance. We have an emergency
at hand. There is slow progress in achieving the goal
of halving world hunger, particularly in Africa. Sierra
Leone believes that there is still much to be done by all
the relevant stakeholders at the national, subregional,
regional and global levels to fight food insecurity and
protect the lives, livelihoods and prospects of millions
of people.
There is an urgent need to plan properly for structural
changes to global food systems, and those plans should
be rooted in sustainable food and agricultural practices.
Increasing food production and distribution, reducing
energy consumption and increasing energy efficiency,
expanding access to finance for developing countries
and dealing with the root causes of crises such as
those of climate change and conflict should be at the
heart of addressing the issue of food insecurity. My
delegation would therefore like to reiterate the urgent
call on Member States to join the growing efforts with
the Global Crisis Response Group on Food Energy and
Finance initiated by the Secretary-General, so that with
our concerted efforts and unwavering commitment we
will be able to effectively remedy that global menace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Prabowo (Indonesia): I thank Switzerland for
convening today’s meeting. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral and the briefers for their insights.
The Secretary-General’s most recent report on the
protection of civilians (S/2023/345) presents us with a
bleak reality, which is that armed conflicts have been
the most significant drivers of the food insecurity
that has affected approximately 117 million people
in 19 countries and territories. If that issue remains
unresolved, it could lead to a vicious circle. Prolonged

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

conflicts continue to disrupt food systems and essential
services, while a lack of access to food and essential
services leads to further violence. On that note, allow
me to share some pertinent points.
First, starvation should never be used as a weapon
of war. The Security Council can promote and enforce
norms for all the parties involved in a conflict to
ensure food security and the protection of essential
services. Those norms can prevent situations in many
conflict areas where agricultural sectors are damaged,
often intentionally, driving people to leave their land
and withering any hope for peace. They can also
prevent situations where access to basic necessities is
obstructed, such as in the occupied Palestinian territory.
Secondly, addressing food insecurity and conflicts
requires a comprehensive approach. That includes
promoting respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law, restoring and securing access to
food, promoting peaceful conflict resolution and
investing in sustainable agriculture and food systems
as part of peacebuilding efforts. Conflict prevention
and peacekeeping must connect in a meaningful way
with peacebuilding and sustainable development.
Thirdly, we must prevent a cascading impact of
conflicts on global food security. Indonesia applauds
the continued efforts of the Secretary-General and
related parties in ensuring a resumption of the Black
Sea Grain Initiative, as well as the implementation
of the memorandum of understanding on trade
facilitation. Both initiatives have helped to stabilize the
global market, allowing the distribution of grain and
fertilizer to resume and thereby staving off hunger that
could affect millions. Nevertheless, a real solution can
be achieved only when peace prevails.
Finally, we must embed the protection of civilians,
including from hunger, into the peace continuum.
The United Nations and the Council should be able to
facilitate measures to strengthen countries’ capacities
to protect civilians, sustain peace and ensure the
continuity of economic activities, food availability and
the resilience of food systems. In achieving those goals,
we also need to guarantee safe, unhindered, unimpeded
and sustained humanitarian access in conflict areas.
Addressing hunger and famine in conflict areas
demands that all members of the international
community work hand in hand. No one should be left
behind. Indonesia stands ready to contribute.

23-1455023/57

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Global Alliance for the Missing, a
cross-regional group of States consisting of Argentina,
Azerbaijan, Colombia, Croatia, Estonia, Kuwait,
Mexico, Nigeria, Peru, the Republic of Korea,
Switzerland and my own country, Norway.
The group was created in 2021 to focus
attention on the issue of missing persons — a global
humanitarian and human rights tragedy — and to
promote the implementation of relevant obligations
and commitments. This year’s report of the SecretaryGeneral on the protection of civilians (S/2023/345)
highlights the vast numbers of people who went missing
last year due to armed conflict, continuing a worrisome
trend of previous years and decades. It also highlights
initiatives to prevent and address their fate. The Global
Alliance welcomed the report’s recommendation to
“put in place legal, policy and institutional
frameworks that account for protected persons …
and ensure the effective search for and identification
of missing persons and the proper management of
the dead” (S/2023/345, para. 90 (d)).
However, there is no doubt that the ever-increasing
number of missing persons far outpaces efforts to
address this issue. Many members of the Global Alliance
know first-hand about the challenges in providing
answers to the families of the missing, some of whom
have been waiting for decades. That requires political
will and access to information, including archives, as
well as resources and expertise.
Four years ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2474 (2019) on missing persons in armed
conflict. The resolution outlines measures to prevent
and address the issue and reaffirms critical obligations
under international humanitarian law, such as those
set forth in the 1949 Geneva Conventions and their
Protocols Additional of 1977. Notwithstanding that
important achievement, the fate of missing persons and
their families’ needs remains all-too-often ignored,
with potential long-term consequences for sustainable
peace. Greater efforts by the United Nations and its
Members States to implement resolution 2474 (2019)
are therefore needed.
As the Global Alliance, we intend to highlight
key areas where progress can and should be made, for
example on the link between missing persons and peace
24/57

23/05/2023

processes or on the creation of national mechanisms
to determine their fate and whereabouts. Addressing
the issue of missing persons is an essential element
of international humanitarian law. Global Alliance
members stand ready to share their experience and to
work with others towards a more effective response at
global, regional and national levels.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Chindawongse (Thailand): I wish to begin by
commending Switzerland for organizing this important
open debate on food insecurity and essential services,
as they relate to the security of civilians in conflict,
and to congratulate His Excellency President Alain
Berset for presiding over this event. I also wish to thank
the Secretary-General and all the briefers for their
insightful views.
As the President mentioned this morning, the
common denominator of conflicts, unfortunately,
is the suffering of civilians. Conflict is terrible; its
devastating impacts on innocent civilians are even
more so. That is why it is so important to promote
ways to minimize the impact of conflict on civilians,
with a strong focus on addressing food insecurity and
promoting human security. Ensuring the security and
dignity of civilians in conflict situations is not only the
right thing to do, from a humanitarian perspective, but
it is also an obligation under international humanitarian
law, especially the Fourth Geneva Convention.
I wish to share two important data trends before I
offer three observations.
The first data trend is that the world is moving
towards greater food insecurity. According to the Global
Report on Food Crises 2023, nearly 258 million people
are in crisis or worse — acute food insecurity. And
according to preliminary assessments by the SecretaryGeneral on progress on the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs), the number of people facing hunger is
likely to reach 650 million people in 2030. This trend
is one of the reasons why the General Assembly, in
resolution 76/264, adopted last year, called on the
international community to urgently support countries
affected by a food security crisis.
The second trend is just as significant — conflict
is a significant driver of such food insecurity in many
affected countries, and in some countries, it is the
main driver.
23-14550

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2023/345),
issued earlier this month, states that conflict and
insecurity were the most significant drivers of food
insecurity for some 117 million people in 19 countries.
That amplifies the link between armed conflict and
violence and conflict-induced food insecurity and
the threat of famine and the need to take steps to
protect civilians. That has been well underscored by
the Security Council for some time now, since in its
resolution 2417 (2018).
In view of those trends, I wish to make the following
three quick observations.
First, all concerned parties should respect
and fulfil their obligations — humanitarian and
legal — to protect civilians in conflict situations and
to ensure their food supply. As the Secretary-General
said earlier this morning, “law overlooked is law
undermined.” International humanitarian law should
not be overlooked, but rather continue to be promoted.
We commend the role of the International Committee
of the Red Cross in that regard. Civilians in conflict
situations, and indeed in all situations, should not have
to experience hunger and starvation. Steps should be
taken to limit the impact of conflict on livelihoods,
agricultural production and related infrastructure
because those will have consequences in the longer
term for human security, economic recovery and for an
enduring peace in the post-conflict period.
Secondly, no longer is the impact of conflict,
including on food security for civilians, confined
primarily to the areas of conflict or its neighbourhood.
Due to the current global supply chain and our
interconnected world, the consequences are global. For
example, 17 per cent of global food and feed products
were affected by export restrictions in many countries
as a result of conflict, according to the 2023 Global
Report. And the resulting food price inflation and
cost of living increases have had the most significant
impacts on vulnerable countries, especially lowincome countries.
Thirdly, it is therefore important that the twin
processes of enhancing peaceful means and promoting
sustainable development, including food security,
continue to be a priority in intergovernmental
processes here at the United Nations — from enhancing
the Organization’s convening power for peaceful
resolution of disputes, to strengthening its peaceful-

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

means instruments, to developing strategic foresight
for the United Nations to scan beyond the time horizon
for potential problems impacting global peace and
stability. Those should all be key components of the
New Agenda for Peace.
At the same time, an accelerated programme with a
reinvigorated commitment to attaining the SDGs, with
a strong emphasis on promoting food security, should
continue to be supported at the upcoming SDG Summit
and beyond — from reinforcing safe, global and
regional food supply chains and, especially, distribution
channels for humanitarian supplies to conflict areas,
to developing an economic landscape and trade rules
conducive to such supply chains and to promoting
sustainable agriculture and food production, with the
help of innovation and technology. Those are elements
of people-centred sustainable development, anchored
in food security for all, which should be pursued.
In conclusion, it is our hope that civilians,
whether or not in conflict situations, will continue to
experience food security, achieve human security and
be shielded — to the greatest extent possible — from
the devastating impacts of conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mrs. González (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Permanent Mission
of Switzerland for convening this open debate and for
allowing the States Members of the United Nations
that are not Council members to voice their thoughts
on a particularly important topic, the protection of
civilians, linking it to two fundamental and applicable
aspects — food security and basic services.
My delegation associates itself with the statements
made on behalf of the Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect and the Group of Friends of
the Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict.
Many food crises in recent decades have laid bare
the shortcomings of the international community with
regard to managing food security in conflict situations.
National Governments with conflicting parties are
often unable or unwilling to respond adequately to food
crises. Humanitarian aid operations face challenges
when providing aid and avoiding the exacerbation of the
conflict. Food insecurity does not result from war, but
rather is central to the dynamics underpinning violent
conflict, as vulnerable people are the most affected.

23-1455025/57

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The number of people living in food insecurity
is increasing worldwide. Many current food crises
result from armed conflicts. The most obvious impact
of violent conflicts and/or protracted food security
crises is the destruction of farmlands, irrigation
systems and infrastructure. We are also seeing massive
population displacement and widespread famine due
to violent conflicts, which have negative and, often,
lasting consequences for the food security of the
affected populations.
Chronic food insecurity can be a decisive factor in
the prolongation and exacerbation of violent conflict,
thus creating a vicious cycle of violence and hunger.
These situations have an impact on climate change,
which triggers economic and health crises, long after
those conflicts are resolved. The destruction wrought
by war and the degradation of farmlands and related
infrastructure, as well as the expansion of zones of war,
trigger large-scale displacement, as we see currently
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Yemen,
Afghanistan, Syria, the Sudan, Nigeria, Ethiopia,
South Sudan and Ukraine. I do not want to be remiss
and not mention, in our region, Haiti, which the
representative of our region on the Security Council,
Ecuador, specifically referred to this morning. The
use of arms and conventional munitions, as well as
chemical weapons, which have a harmful impact both
on the environment and health, must be mentioned
as well. Food insecurity can also become a weapon
when violent conflicts target specific sectors of the
population or ethnic, religious or political groups or
when the access of humanitarian organizations, which
provide assistance or essential services to affected
populations, is impeded.
In the face of that reality, it is an imperative to
promote the systematic implementation of existing
instruments and frameworks to address food insecurity
brought about by conflicts and to protect essential
services. We also need to ensure better cooperation
among the Security Council, parties to the conflict and
the rest of our membership.
We underscore the importance of the Black Sea
Grain Initiative, an agreement reached under the aegis
of the United Nations, which was signed by Russia,
Ukraine and Türkiye on 22 July 2022 and recently
extended on 18 May, to facilitate the export of grain
and related foods and fertilizers from Ukrainian ports.
However, it can be further honed, especially after
hearing the comments made at a high-level meeting last
26/57

23/05/2023

week. It is also vital, in that connection, to exchange
information and to foster partnerships that would allow
a comprehensive and coordinated approach.
As was stated by the representative of the
International Committee of the Red Cross this
morning, we should foster diplomatic negotiations and
mediation to prevent conflicts. We should also promote
peacebuilding initiatives to tackle the root causes of
conflicts and to create an environment conducive to
ensuring food security and basic services.
At the legal level, all parties to conflict must
strengthen their commitment to guaranteeing access to
food as a human right. Resolution 2417 (2018) grants a
new framework for United Nations agencies and States
and must be used effectively to determine if assistance
is being provided to civilians in conflicts.
We should also point to the fact that the inequality
of food systems disproportionately affects women
and girls, which makes them more vulnerable to food
insecurity and malnutrition. That is exacerbated by
climate change and the aforementioned factors. It is not
because of the disproportionately negative impact that
they have in this situation that we must address those
issues from a gender perspective, but rather because the
achievement of gender equality and the empowerment
of all women and girls can increase food security,
improve nutrition and make food systems more resilient
and sustainable for all, both in times of peace and
armed conflict.
Food assistance is vital to reduce the effects of
conflicts in the short and long term and is an important
issue of international humanitarian law. Improving
cooperation between United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations and gaining a better
understanding of local mechanisms for responding to
food crises and conflicts and the local perspectives with
regard to peace must be borne in mind when it comes to
planning and implementing aid operations and national
response strategies. Humanitarian corridors, including
the cooperation of humanitarian organizations such
as the Red Cross and Red Crescent societies, must
be secured.
In that regard, there needs to be better awareness of
the impacts of conflicts on food security and essential
services, and perhaps there needs to be less politicization,
thereby strengthening political will and the effective
implementation of resolution 2417 (2018), resolution
2573 (2021) and resolution 2664 (2022) pertaining to
23-14550

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

humanitarian exemptions on assets freezes established
pursuant to United Nations sanctions regimes, which
are important in facilitating humanitarian assistance.
States must fully implement all those resolutions
and incorporate them in their national policies and
programmes and support humanitarian initiatives
and initiatives linked to sustainable development, in
cooperation with international organizations, including
regional organizations and humanitarian agencies.
The role of the United Nations system, its partners
in implementation and non-governmental organizations
is vital when it comes to ensuring a global response
to the insecurity crisis, in particular armed conflict.
The Security Council is at the centre of that effort and
must protect those principles and rights and ensure the
commitment of the membership of the Organization in
that regard.
In conclusion, Uruguay urges the States involved
in armed conflicts once again to respect human rights,
international law and humanitarian law in general
in conflicts and in particular to respect the need to
guarantee access to humanitarian assistance. We call
for the cessation of activities that limit and jeopardize
humanitarian operations, which are seeking to meet
peoples’ basic needs.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Romania.
Mr. Feruță (Romania): At the outset, I would
like to express our gratitude to the Swiss presidency
for choosing this important topic and for giving,
throughout the whole month of May, such importance
to these topical issues.
Romania is a staunch supporter of multilateralism
and the three United Nations pillars — peace and
security, human rights and development. My country
is confronted with such realities at its external border
with Ukraine, where civilians are killed, wounded
or starved.

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

to improve humanitarians’ capacities to stay on the
ground and deliver aid in accordance with the provisions
of international humanitarian law. Indeed, international
humanitarian law prohibits weaponizing access to food
and starvation as a method of war. We welcome the
continuation of the Black Sea Grain Initiative, but greater
predictability in access to food globally is necessary.
Unimpeded access to food is part of the wide array
of instruments of international humanitarian law, as it
ensures human dignity and human security.
In the past year, Romania alone has facilitated the
transit of over 16 million tons of grain from Ukraine,
which is half of the grain transited via the Black Sea
Grain Initiative. The more routes remain open for the
grain to become available to those in need, the more we
move away from the brink of a food crisis or malnutrition.
It is in that context that we find appalling the findings of
the recent reports of UNICEF on the skyrocketing levels
of acute malnutrition among 2.3 million girls and boys
in Afghanistan.
The protection of civilians in conflicts is intimately
related to climate and security, a reality that is sadly
witnessed by children, the elderly, women and girls,
and men and boys. The earthquakes in Syria and
Türkiye and Cyclones Freddy, which affected Malawi
and Mozambique in March, and Mocha, which hit
Bangladesh and Myanmar last week, are clear examples
of how extreme weather events further exacerbate the
plight of civilians.
The protection of civilians also means curtailing the
culture of impunity and enhancing accountability. We
welcome the specific recommendation in the report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict to:

In addition to the points made by the delegation of
the European Union, I want to add a few points.

“Investigate alleged war crimes, crimes against
humanity and crimes of genocide, prosecute
perpetrators, ensure reparations for victims and
guarantees of non-repetition, strengthen States’
capacity and resources to investigate and prosecute”
(S/2023/345, para. 90 (j)).

To ensure the rights of civilians in conflict means to
allow unimpeded access to humanitarian players to the
areas where civilians need such aid. Given the unfolding
wars and crises taking place before our eyes, unimpeded
access should be available for the humanitarian
actors that operate in the Sudan, Ukraine, Yemen or
Afghanistan for the benefit of the populations. We need

My delegation also echoes the appeal of the
Secretary-General in the same report for countries to
become a party to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and cooperate fully with the ICC
and other investigative and judicial mechanisms. We all
need to take such measures to ensure the security and
dignity of civilians in conflict.

23-1455027/57

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Luxembourg.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg would like to thank Switzerland for
having organized this open debate on the protection of
civilians during its presidency of the Security Council.
My country fully aligns itself with the statement of
the European Union and the statements of the Group of
Friends on the Protection of Civilians and the Group of
Friends on the Responsibility to Protect. I would like to
add a few comments in my national capacity.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2023/345) and recommendations. His conclusion is
clear: we must strengthen the protection of civilians. We
also thank the President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross for her statement and her appeal to make
respect for international humanitarian law a political
priority. We are also grateful to Ms. Aïchatou Mounkaïla
for highlighting the role women play in combating food
insecurity and protecting essential services.
Providing sustainable access to quality basic
services is a priority of Luxembourg’s development
cooperation and humanitarian action. To enable
humanitarian actors to operate in increasingly
difficult contexts, innovation is required. That is why
Luxembourg, in partnership with the World Food
Programme, launched a humanitarian innovation
accelerator this year, which supports the development
of new solutions for access to services.
In its resolutions 2417 (2018) and 2573 (2021),
the Security Council strongly condemned the use of
starvation as a method of warfare, which can constitute
a war crime. Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine
has highlighted the links between conflict, hunger and
critical civilian infrastructure. It has exacerbated food
insecurity in Ukraine and around the world. In this
context, we welcome efforts to ensure the continuity of
the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
Attacks on civilian infrastructure, including schools
and hospitals, can constitute war crimes and crimes
against humanity. These crimes must be prosecuted. We
welcome the investigations by the Ukrainian judicial
authorities and the International Criminal Court into
Russia’s massive attacks on civilian infrastructure
in Ukraine. In general, Luxembourg remains firmly
28/57

23/05/2023

committed to the Safe Schools Declaration, and we
encourage all Member States that have not yet done so
to sign it.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming
Luxembourg’s full support for the crucial mandate of
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
in promoting international humanitarian law and
protecting civilians in conflict. We are proud to have
been able to strengthen our strategic partnership with
the ICRC with the opening in Luxembourg this year
of the Delegation for Cyberspace. The Council can
continue to count on our support.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Malovrh (Slovenia): Let me join speakers
before me in thanking the Secretary-General and the
briefers from the International Committee of the Red
Cross and civil society for their valuable and sobering
briefings earlier today. Slovenia aligns itself with the
statement made by the representative of the European
Union, in its capacity as observer, and I wish to make
some additional remarks in my national capacity.
The situation of civilians in armed conflicts around
the world remains alarming. The latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2023/345) paints a very dark
picture of a 53 per cent increase in civilian deaths in
2022, with more than 100 million persons worldwide
being forcibly displaced and a quarter of a billion
people facing acute hunger. Women, children, older
persons and persons with disabilities are the most
adversely affected.
In that regard, I would like to highlight three points.
First, on respect for international humanitarian
law, the unprecedented disrespect for civilian lives and
disregard for the norms and laws aimed at protecting
civilians is alarming. We call on all parties to armed
conflict to respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law. Resolution 2417 (2018) is clear. It
calls for compliance with the obligations set forth under
international humanitarian law, including ensuring
safe and unimpeded access of humanitarian personnel
to civilians. It calls for the protection of civilian
infrastructure critical for delivering humanitarian
aid and for the proper functioning of food and water
systems, and it acknowledges the link between conflict
23-14550

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and hunger and the need to break the vicious cycle and
establish accountability for those who exploit starvation
as a method of warfare.
Recognizing this challenge, earlier this year,
Slovenia hosted an international conference on legal
challenges and the protection of critical infrastructure
and environments during armed conflicts and respect for
international humanitarian law. The message was clear.
Full respect for international law is a prerequisite for
maintaining peace and security and stability.
Secondly, on protecting the natural environment,
as an environmentally conscious country, Slovenia
pays special attention to promoting the environment in
armed conflicts. Negative impacts from the destruction
of critical infrastructure, soil contamination, water
pollution and disrupted sanitation systems cause severe
and lasting consequences that will be felt for generations
to come. We believe water resources and installations
should be of particular consideration in conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and peacebuilding efforts.
Contamination by unexploded ordinance and landmines
also severely challenges food production. With our
partner, the Slovenian organization ITF Enhancing
Human Security, we will continue to address the scourge
of antipersonnel mines in mine-affected regions in 30
countries worldwide.
Thirdly, on early action and addressing root causes,
while conflicts are among the main drivers of food
insecurity and hunger, they can no longer be viewed as
isolated drivers. Economic, political and environmental
factors deepen food insecurity and its long-term effects.
Addressing all root causes of food insecurity is paramount.
We believe that the peace and security effects of climate
change should both be discussed in this Chamber. All
peacekeeping and peacebuilding interventions must be
climate-sensitive and climate-resilient. Peacekeeping
and political missions should heighten their attention to
climate-related risk in their areas of operation.
Slovenia supports strengthening the nexus between
humanitarian development, peace assistance and placing
food security at the centre of this work. Slovenia has
increased its financial support for food security sixfold
last year, and we have earmarked a share of these
funds for preventive action and resilience-building in
countries facing food insecurity. We also welcome the
extension of the Black Sea Grain Initiative, which is
important for global food security, especially for the
most vulnerable countries.

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

The year 2022 has been among the most food-insecure
years on record, with devastating effects on civilians.
Armed conflicts, the economic downturn, the recovery
from pandemic and the impacts of climate change have
created the perfect storm of crises. Preventing civilian
suffering is not optional; it is our collective responsibility,
regardless of whether a situation is on the Security
Council’s agenda or not.
We also understand today’s debate to be a sequel to
the Arria Formula meeting on the protection of water,
which Switzerland organized together with Mozambique.
We understand food security and water security as
two sides of the same coin — two key aspects of the
protection-of-civilians discussion — and appreciate the
systematic approach of the two presidencies.
Finally, as a candidate country for the Security
Council, Slovenia will continue to promote the agenda
and positively contribute to the protection of civilians
in conflict situations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Mrs. Narváez Ojeda (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the opportunity to participate in today’s open
debate. We take note of the briefings and statements
heard today.
There is no doubt that the protection of civilians
is a central part of peace operations. Observance and
compliance in this area is a humanitarian imperative;
this has become an elementary rule of peacekeeping
and therefore of the United Nations system. Promoting
the rule of law and accountability and full compliance
with human rights, international law and international
humanitarian law is fundamental to the protection
of civilians.
Based on the foregoing, States Members of the United
Nations must implement provisions for the protection
of civilians in their national legislation and ensure that
they are implemented in armed conflict. Indeed, we
recognize the occasions on which the Security Council
and/or the General Assembly have established followup mechanisms when belligerent forces have violated
the protection of civilians. We firmly believe that the
international register of damage allows for comprehensive
monitoring of conflicts. Similarly, more countries
need to consent to the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court, a specialized court that can prosecute
such war crimes as attacks on civilian infrastructure,
essential services and the suppression of food supplies.

23-1455029/57

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

We recognize the contributions made by resolutions
2417 (2018) and 2573 (2021), which focus on mitigating
the effects of conflict on food insecurity. It is imperative
that the Security Council addresses emerging risks in
conflict that affect both food security and the protection
of essential services.
We believe that consideration could be given to
the gender perspective and how food insecurity or the
absence of relevant services may have a differential
impact on women.
The first of those emerging risks is climate
change, the impact of which, in combination with
socioeconomic and/or political factors, exacerbates the
risk of violence caused by food insecurity, as well as
by economic crises and migration. Climate change can
lead to droughts, floods and other natural disasters that
affect food production.
Similarly,
armed
conflicts
are
causing
unprecedented forced displacements of people and
refugees, which can disrupt food production and further
increase food insecurity.
A third element to consider is armed and criminal
groups using control over food production and
distribution as part of their war strategies. The Security
Council, together with other specialized agencies, can
work to disrupt those war economies and ensure that
food reaches those who need it most.
Finally, we wish to stress the importance of
preventing conflict itself. We therefore call for united
work by the Security Council, together with regional
organizations, the Peacebuilding Commission and,
above all, civil society, including women on a permanent
basis, to achieve long-term solutions to food insecurity
caused by conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Greece.
Mr. Sekeris (Greece): Greece aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union and would like to add the following in
its national capacity.
We would like to thank Switzerland for organizing
this timely open debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.
Conflicts remain the major causes of hunger,
affecting global markets and supply chains, with the
ongoing war in Ukraine further exacerbating the so30/57

23/05/2023

called triple-F crisis of food, fuel and fertilizers. That
crisis is even further aggravated when conflict is
combined with other factors, such as climate change.
In that context, the implementation of resolutions
2417 (2018) and 2573 (2021) remains critical. Full
compliance with international humanitarian law
remains of utmost importance, and all parties to armed
conflicts should abide by humanitarian principles. The
contribution of the International Committee of the Red
Cross in that regard is of utmost importance. Attention
should also be paid to demining operations, so that arable
lands are safe for agricultural activities.
No effort should be spared to ensure humanitarian
access to those in need. We need to safeguard civilian
infrastructure from any attacks, while the safety of
humanitarian personnel should remain our top priority.
An emphasis should be placed on the protection of
the most vulnerable, such as women and children. Of
particular concern is the safety of female humanitarian
workers, whose role is indispensable in providing
essential services to women and girls.
Digital technologies and artificial intelligence
can play a constructive role, including through the
dissemination of critical information. However, we
should remain vigilant so that this tool will not be used
to the detriment of civilians by spreading misinformation
or even through cyberattacks, which can threaten vital
civilian infrastructure.
Moreover, we need to act pre-emptively,
strengthening the links between early warning and early
action in conflict-driven food crises. In that vein, every
Government should pursue preventive policies and adopt
emergency actions to secure food for its population. If
a Government lacks the capacity to prevent or mitigate
a food crisis, it should facilitate relief operations
in accordance with international humanitarian law.
Improving food security requires coordination and
complementarity among actors in humanitarian
assistance. In that respect, the work of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is commendable.
I would like to stress that Greece is particularly
committed to delivering humanitarian assistance to
regions severely affected by conflict-induced hunger,
such as sub-Saharan Africa, the Sahel and the Horn of
Africa. In that regard, we are contributing financially
to the reconstruction of the port of Benghazi in
Libya — a hub that facilitates the provision of foodstuffs
to the broader region.
23-14550

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

In addition to the above, in the framework of the
Black Sea Grain Initiative, which has played a vital role
in reducing global food and fertilizer prices, fleets of
Greek interests involved in maritime transportation
worldwide carry 50 per cent of the total volume of
products currently exported by Ukraine.
Finally, we are engaged in all relevant discussions
at the United Nations, including on the New Agenda for
Peace. Preventing conflict is the most effective means
of preventing famine. While humanitarian assistance is
essential, the solution is peace. As a Security Council
candidate for the period 2025–2026, Greece remains
committed to the promotion of international peace and
security and to the peaceful resolution of conflicts.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. Mainero (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate Switzerland on its
presidency of the Security Council and on convening
this important open debate.
The Security Council must remain committed
to the protection of civilians in armed conflict and
to the promotion of full respect for international law,
in particular international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, as well as to the fight
against impunity.
Argentina would like to stress, once again, the
value and significance of the 1949 Geneva Conventions,
which represented a remarkable step forward for the
international community in the normative evolution of
international humanitarian law. Seven decades later,
conflicts continue to exist, and it is regrettable that there
are still many situations in which civilians are the target
of attacks, with unacceptable deaths among the civilian
population; in which children are recruited as soldiers
and abused; in which thousands and even millions of
people are displaced; and in which humanitarian access
is impossible or seriously curtailed. Many of those
situations are exacerbated by impunity.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2023/345) and appreciate its recommendations and
conclusions. The Secretary-General’s report highlights
that, in 2022, more than 250 million people suffered
from acute hunger in 58 countries and territories, many
of them in armed conflict. It also states that conflict
and insecurity were the most significant factors driving

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

the high levels of food insecurity, which affected
an estimated 117 million people in 19 countries and
territories.
Armed conflict generates food insecurity by
destroying farms, roads and ports, by paralysing the
economy and by disrupting humanitarian access. Food
insecurity, in turn, can become a trigger for violence,
instability and migration and can be a factor in
recruitment by terrorist groups.
In recent years, the Security Council has focused
its attention on the link between conflict and hunger. In
2017, when the Secretary-General warned the Council of
the threat of famine in various regions, the Council, in a
presidential statement, deplored the failure of the parties
to those conflicts to ensure sustained and unfettered
access to deliveries of life-saving food assistance
(S/PRST/2017/14).
In May 2018, the Council adopted resolution 2417
(2018), recalling the link between armed conflict and
conflict-induced food insecurity. The resolution strongly
condemned the use of civilian starvation as a method of
warfare, as well as the unlawful denial of humanitarian
access, and urged all parties to conflict to protect critical
civilian infrastructure to ensure the proper functioning
of food systems.
The Secretary-General’s report highlights that, five
years after the adoption of resolution 2417 (2018), armed
conflict remains the main driver of hunger. International
humanitarian law prohibits the starvation of civilians as a
method of warfare and provides protection for the assets
needed to produce food and clean water. Despite those
provisions of international humanitarian law, hunger is
alarmingly often a consequence of armed conflict, either
because belligerents deliberately cause it, thus violating
their obligations, or because it arises as an indirect result
of the destruction caused by war. What is clear is that
respect for the rules of international humanitarian law
can help to mitigate the impacts of armed conflict on
food security.
An important element in the protection of civilians is
the investigation of the facts and accountability for those
responsible for crimes against civilians. In that regard,
Argentina considers it appropriate to point out that
international humanitarian law offers a tool to investigate
events that could constitute grave breaches of the
Geneva Conventions by an impartial entity, namely, the
International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission
provided for in the first Protocol Additional to the
Geneva Conventions.

23-1455031/57

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Argentina would also like to highlight the
fundamental role of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) in the fight against impunity. The ICC is a key
tool in the quest for justice, and it is often the Security
Council that holds the key to access to the Court.
In conflict zones, both State and non-State actors
continue to perpetrate attacks on civilians, and victims’
registries can shed light on conduct during hostilities
and help identify the parties responsible. Argentina
encourages all parties to conflicts to record and track
casualties in a consistent manner in collaboration with
the relevant internationally mandated bodies. The
registration of victims is a fundamental tool for early
warning of potential mass-scale atrocity crimes and for
understanding other threats to civilians.
More than 20 years after the adoption of resolution
1265 (1999), the first Security Council resolution on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, civilians
continue to represent the vast majority of conflict
victims. The problem lies not in the current normative
framework but in the translation and implementation of
the norms in practice. In order to translate the normative
advances of the past 20 years into demonstrable
results, the Security Council, and the international
community as a whole, must advocate for a more robust
implementation of the existing normative framework.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Ms. Zacarias (Portugal): I would like to thank
Switzerland for convening this debate and the briefers
for their insights this morning.
Portugal aligns itself with the statement made
by the Director-General for General European Civil
Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations of the
European Commission on behalf of the European
Union, and the statements made by the representatives
of Kuwait and Croatia on behalf of the Group of Friends
of the Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict and
the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect,
respectively. I would like to underline three points in
my national capacity.
First, we welcome the Secretary-General’s annual
report (S/2023/345) on the protection of civilians. We
are encouraged by some positive steps, such as the
adoption of the Political Declaration on Strengthening
the Protection of Civilians from the Humanitarian
Consequences Arising from the Use of Explosive
Weapons in Populated Areas, the recent renewal of
32/57

23/05/2023

the Black Sea Grain Initiative and Mozambique’s
establishment of the Interministerial Commission on
Human Rights and International Humanitarian Law,
as President Nyusi mentioned this morning. However,
the overall situation remains very concerning. Civilian
deaths increased by 53 per cent in 2022, and half of
them were the result of Russia’s war of aggression in
Ukraine. And two thirds of people experiencing acute
hunger live in conflict-affected areas. States bear
responsibility.
Secondly, in that regard, States must protect,
respect and fulfil the human right to food, safe drinking
water and sanitation recognized under international
human rights law. To that end, we must ensure
compliance with international humanitarian law, while
strengthening efforts to disseminate and implement
resolutions 2417 (2018) and 2573 (2021) in order to
ensure coordination between the Security Council and
the Human Rights Council and its special procedure,
as well as synergies with other relevant actors. And
we also need to align efforts in the areas of peace,
development and humanitarian action, in order to
ensure complementarity and address root causes while
also bearing in mind the impacts of climate change.
Lastly, we have to combine short-term action with
long-term solutions to be effective. We need strategic
foresight and accountability. We need more systemic
coordination of emergency relief and humanitarianworker protection. Sanctions regimes must provide for
humanitarian exemptions, in line with resolution 2664
(2022). The right of civilians to education and health
during armed conflicts must be respected. We need
strategies that emphasize sustainable development and
respect for human rights, while mobilizing technology
to ensure that food and water systems are resilient
and ecologically balanced. Moreover, we need to be
inclusive. Civilians are not faceless masses. They are
communities torn apart by conflict. We need to listen
and work with them at the local level. In short, we
must support vulnerable countries while respecting
their national priorities and ownership, scale up
humanitarian operations and safeguard livelihoods as
we promote political dialogue. That is the way to go if
we are to break the vicious cycle of armed conflicts and
food insecurity.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
23-14550

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Ms. Marchand (Belgium) (spoke in French): At
the outset, let me warmly congratulate you, Madam
President, on the historical significance that your
presidency of the Security Council represents. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General, the President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and
Ms. Mounkaïla for their briefings.
My country aligns itself with the statement made
by the Director-General for General European Civil
Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations of the
European Commission on behalf of the European
Union, and the statements by the representatives of
Kuwait and Croatia on behalf of the Group of Friends
of the Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict
and the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to
Protect, respectively.
Civilians continue to pay a heavy price in armed
conflicts. At a time when the international community
is facing the largest number of conflicts we have seen
since the Second World War, 2 billion people, that is, a
quarter of the world’s population, live in areas affected
by violence. And the number of displaced persons has
reached record heights. Armed conflicts result in the
loss of human life, displacement and sexual violence.
They lead to the exploitation of natural resources, the
destruction of critical infrastructure, the interruption
of essential services for civilians and serious shortages
of food and water, with a disproportionate impact on
women, girls and other vulnerable people. Russia’s war
of aggression against Ukraine has further compounded
that pattern, leading to massive displacement and
heightened food insecurity for millions of people
all over the world. Those challenges call for a strong
response by the international community. In that
regard, we welcome the renewal of the Black Sea Grain
Initiative. As the Secretary-General underlines in his
report on the protection of civilians (S/2023/345), armed
conflicts remain the main cause of food insecurity. We
must break the cycle of conflict and hunger, support
the economies of vulnerable countries and come up
with comprehensive solutions to combat the multiple
drivers of food insecurity in conflicts. We welcome the
recommendations set forth by the Secretary-General
in his report and call on all relevant stakeholders to
implement them.
(spoke in English)
With regard to today’s debate, my country would
like to stress four points. First, strict compliance with
international humanitarian law by all parties to armed

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

conflicts remains critical for the protection of civilians
and the resources and objects indispensable to their
survival. We welcomed the adoption last year of the
Political Declaration on Strengthening the Protection
of Civilians from the Humanitarian Consequences
Arising from the Use of Explosive Weapons in
Populated Areas, under which States agreed to adopt
and implement policies and practices to avoid harming
civilians, including by restricting or refraining from
the use of explosive weapons in populated areas. We
call on all States to adhere to the Declaration.
Secondly, the Council must step up its efforts to
end the scourge of armed conflict and use the full range
of tools at its disposal to respond to the humanitarian
and food crises fuelled by conflict. It is imperative to
advance the implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, such as resolution 2417 (2018)
and 2573 (2021), which reaffirm the prohibition on the
use of starvation of civilians, including children, as a
method of warfare.
Thirdly, States should strengthen accountability
mechanisms at both the domestic and international
levels. They should conduct investigations into
violations of international humanitarian law related to
the use of starvation as a method of warfare, including
the unlawful denial of humanitarian assistance. When
national jurisdictions fail to take action, the Council
has the tools to activate a range of international
investigation and accountability mechanisms. In that
regard, we welcome the amendment to the Rome Statute
that includes as a war crime the intentional starving of
civilians as a method of warfare in non-international
armed conflict, and we call on Member States to adhere
to the Statute and to ratify that amendment.
Lastly, the Council should make better use of the
early-warning and prevention functions of resolution
2417 (2018) and request regular briefings on contexts
where conflict is a leading driver of hunger. The
Secretary-General also has an important role to play
in alerting the Council when there is a risk of conflictinduced famine and widespread food insecurity in the
context of an armed conflict. In that regard, we also
welcomed as a positive measure the appointment last
year of the United Nations Famine Prevention and
Response Coordinator.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cambodia.

23-1455033/57

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

23/05/2023

Mrs. Eat (Cambodia): I would first like to express
my appreciation to Switzerland for convening today’s
debate on ensuring the security and dignity of civilians
in conflicts. The updates given by the SecretaryGeneral and the views of the briefers and speakers have
been insightful and relevant.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union, as well as the statements
delivered by the representatives of Ireland, on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Action on Conflict and Hunger,
and Kuwait, on behalf of the Group of Friends on the
Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict.

It is sad to see that the number of people facing
acute food insecurity increased from 193 million
in 2021 to 258 million in 2022, largely as a result of
armed conflicts. That increase, despite the Security
Council’s adoption of relevant resolutions, reflects
severe shortcomings in our efforts to address peace and
security issues. I would like to make three points.

We would also like to add a few points in our national
capacity, because the Kingdom of the Netherlands is
proud to have been a co-penholder for resolution 2417
(2018) and to have played a part in its adoption when
we were on the Security Council. Unfortunately, five
years on, the situation is worse than it was in 2018.
As others have pointed out, humanitarian needs are
at unprecedented levels and conflict is still the single
most important driver of those record-breaking needs,
including in countries that are now facing famine. The
direct and indirect impact of armed conflict on hunger
is obvious, as the representative of Argentina just
eloquently outlined. All of that means that resolution
2417 (2018) is even more important today than it was
five years ago. I would like to highlight three points in
that regard.

First, all of the parties to any conflict should be
urged to take equal responsibility in facilitating safe
access for humanitarian organizations to reach civilians
in need, with full impartiality assured. That could be in
the form of safe camps in conflict zones with secure
corridors to them for civilians’ passage and the delivery
of aid.
Secondly, Member States should prioritize the
prevention of the further escalation of existing conflicts
by urging the parties concerned to find common ground
with regard to the root causes of their conflicts so that
they can be effectively addressed. It is easier said than
done, but we should persist nonetheless.
Thirdly, we urge for every effort to be made to
prevent the harming of civilian infrastructure and
essential services, food production and supply chains,
in line with international humanitarian law. There is no
lack of established laws and norms, but there is a lack
of commitment to honouring them.
My delegation hopes that the Security Council can
play a leading role involving all the relevant United
Nations institutions and stakeholders, including the
Peacebuilding Commission, in order to realize the
aspirations outlined in those three points and save
the Sustainable Development Goals from the negative
impact of violent conflicts around the world.
The President (spoke in French): I now give
the floor to the representative of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands.
Ms. Brandt (Kingdom of the Netherlands): I
thank you, Madam President, as well as your country,
Switzerland, for organizing this crucially important
open debate on the occasion of the anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 2417 (2018).
34/57

First, the link between conflict and hunger is a
matter of international security that concerns us all.
It is not just an issue for humanitarian organizations.
We must all work to break the vicious cycle between
conflict and hunger.
Secondly, resolution 2417 (2018) recalls that
the use of the starvation of civilians is prohibited
under international humanitarian law, including
in non-international armed conflict, reminding us
that like gender-based violence, it should never be
accepted, including in times of war. We are collectively
responsible for upholding those norms, not just in
words but in practice, and for ensuring accountability
when they are not respected.
Thirdly, resolution 2417 (2018) helps in anticipating
and rapidly addressing situations of acute food
insecurity that result from armed conflict. In fact, it
commits the members of the Security Council to paying
full attention to the reports of the Secretary-General on
that issue.
Resolution 2417 (2018) was a landmark resolution,
yet it is clear that we should do more to strengthen its
implementation. In that regard, I have two suggestions.
First, the resolution calls on the Secretary-General to
report to the Security Council when conflict leads to
severe food insecurity. While we welcome the efforts
23-14550

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

made so far in that regard, in particular those outlined
in this year’s report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians (S/2023/345), we feel that more
frequent reporting under the resolution is necessary.
Secondly, and most importantly, such reporting
should lead to swift action by the Council, in line with
resolution 2417 (2018). The Security Council should
take those reports seriously and take concrete action
when hunger is used as a weapon. Only then will
the resolution do what it is intended to do — make a
difference in people’s lives, as it did in 2018, when
action by the Council contributed to averting a famine
in Yemen.
In conclusion, the resolution’s full potential needs
to be brought to bear in these times of increasing
humanitarian needs. We need to act — and act
together — to break the vicious cycle between conflict
and hunger. And we hope that this week, focused on
the protection of civilians, and today’s open debate will
strengthen our commitment and provide the inspiration
we need to achieve those collective goals. I can assure
the Council of the continued support of the Kingdom of
the Netherlands in that regard. And let me repeat what
my Cambodian colleague just said. It is easier said than
done, but let us be persistent.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.
Mr. Tammsaar (Estonia): I would like to thank
you, Madam President, for convening today’s open
debate of the Security Council.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union.
Estonia remains gravely concerned about the
situation of civilians in the cases addressed in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2023/345), including in
Afghanistan, Somalia, the Sudan, Syria and Ukraine.
We underline the need to ensure humanitarian access
and the ability of humanitarian workers, including
women, to conduct their activities safely and without
constraints. In order to put an end to attacks on civilians
and deter those who wish to challenge peace, there
must be full accountability in place. In cases that have
already been referred to the International Criminal
Court (ICC), further backing from the Security Council
or the General Assembly is of paramount importance.
According to a rather conservative estimate in
the Secretary-General’s report, almost half of the

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

reported civilian casualties in the world in 2022 were
a direct result of Russia’s aggression against Ukraine.
In Ukraine, Russia has killed, tortured, raped and
deliberately bombed civilians, as well as targeting
civilian infrastructure and forcibly displacing civilians,
including children. The latter issue is why Putin and
Lvova-Belova are on the ICC’s most-wanted list. Those
heinous crimes are also the reason why Russia should
be listed in the annexes to the Secretary-General’s
upcoming annual report on children and armed conflict
as a party committing grave violations against children.
The aggression against Ukraine has also reduced
Ukraine’s grain exports by at least a third. We welcome
the extension of the Black Sea Grain Initiative. However,
Ukraine and the world need Russia to end its war. Only
then will farmers be able to return to their fields and
normal worldwide agricultural trade be restored, which
would improve global food security significantly.
Russia is blocking humanitarian aid access to the
temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine and has
caused enormous numbers of deaths among health-care
workers, thereby deliberately ignoring resolutions 2417
(2018) and 2573 (2021). Of the 25 journalists killed in
conflict, as recorded by UNESCO, 10 were killed in
Ukraine. In that regard, regrettably, the implementation
of resolution 2222 (2015), on the protection of
journalists, has still not been achieved.
In conclusion, every Member State has a part to play
in supporting and protecting civilians affected by armed
conflict. Since February 2022, Estonia has opened its
borders to more than 70,000 Ukrainian refugees, which
is equivalent to more than 5 per cent of our population.
We are also issuing 35 residency permits per year to
journalists in need in order to protect free journalism
and support independent media around the world. We
will continue our support to improving global food
security, including through the World Food Programme.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lithuania.
Mr. Paulauskas (Lithuania): I sincerely thank the
Swiss presidency of the Security Council for organizing
today’s important debate.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement made
earlier on behalf of the European Union.
It has been more than 20 years since resolution 1265
(1999) was unanimously adopted. That resolution was a
significant step in addressing the protection of civilians

23-1455035/57

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

during armed conflict. Since then, the Security Council
has adopted numerous resolutions emphasizing the
need to protect civilians and abide by international
humanitarian law. However, we are still witnessing
active conflicts worldwide, in which civilians suffer
the most, leading to millions being displaced from their
homes. According to the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2023/345), there were at least 16,988 civilian deaths
in 2022 across 12 armed conflicts. Shockingly, almost
half of those deaths were caused by Russia’s aggression
against Ukraine, which resulted in 7,957 casualties.
The actual numbers may be much higher. Russia’s
continual attacks on civilians in Ukraine, along with
the deliberate destruction of 700 critical infrastructure
facilities and cyberoperations targeting electricity, the
Internet and transportation services, represent serious
violations of international humanitarian law.
Children are particularly affected by armed
conflict. According to a report from UNICEF, the
education of approximately 5.7 million children in
Ukraine has been disrupted, and 1.5 million children
are facing mental health issues. We also want to
highlight Russia’s large-scale attempts to abduct and
transfer children from Ukraine to Russia. We fully
support the investigation of the International Criminal
Court and its decision to issue arrest warrants against
Russia’s President, Vladimir Putin, and his current
Children’s Rights Commissioner, Maria LvovaBelova, for possible war crimes involving the unlawful
deportation and transfer of children from the occupied
areas of Ukraine. We also underline the importance of
resisting all attempts by Russia to instrumentalize the
United Nations system in covering up and shifting the
blame for those serious crimes.
Another crucial document, resolution 2417 (2018),
adopted in 2018, strongly condemned the deliberate use
of starvation as a tactic of warfare and the obstruction
of humanitarian aid aimed at alleviating hunger
among civilian populations affected by conflicts.
We fully support the Secretary-General’s efforts to
break the cycle connecting armed conflicts with food
insecurity and seek political solutions that strengthen
the economies of vulnerable nations. Extending the
Black Sea Grain Initiative is a positive development,
and we are grateful to the United Nations, Türkiye and
others involved for their dedicated work. However, it
will also be crucial for Russia to stop using food as a
weapon and demonstrate a genuine commitment to full
compliance with the agreement. We urge countries,
36/57

23/05/2023

especially developing countries, involved in fertilizer
production to seize the opportunity to enhance their
production capabilities and play a stronger role in the
global fertilizer market. That will not only contribute
to global food security but also enhance the stability of
agricultural systems worldwide.
Lithuania fully supports the Secretary-General’s
recommendations in his report, which include calling
for investigations into alleged war crimes, crimes
against humanity and acts of genocide. It is crucial to
hold those responsible accountable, provide reparations
to victims and establish measures to prevent similar
atrocities in the future. The International Criminal Court
should exercise its jurisdiction whenever appropriate.
We also recognize and appreciate the efforts of the
United Nations, the International Committee of the Red
Cross, regional organizations and non-governmental
organizations
in
implementing
international
humanitarian law. Their dedication to protecting
civilians, safeguarding civilian infrastructure and
addressing food insecurity is commendable.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan): I am pleased to be able to
begin by thanking Switzerland for organizing today’s
important open debate. I would also like to express our
appreciation to the briefers for providing their valuable
insights to the Council.
The primary responsibility for the protection of
civilians and civilian objects lies with the State and
non-State parties to conflicts. However, the United
Nations and relevant humanitarian agencies, in
particular the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC), play a very important role in implementing and
supporting that protection, based on their mandates.
With regard to the United Nations, the protection of
civilians and civilian objects in conflict areas should be
at the centre of its mechanisms and initiatives related
to protecting people caught up in conflicts as well as
managing and resolving those conflicts, including
through the peace processes in which the United Nations
is involved. It is also vital that the Security Council and
other relevant parties of the United Nations, including
the Secretariat, set clear guidelines to ensure that
evacuations of United Nations staff and personnel in
response to eruptions of hostilities are not carried out
in a way that jeopardizes the protection and well-being
of civilians.
23-14550

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

At the legal level, as the international community
it is in our common interests to ensure respect for the
rules of international humanitarian law related to the
protection of civilians and civilian objects, including
those contained in the 1907 Hague Convention IV with
respect to the laws and customs of war on land and
the 1949 Fourth Geneva Convention and the Protocols
Additional to the Geneva Conventions. States parties to
the relevant international humanitarian law instruments,
as well as the ICRC, have important roles to play. But it
is up to the international community as a whole to work
for adherence to international humanitarian law and
accountability for attacks on civilians, civilian objects
and the environment.
It is the duty of the parties to a conflict, including
armed groups, to respect the rules of international
humanitarian law that apply to the protection of civilians
and civilian objects, as well as the environment, and
to prevent violations by their forces and personnel.
Those rules — including the prohibition on methods
and means of warfare that may cause widespread
long-term and severe damage to the environment; the
prohibition on attacks against civilians, civilian objects
and the environment, to the extent that it remains a
civilian object, and the applicability of the principles
of distinction, proportionality and precaution — must
be applied at all times during military operations.
The rules also include a prohibition on the pillage of
natural resources, the prevention by occupying Powers
of significant harm to the environment of occupied
territories, a prohibition on unlawful exploitation by
occupying Powers of natural resources in occupied
territories and a requirement that the use of such
resources be sustainable and for the benefit of the
protected civilian population in occupied territories.
In that regard, Jordan would like to remind
members of the applicability of the Martens Clause on
the protection of civilians and civilian objects, as well
as the protection of the environment. That includes
the prohibition on means and methods of warfare,
including new technologies that are not specifically
prohibited under relevant treaty rules. In that context,
Jordan condemns Israel’s illegal policies and actions
against the protected civilian population, essential
civilian infrastructure and environment in the occupied
Palestinian territory, which includes the unlawful
exploitation of a majority of the natural resources in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including water
resources. The Security Council, the primary body

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security, has the authority and responsibility to take
action in situations in which the protection of civilians
and civilian objects is being undermined.
With the multiplication of armed conflicts
worldwide, we continue to witness the horrors facing
civilian populations as a result of conflict. We therefore
must view their protection in a holistic manner that takes
into account the loopholes in the existing protection
regimes with a view to maximizing the efficiency of
current mechanisms.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): We thank
Switzerland for convening this important open debate
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We
thank the Secretary-General and all the briefers who
spoke this morning for their insightful remarks.
The Security Council is discussing this important
issue at a time when the world is still engulfed with
new, recurring and protracted conflict situations, with
serious ramifications on civilians, especially women,
children and young people. The report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2023/345) elaborates on the alarming
statistics on armed conflicts and their effects on
civilians, civilian safety and people’s livelihoods across
the world. That is true in the occupied territories of
Palestine and Somalia, for example. The report projects
an upward trajectory of human suffering, which is of
grave concern.
More often, attacks against civilians are not only
indiscriminate, but are attacks on innocent people,
resulting in loss of life, lifelong injuries causing
permanent damage, forced displacement, disruption
of provision and lack of access to essential services,
destruction of critical infrastructure, as well as
livelihoods, which are already affected by the prevailing
global economic pressures, such as rising food prices,
energy and food insecurity. We remain concerned
about the constraints to food access and the reports
pertaining to the perpetual use of hunger and starvation
as an instrument of war and/or access to humanitarian
assistance in conflict situations. In that connection,
we are concerned about the negative impact of armed
conflicts — not only on food security, but also on
nutrition, affecting primarily the most vulnerable.

23-1455037/57

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The report of the Secretary-General also
highlighted that armed conflict is the main driver of
hunger. South Africa deeply regrets the rising levels of
food insecurity as a result of armed conflict and the
targeted attacks on critical infrastructure. We deplore
the continued disregard of the Geneva Conventions and
its Protocols Additional, which reiterate the need for
parties in conflict to comply with their obligations and
duties under international humanitarian law. It is vital
that the Security Council, in keeping with that mandate,
should ensure the upholding of international law and act
in unison against the violations of international human
rights and humanitarian law.
We recognize the important role played by the
Security Council in taking decisions, where required,
to strengthen the mandates of peacekeeping missions
pertaining to the protection of civilians, particularly
as those operations are undertaken in increasingly
volatile environments. In that context, we commend the
continued efforts of the United Nations peacekeeping
missions, where mandated, in protecting civilians in
conflict situations, while recognizing that the primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians, as well as
for the protection and promotion of human rights rests
with the host States.
In conclusion, we applaud countries for taking
steps to protect civilians and critical infrastructure,
lessons for which can be drawn from, and emulated in,
other conflict situations so as to maximize protection.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bulgaria.
Mrs. Beshkova (Bulgaria): Bulgaria aligns itself
with the statements made on behalf of the European
Union and the Group of Friends of the Responsibility
to Protect. In my national capacity, I would like to
highlight the following additional points.
At the outset, I would like to thank Switzerland for
convening today’s high-level open debate. I would also
like to welcome the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral latest report (S/2023/345) and to thank the
briefers for their inputs and insights this morning.
Conflicts continue to affect many parts of the
world and to demonstrate how violence and instability
exacerbate
humanitarian
challenges,
including
conflict-induced hunger. While, in 2022, we witnessed
a reduction in civilian casualties in some contexts, like
Syria and Yemen, in others, like Ukraine and Somalia,
38/57

23/05/2023

the death toll of civilians is hitting grim records. In
addition to the disturbing increase of civilian deaths in
conflicts, compared with 2021, efforts by humanitarian
personnel to provide assistance and to protect civilians
everywhere are facing overlapping impediments, from
insecurity and violence to bureaucratic hurdles.
Today, five years after the adoption of resolution
2417 (2018) and two years after the adoption of resolution
2573 (2021), the suffering of civilians is deepening
and violations of basic norms are on the rise. Bulgaria
therefore joins the call for compliance and respect for
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law by the parties to international conflicts and by
all members of the international community. Parties to
conflicts must ensure rapid and unhindered humanitarian
access to populations in need and must facilitate the
work of humanitarian actors. In that regard, it is worth
recalling that the primary responsibility to protect the
population in their territories rests with States.
As we need to see change in the behaviour of parties
to conflicts in upholding international humanitarian law,
it is equally urgent that the Council rise to its task to
provide better and broader support for humanitarian
action. Decisions made here or the inability to arrive at
a decision could have enormous and — as we witnessed
multiple times — devastating consequences around
the globe. Efforts to ensure compliance and respect
for international humanitarian law should go hand
in hand with steps to strengthen accountability for all
violations and ensure a survivor-centred and gendersensitive approach.
Steps at a national level should be complemented with
international mechanisms. In that regard, we welcome
the continued contribution of the International Criminal
Court in Darfur, the Sudan, the Central African Republic
and Mali and, since March, in Ukraine, and we support
the establishment of the register of damage caused by the
aggression of the Russian Federation against Ukraine.
Since 2021, when the topic of addressing the impact of
conflict on hunger made its way, for the first time, to the
Security Council (S/2021/250), there is now an increased
shared collective understanding on the short- and longterm impacts of conflict on food systems and on varying
impacts on women, girls, boys and men.
Bulgaria is of the view that strengthening the
operationalization of resolution 2417 (2018), including
through enhanced political leadership and the
standardization of reporting, is fundamental to enable
23-14550

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the Security Council to take decisive action and to come
up with solutions. A further step to promote a more
systematic implementation of existing frameworks and
instruments would be the implementation of the proposal
for a regular submission of white papers on conflict and
hunger to the Security Council and for the appointment
of a dedicated focal point in the Secretariat to coordinate
and lead the reporting efforts under resolution 2417 (2018).
Bulgaria emphasizes with deep concern that
ongoing military conflicts have a devastating impact
on indispensable civilian infrastructure and reaffirms
its support for resolution 2573 (2021). We call on all
parties to give full effect to its provisions, especially
given the numerous damages to electricity, health care,
water and sanitation infrastructure and the catastrophic
threat emanating from hostilities in and around the
Zaporizhzhya power plant.
In conclusion, the protection of civilians in armed
conflict will continue to rank high among Bulgaria’s
priorities, and we call on all States and all parties to
conflict, including non-State armed groups, to prioritize
the protection of civilians and to fully apply the laws
and tools we have at our disposal to achieve same.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Mrs. Zalabata Torres (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): For Colombia, food security and sovereignty,
and guaranteeing the human right to food, are sine qua
non conditions for achieving total peace and sustainable
development. The global fight against hunger is an
action aimed at preventing the emergence of armed,
civil and social conflicts. This fight addresses one of
the main sources of conflicts with a view to eradicating
them at their root and is based on the inescapable link
between peacekeeping and development.
Colombia insists that there is no peace without
development and no development without peace.
We believe that the Security Council must ensure
multilateral action to reinforce this approach as an
integral part of its mandate in favour of the protection
of civilians and the comprehensive care of populations
exposed to higher levels of vulnerability. A sustainable
solution to this fight implies the eradication of poverty
in all its dimensions and the closing of the inequality
gap by strengthening the productive capacities of
historically marginalized populations, particularly

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

rural women, youth, people living in rural communities,
indigenous peoples and communities comprised of
people of African descent.
The Government of President Gustavo Petro Urrego
is fully committed to the objectives outlined just now, for
which it has sought to accelerate the implementation of
the comprehensive rural reform contained in the Peace
Agreement signed in 2016 with the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo. As
of March 2023, the Colombian State had invested more
than $4.8 million to acquire more than 3,500 hectares
of fertile land in order to directly benefit 6,195 rural
families. Making progress in these efforts requires a
renewed social contract in which the State, the private
sector and major landowners work collaboratively to
increase agricultural productivity in our country under
sustainable models that contribute to the fight against
climate change and provide means of production and
technology to rural communities.
Colombia also highlights the support of United
Nations agencies for national efforts to strengthen
resilient agrifood systems. In January 2023, we signed
with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations the Letter of Intent on the Pact for Peace,
Food Security and the Human Right to Food to provide
a robust framework of technical collaboration for the
agency to assist the country in achieving fundamental
objectives of its National Development Plan 2022–
2026, inter alia, territorial planning around water and
the empowerment of rural women.
This conception of territorial planning is based
on identifying and enhancing the socioeconomic
system connectivity present in Colombia as a result of
its vast biological and cultural diversity, which must
also be protected in the context of armed conflicts.
In this regard, measures to make progress towards
guaranteeing the human right to food must overcome
the mercantile dynamics of land exploitation and
food commercialization and seek to ensure that all
communities have sufficient, adequate and healthy
food progressively leading to food sovereignty.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I
congratulate your friendly country, Madam President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month. We welcome the convening of today’s meeting
under the presidency of His Excellency Mr. Alain

23-1455039/57

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Berset, President of the Swiss Confederation. We thank
the Secretary-General, the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the President of the
Network of Women-led Organizations of the Lake Chad
Basin for their briefings earlier today.
The protection of civilians is one of the issues at
the top of the Security Council’s agenda, in view of the
Council’s mandate to maintain international peace and
security. This means that we must avoid civilians being
exposed to violence, killing, displacement and the very
serious violations that strike at their dignity and safety,
including those that stem from food insecurity and lack
of essential services caused by conflicts Accordingly, we
welcome the fact that the Security Council adopted two
key resolutions on this issue of paramount importance:
resolutions 2417 (2018) and 2573 (2021). We would like
to highlight the importance of implementing all of the
provisions of both resolutions in all circumstances and
by all parties to conflict.
There is no doubt that the ideal way to keep
civilians from having to undergo different types of
human suffering as a result of conflicts is to prevent
conflicts or settle them. However, in the absence of
finding a solution, parties to conflicts must uphold
the provisions of international humanitarian law. They
must prevent the starvation of civilians or the targeting
of civilian objects necessary for the water delivery,
food production and distribution, and the provision of
energy, health care and education. Parties to conflict
must guarantee the freedom of movement of civilians
and access to humanitarian assistance without obstacles
and in the fastest possible manner.
Qatar makes efforts in various fields aimed at
promoting the protection of civilians in times of
conflict, especially through its unrelenting endeavours
to achieve peace, stability and security. Our foreign
policy is underpinned by the principle of the peaceful
settlement of conflicts, and we support all initiatives that
strive to ensure that all perpetrators of crimes against
civilians are held to account to avoid their recurrence.
We attach great importance to promoting the
protection of education, which is why we co-sponsored
the General Assembly resolution 74/275, which
proclaims 9 September the International Day to Protect
Education from Attack, and urges parties to armed
conflicts to respect civilians, including students and
educational personnel, and such civilian objects as
educational institutions.
40/57

23/05/2023

Qatar also supports the capacity of the United
Nations to swiftly respond to the needs of civilians
who have been affected by conflicts through the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and
the Central Emergency Response Fund, to which we
have contributed more than $18 million. We have also
extended direct support to efforts aimed at mitigating
humanitarian crises. This year, we will be giving
$43 million in response to the Secretary-General’s
appeal to help meet the needs of all those suffering
from famine of various origins, including conflictinduced famine.
Of late, we have seen the terrifying repercussions of
the violence against civilians in the Gaza Strip. We have
strongly condemned Israel’s aggression. We have called
on parties to de-escalate, exercise restraint and ensure
a return to peace. We have underscored the importance
of the international community taking swift action to
protect Palestinian civilians and compelling Israel to
put an end to its flagrant violations of international
law. We have also made efforts to ensure that calm is
restored, and the cycle of violence broken. We welcomed
the ceasefire that has been agreed.
In our brotherly country, the Sudan, recent events
have hit civilians particularly hard. For that reason,
Qatar has called on all parties to immediately cease
hostilities, heed the voice of wisdom, exercise the
greatest restraint and ensure that they act in the general
interest of the people, that is, avert civilian suffering
from the repercussions of conflict. We have also called
for facilitating the delivery of humanitarian assistance
to affected populations. This month, we ourselves have
sent dozens of tons of urgent food aid to the Sudan after
hostilities erupted.
In conclusion, we avail ourselves of this opportunity
to stress that Qatar is eager to uphold provisions of
international law related to the protection of civilians.
We have used all means at our disposal to achieve
that objective.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express our sincere appreciation
to Switzerland for holding this important meeting. I
also address my appreciation to the Secretary-General
and thank him for submitting his report (S/2023/345). I
also thank the other briefers for their valuable briefings.
23-14550

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

According to the most recent statistics,
21.6 million Yemenis need humanitarian assistance,
more than 17 million of whom face severe food
shortages. Malnutrition rates among women and
children in Yemen remain very high. This bleak
picture of the situation in Yemen is the result of the
war that the Houthi militia has been waging against
the Yemeni people for over eight years. Understanding
the causes of food insecurity and the deterioration of
basic services in Yemen is a key element in finding a
solution. Therefore, allow me to elaborate.
First, one of the main reasons for the food shortage
in Yemen is the inability of people to afford the cost of
living and the fact that Houthi militias are besieging
cities — especially Taiz, with more than 4 million
citizens — and starving civilians as a method of war.
They continue to loot and refuse to transfer tax and
customs revenues, as well as revenue from the port of
Al-Hudaydah, to the bank account set up to contribute
to paying salaries for employees, in accordance with
the Stockholm Agreement.
Secondly, when the international community offered
its generous support in the provision of food, nutrition
and basic services to the Yemeni people, the acute food
shortage suffered by most Yemenis continued, and the
United Nations agencies, including the World Food
Programme, clearly reported the obstacles imposed
by the Houthis to impede the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, stealing part of it from the mouths of the
hungry, not to mention their imposition of restrictions
on female humanitarian workers through the so-called
male-guardian system.
Thirdly, even when assistance to Yemen, arriving
often via Al-Hudaydah port, eventually passes through
those obstacles, it often reaches the camps of some
4 million internally displaced persons (IDPs) too late
because the IDPs have had to flee again to other camps
as a result of further Houthi military escalation.
Fourthly, the ability of the Yemeni Government to
stay resilient in the face of these challenges has been
depleted because the national economy has shrunk by
half due to war. With continued Houthis attacks on
oil ports and facilities, the country has suffered some
$1 billion worth of losses that were allocated to improve
public services, paying salaries all over Yemen. Despite
this bleak picture, the Yemeni Government has carried
out many reforms in order to enable State institutions,
like the Central Bank and the Ministry of Finance, to

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

work effectively to achieve economic recovery and
macroeconomic stability. From an early stage, the
Government also sought to rebuild the economy and
develop the private sector to enable it to better deal with
risks and shocks and to raise the income of citizens,
create job opportunities and improve food security and
nutrition in Yemen.
Fifthly, climate change and the ensuing water
scarcity, drought, desertification and destructive
floods in some governorates of Yemen, as well as the
weakness of water policies, have further deteriorated
food security in Yemen. The coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic has also further exacerbated the
humanitarian crisis.
The problem of food insecurity in Yemen is further
worsened by the effects of tensions and conflicts
worldwide, since Yemen imports most of its food. The
fragile situation in Yemen is therefore very sensitive
to any shock to supply chains and global trade. In that
regard, we commend the Black Sea Grain Initiative,
which had a significant impact in combating the rise
and volatility of prices of basic food supplies, as the
initiative enabled the export of more than 15 million
tons of food during the past year. In that connection,
we reiterate the importance of prioritizing countries
in conflict situations and those suffering from
food insecurity so as to avoid unfortunate famine
and catastrophe.
The United Nations truce, which the Houthi
militias refused to extend, provided a ray of hope
for the Yemeni people. The Yemeni Government
has supported all international and United Nations
initiatives and has shown greater flexibility in its
attempt to ensure progress that would put an end to
the conflict and ease the suffering of the Yemenis, as
well as facilitate the work of United Nations agencies
and relief organizations and access to commercial
imports. We strive to allow Yemenis to have freedom of
movement to and from Yemen. However, those efforts
are threatened by the Houthis’ refusal to deal positively
with the peace initiatives and efforts and their refusal
to extend the humanitarian truce in order to achieve a
comprehensive ceasefire and launch a political process,
led by Yemenis and sponsored by the United Nations,
to end the conflict.
In conclusion, in the context of achieving the
main goal of our meeting today and ensuring that
we come with achievable visions and proposals to

23-1455041/57

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

promote the necessary protection for civilians and their
access to basic services, we would like to stress the
following points.
First, we need to pressure the Houthi militias to
stop plundering the Yemeni people’s resources, to stop
their violations, to commit to a truce as a humanitarian
priority and to engage in good faith with the United
Nations Special Envoy and with the mediation efforts of
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the Sultanate of Oman
to reach a just, lasting and sustainable solution to the
Yemeni crisis.
The Houthi militias must be pressured to stop
targeting the oil facilities and basic infrastructure of
Yemen and to stop other violations that jeopardize the
peace process and cause economic harm to all Yemenis
and deteriorate the humanitarian situation. The Houthis
should empower the Government to resume oil exports
so that it can meet its urgent financial obligations
to citizens, including paying salaries that help the
population to cope with difficult living conditions and
financing food imports flowing to areas under its control
and under the control of the Houthis.
We stress that humanitarian support plays a prominent
role in achieving economic stability through using the
Central Bank as the main banking establishment, instead
of commercial banks or local banking establishments
in areas under the control of the Houthi militias, with
a view to enhancing the role of national institutions
and achieving a stable economy and national currency
exchange rate.
Those approaches must be long-term and focused
on bolstering the resilience of the most vulnerable
segments of society so that they can achieve a level of
self-sufficiency and no longer require humanitarian
assistance. In that context, we stress the importance of
focusing on the relationship between the humanitarian
and long-term development aspects in order to enhance
the resilience of individuals and communities and
create a future where job opportunities contribute to the
eradication of poverty and hunger.
We need to incorporate capacity-building aspects
and strengthen resilience capacities in all programmes
and humanitarian interventions. We must work with
the Governments of beneficiary countries to promote
their humanitarian capacities and provide modern
technologies to develop national programmes to lift up
the national economy and create new work opportunities
to raise the quality of Government services and the lives
of citizens.
42/57

23/05/2023

We must work on helping the least developed
countries, especially those living through conflict
or are in a post-conflict situation, to address the
effects of climate change based on the principle of
common but differentiated responsibilities. We must
provide those countries assistance to help mitigate the
effects of COVID-19, as part of the loss and damage
fund recently approved, and benefit from other
climate-change-reparation initiatives. We must also
ensure the continuity of supply chains and the flow of
food commodities, fight inflation and price increase in
order to safeguard the security and dignity of civilians.
I apologize for the length of my statement.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Rodríguez Mancia (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala thanks the Swiss Confederation
for convening this timely open debate and the panellists
for their briefings.
Guatemala shares the views expressed in the
concept note (S/2023/307, annex), in the sense that
civilians continue to be the most affected by armed
conflicts, especially women and children. It is
regrettable that conflicts continue to be the main factor
of food insecurity and displacement, aggravated by the
growing crises, including climate change.
We call the attention of all States to their commitment
to the application of international humanitarian law
in armed conflict. Experience has shown us that the
use of explosive weapons in populated areas causes
serious harm to civilians and affects services essential
to their survival.
The security environment of peacekeeping missions
is increasingly volatile and requires a readjustment of
the mandates of the Council in order to meet real needs,
especially those related to the protection of civilians.
It is necessary for the actors involved, in particular
troop-contributing countries and the United Nations
Secretariat, to review the rules of engagement so as to
ensure that they are updated and properly aligned.
There is a need to recognize the importance of
integrated, coordinated and comprehensive approaches
to mandate implementation. The Security Council
must take into account assessments of the threat of
violence against civilians in the operational planning
and decision-making processes that determine when
and where peacekeeping operation capabilities will be
23-14550

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

deployed and — in the General Assembly’s assessment of
the mandate, as well as in the Fifth Committee — where
the necessary resources must be approved.
Guatemala makes an urgent call to address the
hunger crisis as one of the priorities of the international
agenda. We recognize the work carried out by the
World Food Programme and reiterate the importance of
guaranteeing the protection of humanitarian personnel
in the field.
International cooperation must have a preventive
and not only reactive approach, addressing the root
causes of hunger from a holistic perspective. We are
therefore preparing for the 2023 United Nations Food
Systems Stocktaking Moment and stress the importance
of the coordinated work of the United Nations system,
in cooperation with regional and national organizations.
We reiterate our support for the recommendations
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations regarding keeping open trade in food
and agricultural goods, promoting local production
and technology transfer. National ownership is key to
ensuring sustainability, improving transparency and
strengthening institutions.
We highly appreciate that the Security Council
supports early warning systems to provide Governments
and humanitarian actors with timely, reliable, accurate
and verifiable information to prevent and mitigate
the effects of a food crisis in the context of an armed
conflict.
We follow with interest the implementation of the
recommendations of the Global Crisis Response Group
on Food, Energy and Finance, of which the Security
Council is a part, and the renewal process of the Black
Sea Grain Initiative and the Joint Coordination Centre,
which are multilateral efforts to mitigate the devastating
consequences of the Russian Federation’s illegal,
unjustified and unprovoked aggression against Ukraine.
We call for peace and justice, focusing on the fight
against poverty, hunger and climate change, ensuring
the life and development of our peoples, with a view to
achieving the New Agenda for Peace.

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

those made on behalf of the Group of Friends on the
Protection of Civilians and the Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect. I would also like to make
some additional remarks in my national capacity.
At the outset, I would like to wholeheartedly
thank the Swiss presidency for convening this highlevel open debate. Attacks on populations and critical infrastructure — from hospitals and schools
to water storage systems, food or power generators — are, unfortunately, commonplace in contexts
such as Afghanistan, Syria, Mali or, of course, Ukraine.
But Ukraine is not only an example of the horrors
faced by civilians in conflict contexts, but it also
shows how conflicts can have global humanitarian
repercussions, in this case through food insecurity. In
that regard, we welcome the two-month renewal of the
Black Sea Grain Initiative and commend the SecretaryGeneral for his mediation efforts.
The Secretary-General’s report on the protection of
civilians (S/2023/345) notes that, in 2022, 174 health
workers lost their lives in attacks, most of them in
Ukraine. That is unacceptable. We call for compliance
with resolution 2286 (2016), which Spain promoted in
2016, on the protection of hospitals, ambulances and
health workers in conflict.
The report also shows how women and girls
continue to be particularly exposed to sexual violence
in conflict. It is therefore essential to support
preventive approaches and women’s participation in
decision-making spaces, including in the humanitarian
response to armed conflict, in line with the women and
peace and security agenda.
Attacks on schools and teachers not only continued,
but increased in 2022. We will continue to promote
support for the Safe Schools Declaration, which in
May was endorsed by Guyana, to reach 118 signatory
countries, and encourage all countries that have not
signed it yet, to do so.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.

We also encourage countries that have not yet
joined the Political Declaration on the Use of Explosive
Weapons in Populated Areas to do so. We must integrate
the content of the Political Declaration into the practice
of our armed forces so as to ensure effective protection
of civilians in conflict.

Ms. Jimenez de la Hoz (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of the European Union, as well as

I would like to conclude by stressing that Spain
recently approved its first humanitarian diplomacy
strategy for the period 2023-2026 in order to provide

23-1455043/57

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

a more coordinated and effective response to growing
humanitarian needs. This document addresses all these
issues, from hunger in armed conflicts and the fight
against impunity, to care for refugees and internally
displaced persons and the protection of persons with
disabilities in conflict situations.
Finally, beginning on 1 July, my country will also
take over the presidency of the Council of the European
Union, where humanitarian issues will be very present,
and we will continue to advocate for the protection of
civilians and full respect for international humanitarian
law.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Dominican Republic.
Ms. Carlson (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): First, the Dominican Republic thanks
Switzerland for convening this open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We appreciate
and welcome the presentation of the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2023/345) and take note of his
recommendations.
The Dominican Republic aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Ireland, on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Action on Conflict and
Hunger, and by the representative of Kuwait, on behalf
of the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians.
This year marks five years since the Security
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2417 (2018) as
a sign of its concern and resolve to address one of the
most relevant issues in the context of armed conflict.
In 2020, under the leadership of the Dominican
Republic, the Council adopted a presidential statement
S/PRST/2020/6, which gave new impetus to this issue
and broadened its scope by emphasizing the need
for early warning as a way to facilitate the Security
Council’s action in a timely manner.
Regrettably, however, the reality is that much
remains to be done in this area. Despite the warnings
and alarms, the Security Council has, at times, been
paralysed from taking the necessary action to ensure
the protection of civilians from hunger and destitution.
Hunger is still used as a weapon in conflicts, at the
expense of vulnerable populations, in full view of all.
The Dominican Republic reiterates once
again — we need a paradigm shift that forces us to
anticipate, prevent and better respond to the causes
of food insecurity and famine caused by violence,
44/57

23/05/2023

conflicts and humanitarian crises. We therefore
need to invest in proactive action, full respect for
international humanitarian law, peacebuilding and
resilient livelihoods to prevent humanitarian crises
from turning into catastrophes. But, above all, we must
increase political will to use the tools at our disposal
and with the necessary decisiveness at the right time.
We must recommit to the full implementation of
resolutions 2417 (2018) and 2573 (2021), as well as
presidential statement S/PRST/2020/6, in particular
by protecting assets indispensable to the survival of
civilians, by taking constant care to preserve civilians
and civilian objects and by facilitating the rapid and
unimpeded passage of impartial humanitarian relief to
all those in need.
Conflict and violence are the main causes of hunger.
That is why we need to break the vicious cycle of armed
conflict and food insecurity, find political solutions to
conflicts and support integrated responses to address
the multiple drivers.
The world is not on track to end hunger by 2030.
We therefore reiterate that the cost of inaction would
be even greater for all countries of the world if we do
not act now.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of El Salvador.
Mrs. González López (El Salvador) (spoke
in Spanish): Let me express my gratitude to the
Swiss presidency for its leadership in organizing
and convening this debate on ensuring the security
and dignity of civilians in conflict, which presents a
unique opportunity to address food insecurity and
the protection of essential services. We also thank all
briefers for their presentations.
El Salvador regrets that, five years after the adoption
of resolution 2417 (2018), more than 250 million people
have suffered from acute hunger in more than 50
countries and territories, in many of which the civilian
population is also facing armed conflict and insecurity.
We also regret that, two years after the adoption
of resolution 2573 (2021), critical infrastructure, in
particular those enabling the provision of energy, health
care, water and sanitation services, suffered extensive
damage as a result of armed conflict, disrupting access
for civilians.
23-14550

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

We are deeply concerned that conflict continues
to destroy or disable civilian infrastructure and assets
essential for livelihoods, food security and survival.
Millions of people have been deprived of safe drinking
water and have been exposed to contamination, deadly
disease outbreaks and serious malnutrition risks. I
would like to emphasize that this is about the wellbeing of people who trust the United Nations and hope
that they will be supported and kept safe, above all, in
conflict situations.
The destruction of civilian infrastructure, such
as agricultural systems and transport networks, only
increases the suffering of civilians — again, these
are people — reducing their access to basic services
such as health, water, sanitation, electricity and
communications, blurring the line of the principle of
distinction of international humanitarian law.
El Salvador therefore recognizes the direct link
between armed conflict and food insecurity, which
increases the vulnerability of millions of people and
highlights underlying humanitarian needs. Civilians in
armed conflict and those forcibly displaced suffer firsthand the devastating impacts of war and violence.
We deplore that in contexts of conflict, civilians are
deliberately or indirectly prevented from obtaining food
and water and that access to humanitarian assistance is
impeded — in extreme cases, as a result of attacks on
humanitarian workers and assets.
All of that is compounded by the devastating effects
of climate change and extreme weather events, such
as droughts and heavy rains, which have significantly
worsened food security globally, including in countries
in conflict. It is clear that there is much to be done. That
has been noted and repeated in the various country
statements delivered here. We must do much more
to protect the population and to prevent and combat
hunger in conflicts, but that requires an urgent and
cohesive response from the United Nations system, as
well as the political will of all the States Members of
the United Nations.
El Salvador takes this opportunity to express its
full support for resolutions 2417 (2018) and 2573 (2021)
and reiterates the need to redouble efforts for their full
implementation and compliance. They must be put into
practice and not just remain on paper. We must honour
our responsibility to ensure the well-being of all people,
especially the most vulnerable.

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

As a troop- and police-contributing country, El
Salvador recognizes the fundamental role played by
United Nations peacekeeping operations and special
political missions in preventing and reducing acts of
violence against the civilian population. My country
reiterates its firm commitment to the implementation of
civilian protection mandates in peacekeeping operations.
The States Members of the United Nations and
other organizations working to ensure respect for the
principles of international humanitarian law need to
redouble their efforts on the ground — and I will not tire
of saying this — in order to ensure civilian protection
and food security. Let us work together.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya.
Ms. Kinyungu (Kenya): I express our gratitude
to the delegation of Switzerland for initiating this
important debate.
Joining other delegations, Kenya strongly condemns
any act of targeting civilians or civilian infrastructure.
We affirm the paramount necessity for combatants to
adhere to international humanitarian law and associated
norms that safeguard civilians amid armed conflict.
War, inherently, disregards dignity. The foremost
protection for civilians’ dignity and security does not
lie in the conduct of war, but in its prevention. Should
a conflict erupt, prompt, competent and decisive action
to mediate a ceasefire and facilitate negotiated peace
becomes indispensable.
Paradoxically, frequent emphasis on norm
observance during conflicts may inadvertently validate
them. This comes from the erroneous belief that war can
be clinical — an illusion that has repeatedly drawn us
into repeated and extraordinarily costly elective wars in
recent decades.
I present the following recommendations for the
Council’s consideration.
First, the Secretary-General’s good offices must
be respected by States, which should embrace their
independence and avail themselves more readily of
those offices. These efforts should be led by competent,
qualified and courageous leadership.
Secondly, war often precipitates hunger and
starvation, even when not weaponized. While we
denounce attacks on civilian resources crucial for food
security, we must also enable humanitarian interventions
that bolster local production and livelihoods.

23-1455045/57

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Thirdly, it is crucial to establish a strong
bridge between humanitarian aid, development and
peacebuilding. In addition, the international financial
institutions should further strive to mitigate investment
risks in fragile post-conflict regions, which typically
struggle to secure traditional investment.
Fourthly, we must prevent escalation towards major
Power conflicts, which inevitably result in proxy wars
and expose civilians to harm. We must collectively
demand that major Powers, with their far-reaching
economic, political and military influence, exhibit
responsible statesmanship to establish a balanced
and stable multipolar world. They can recognize and
embrace their own long-term interest in upholding
robust multilateralism, whose laws and agreements
constrain the powerful, rather than today’s tattered
multilateralism in which — with every passing act of
great power — impunity becomes a facade for a brutal
Darwinian international system.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Kenya’s commitment to
enhancing civilian protection in situations of armed
conflict and to addressing the grave challenge of
food insecurity.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nepal.
Mr. Aryal (Nepal): I thank the presidency of
Switzerland for convening today’s open debate. We
thank the briefers for their comprehensive and insightful
briefings this morning.
The protection of civilians is at the core of the
work and purposes of the United Nations. However,
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/345) presents
a gloomy picture of around 17,000 civilian deaths
across 12 armed conflicts in 2022, which is a 53 per
cent increase compared to 2021. Both the State and
non-State actors have violated the international
normative frameworks and laws of armed conflict.
Civilian infrastructure and assets essential to
people’s livelihoods and survival, including food
systems, health care, water and electricity services
have been attacked purposefully. The rise in the prices
of food, fuel and fertilizers, combined with the effects
of climate change, has intensified civilians’ suffering.
More than a quarter of a billion people are now facing
acute levels of hunger.
The Ukraine crisis has further worsened food and
energy insecurity. The mounting food and oil prices
46/57

23/05/2023

have hit the least developed countries such as Nepal and
their most vulnerable populations, including women
and children.
Resolution 2417 (2018) has recognized the links
between conflict and food insecurity. Similarly,
resolution 2573 (2021) recognizes the indispensability
of the protection of civilian infrastructure.
Compliance with applicable international laws and
international humanitarian laws, including Security
Council resolutions, is essential for mitigating conflictinduced food insecurity, banning starvation as a
weapon of war and protecting civilian infrastructure
alongside ensuring access to humanitarian aid. We
need to ensure accountability for the violation of such
a normative/legal framework. We also need to improve
the identification of critical infrastructure and update
no-strike lists.
The State has the primary responsibility to
protect its civilians. Therefore, the capacity of the
national Government should be strengthened for the
implementation of international humanitarian, human
rights, criminal and refugee law. The primacy of
politics and the preference for preventive diplomacy
should be upheld.
We need to address the root causes of conflicts,
including through supporting vulnerable countries for
their economic development.
While prioritizing conflict-affected zones, we
should address food insecurity by building a sustainable,
resilient and inclusive food system at the national and
global levels.
Nepal remains supportive of the United Nations
normative framework and holistic approach to
protecting civilians in armed conflict. Currently, as the
second largest troop-and-police contributing country,
Nepal is contributing to protecting civilians in the most
volatile parts of the world. However, the protection of
civilian mandate should be equipped with adequate
financial, human and technological resources.
There is a need for urgent action to protect
civilians and essential services before situations turn
into a humanitarian disaster on a vast scale. We call
on all parties concerned to respect the rules and do the
right thing.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
23-14550

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Mr. Miller (Israel): The past year has demonstrated
to the international community the importance of the
protection of civilians as a key tenet of our shared values.
For Israel specifically, as a nation faced with
unrelenting security threats since its founding 75
years ago, the protection of civilians in armed conflict
is of utmost importance. Israel remains committed
to the provision of humanitarian aid across the globe
and shares the concern of other Member States
regarding the impact of armed conflicts on global food
security, as well as the intentional targeting of critical
civilian infrastructure.
The protection of civilians must be at the forefront
of any armed conflict. Nevertheless, our enemies do
exactly the opposite. Earlier this month, more than
1,400 rockets were indiscriminately launched by the
Palestinian Islamic Jihad, a globally recognized terror
organization, at Israeli towns and cities. That came
weeks after a barrage of 34 missiles were fired at Israel
from southern Lebanon, where Hizbullah continues to
increase its presence unabated, while bluntly violating
numerous Security Council resolutions, placing the
lives of both Israeli and Lebanese civilians at risk.
During that last blatant terror rocket attacks, several
Israelis were injured, and one Israeli, 82-year-old Inga
Avramyan, a loving wife, mother and grandmother,
was murdered.
While Israel goes above the letter of the law to
protect the lives of civilians, those who seek Israel’s
destruction intentionally target Israeli civilians while
using Palestinian and Lebanese civilians as human
shields. They hide their rockets among the local
population, use private residences as situation rooms
and utilize dense urban areas as rocket launchpads.
In addition, during the recent Operation Shield
and Arrow two weeks ago, roughly one of every five
rockets fired by the Palestinian Islamic Jihad at Israel
misfired and fell into Gaza. Several of those misfired
rockets killed at least two Palestinian children, Yazan
Elayyan, 16 years old, and Layan Madoukh, 8 years
old. That is the result when terrorists purposely fire
rockets at Israeli civilians from populated civilian
areas. Everyone is at risk of being killed. There is no
more serious crime.
Targeting civilians while using civilians for cover
is not only unthinkable, it also a double war crime,
and the international community remains silent. For
Israel, the value of human life is paramount. And we

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

take every effort to protect the lives of both our own
population, as well as others. In that regard, Israel
harnesses innovation and creativity in developing
groundbreaking defensive technologies, such as the
Iron Dome and Iron Beam, to save countless lives.
Two weeks ago, as rockets rained down on Israel,
the Iron Dome and other defensive measures intercepted
371 rockets launched at our civilians. That directly
prevented a catastrophic loss of life and damage to
civilian infrastructure. While Hamas, Palestinian
Islamic Jihad, Hizbullah and other terror proxies of
the Iranian regime invest in murdering civilians, Israel
invests in protecting them.
Terrorist groups used their murderous attacks as
an opportunity to obstruct that aid at the expense of
Palestinian civilians. Terror groups in Gaza repeatedly
target areas adjacent to crossings in and out of the
Gaza Strip. Those attacks forced the closure of those
crossings, preventing the passage of aid, but also the
passage of Palestinian civilians, including children, in
need of critical medical treatment in Israel. That was
true two weeks ago when Palestinian Islamic Jihad was
firing rockets in Israel and also two years ago when
Hamas indiscriminately launched over 4,000 rockets
at Israel. Humanitarian aid cannot ever be a target
under international law, and any act that obstructs or
hinders humanitarian access must be condemned in the
strongest terms.
While Israel takes every measure to protect the lives
of the innocent, its enemies act in the exact opposite
way. We use our missiles to protect our children
while they use their children to protect their missiles.
Indiscriminate rocket fire on civilian populations and
the use of one’s own people as human shields must be
condemned. But more than that, it must end. We urge
all delegations to join us in condemning those heinous
acts of terror from Hizbullah, Hamas, Palestinian
Islamic Jihad and all terror organizations that seek to
kill Israeli civilians.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of San Marino.
Mr. Beleffi (San Marino): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this very important
meeting, and I would like to thank the briefers for
their statements.
Armed conflicts cause an unacceptable number
of casualties among civilians. Civilians are often

23-1455047/57

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

wounded. They must flee their homes. They suffer
from a lack of food and the destruction of their houses
and vital infrastructure.
San Marino is alarmed by the unprecedented food
and nutrition crisis caused by all conflicts and affecting
hundreds of millions of people around the world. The
levels of malnutrition, food insecurity and risk of famine
can only increase when hostilities are protracted.
We are concerned about the direct and indirect
consequences of hostilities on food systems, water
and electricity infrastructure, sanitation and health
care. Some Marino calls on all parties to implement
resolution 2417 (2018), which condemns the use of
the starvation of civilians as a method of warfare, as
well as the unlawful denial of humanitarian access.
Furthermore, San Marino supports resolution 2573
(2021), which condemns attacks against critical civilian
infrastructure indispensable to the survival of the
civilian population. In that regard, we welcome the
adoption of the Political Declaration on Strengthening
the Protection of Civilians from the Humanitarian
Consequences Arising from the Use of Explosive
Weapons in Populated Areas.
The Republic of San Marino is deeply concerned
about the condition of vulnerable groups in armed
conflict. Many children suffer grave violations and
abuses. They are deprived of their basic rights, such as
education, after schools are attacked, destroyed or used
as military facilities. In that regard, San Marino has
joined important instruments that are aimed at protecting
children in conflict, as well as their rehabilitation and
reintegration, such as the Safe Schools Declaration,
the Paris Principles and the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers.
The possibility that persons with disabilities living
in conflict areas might be unable to flee attacks and
might be abandoned is another concern for San Marino.
Moreover, the disruption of basic services in those
areas deprives them of their basic needs. It is therefore
critical to act effectively together for the protection of
those specific groups.
Once again, I want to reiterate the critical
importance of international humanitarian law. All
parties must strictly abide by those norms, and we
need to support measures to ensure accountability
for violators. Political mediation, early warning
mechanisms and actual policies and practices are also
48/57

23/05/2023

needed for effective protection of civilians. Only with
the genuine commitment of all parties and stakeholders
will we finally be able to safeguard civilians in
armed conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Muhamad (Malaysia): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening today’s important debate. I
also thank the briefers for their invaluable insights.
Exactly five years ago, the Security Council
adopted resolution 2417 (2018), which condemns the
use of starvation of civilians as a method of warfare
in armed conflicts. The briefing today reaffirms that
it continues to be a grave concern. We must use this
opportunity to address the issue constructively and
focus our efforts towards fully implementing the
relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolutions 2417 (2018) and 2573 (2021).
Our delegation condemns violent attacks on
civilians in armed conflicts. Sadly, in many parts
of the world — for example, in Palestine and
Myanmar — protracted violence has caused massive
destruction and immense suffering to innocent
civilians, many of whom are women and children. The
hardship faced by civilians caught in armed conflicts
typically includes food insecurity, malnutrition and a
general lack of access to basic necessities.
In that regard, my delegation wishes to stress the
following points.
First, Malaysia believes in peaceful and negotiated
solutions to armed conflicts. We continue to call
on Member States, particularly Council members,
to honour the commitment made in supporting the
Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire in 2020.
Secondly, Malaysia considers United Nations
peacekeeping operations an indispensable instrument
in the protection of civilians in armed conflicts. In
some places, the peacekeepers have participated in
projects to enhance food security in local communities.
For example, Malaysian peacekeepers, through a quickimpact project of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, have contributed to enhancing food security
by helping local communities to build agricultural
infrastructure. We should do more to explore
such possibilities.
23-14550

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Finally, we reiterate our call for all parties to conflict
to adhere to the applicable norms of international
humanitarian and human rights law, as well as to respect
and earnestly implement United Nations resolutions.
States must uphold their obligations to protect the life,
health and dignity of civilians in times of conflict,
especially those of vulnerable groups such as children,
women, the elderly and those with disabilities.
Regrettably, 77 years after we made the promise
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war, armed conflicts continue raging in many parts
of the world, inflicting great human suffering. While
we continue striving to end armed conflict, we must
do more to uphold international humanitarian law and
implement relevant United Nations resolutions to ensure
the protection of civilians. Malaysia will continue to do
its part in contributing constructively to that endeavour.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Muhith (Bangladesh): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this important debate today. I
also thank the Secretary-General, the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the other
briefers for their insightful presentations.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the Group of Friends on the
Protection of Civilians and the statement delivered on
behalf of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility
to Protect.
Having experienced the devastation of war in 1971
and its consequences for innocent civilians during and
after the war, Bangladesh remains deeply committed
to the protection of civilians. Our commitment is
well manifested in the contributions of our men and
women serving as Blue Helmets in various conflictaffected parts of the world. It is in the same spirit
that our Government opened its border to more than
1 million Rohingya minorities when they fled atrocities
in Myanmar.
During conflict, civilians suffer the most. Their
sufferings are exacerbated when there are attacks
on essential services or infrastructure. Such attacks
can lead to food insecurity and displacement. Those
irresponsible acts also have long-term impacts on
those countries, making post-conflict rebuilding even
more challenging.

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

As mentioned in the report of the Secretary General
(S/2023/345), conflict and food insecurity have been
the most significant drivers of high levels of acute food
insecurity for approximately 117 million people in 19
countries and territories. And the causes of conflictinduced food insecurity in those and other conflict
situations include direct harm to food and water sources,
as well as impediments to food and water production,
delivery and access.
Allow me to share a few thoughts on today’s topic.
First, with primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, the Security Council
has a major role to play in addressing conflict-induced
food insecurity and protecting essential services. In
that regard, we recall resolutions 2417 (2018) and 2573
(2021) and seek their full implementation. It is equally
important to ensure respect for and full compliance with
international humanitarian law by all parties to conflict.
Secondly, when conflicts cause food insecurity
and hunger, often the only way for civilians to survive
is by gaining access to humanitarian aid. Ensuring
unimpeded access for the people in need and the
safety of humanitarian personnel, including national
staff, is critical for the protection of civilians during
armed conflicts.
In that regard, we also wish to emphasize the
importance of ensuring the delivery of humanitarian
aid to all communities irrespective of race, religion or
belief. We are concerned that, in Myanmar, Rohingya
Muslims are facing obstacles in their ability to access
humanitarian aid in the aftermath of Cyclone Mocha. Such
discrimination may lead to their further displacement.
Thirdly, we are concerned about the impact of
conflict on the environment. Environmental hazards
resulting from the destruction of critical infrastructure
may have a long-term effect on the climate and the lives
of the people in conflict settings. Besides, conflictrelated food insecurity exacerbates the sufferings of
people living with existing vulnerabilities, including
those caused by climate change, drought, floods and
other natural disasters. Those need to be adequately
factored in while responding to food insecurity and also
in addressing their root causes.
Fourthly, peacekeeping missions play a crucial
role in protecting civilians in conflict-affected
settings, including by providing security to critical
civilian infrastructure and also during the delivery of

23-1455049/57

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

humanitarian aid. The Council needs to also enable and
empower the peacekeeping missions with necessary
resources and capabilities for effective implementation
of their protection of civilians mandate.
Women often suffer the most when conflict strikes
and causes food insecurity. Women can, however,
also play a critical role in addressing food insecurity,
including in post-conflict settings. Numerous Council
resolutions on women and peace and security have
recognized that. We therefore reiterate our call for
stronger efforts for the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda.
In conclusion, I reiterate Bangladesh’s commitment
to the protection of civilians. We will continue to
contribute to the protection of civilian mandate of the
United Nations through peacekeeping operations and
other forms of engagement.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Ms. Dakwak (Nigeria): I thank the Permanent
Mission of Switzerland and Council President for the
month for organizing this very important debate on the
theme “Ensuring the security and dignity of civilians
in conflict: addressing food insecurity and protecting
essential services”. My delegation also thanks His
Excellency Mr. Alain Berset, President of the Swiss
Confederation, for chairing the debate. Permit me
to also express my delegation’s sincere appreciation
to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, His
Excellency Mr. António Guterres; the President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross and
Ms. Aïchatou Mounkaïla for their briefings. My
delegation aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to
Protect.

23/05/2023

terrorism further compound the situation. With those,
we often are confronted with the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons, with the resultant effects of the
exacerbation of conflict and the loss of lives of locals
and humanitarian workers.
The widespread availability and misuse of illicit
weapons have resulted in the displacement of hundreds
of thousands of civilians, many injured, women raped
and many killed in attacks. Weapons are so easy to
obtain, armed violence is so prevalent and humanitarian
assistance is frequently suspended or delayed. Under
such circumstances, human rights violations, including
of international humanitarian law, have become
widespread. We must address that menace and control
the movement of weapons and uphold international
humanitarian law norms.
Food insecurity has been associated with many
recent conflicts. Conflict has been a major factor behind
the disruption of food systems and the destruction of the
means of livelihoods and more. As in many situations,
the impact has been more severe on the poor who are
dependent on farming for food and other resources.
My delegation notes with concern the reports of the
World Food Programme and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations which point out that
70 per cent of the world’s population experiencing acute
hunger is in conflict-affected areas.
In Africa, the Ukraine war is adversely affecting
the food supply chain, further exacerbating pre-existing
food insecurity which in some cases stems from
terrorism. The reduction or even stoppage of agricultural
activities due to insecurity and displacement has also
led to other terrible consequences. Violent conflict
must be stopped, and in all cases priority should be
given to the protection of the civilian population.

The theme is a reminder of the susceptibility of the
population to food insecurity in times of conflict and
the need to take collective action to address some of
that and related challenges. Conflict has cost the lives
of thousands of defenceless civilians, and many more
are caught up in the web of conflict-induced crises even
as we are gathered here today.

A recent United Nations report projects that
the African population will rise to approximately
3.8 billion by the year 2100. Given the all-too-familiar
siphoning of Africa’s resources through an unfair
international trading system, corruption and other
factors, a serious normative and institutional look at
that situation is called for by both the African States
and international community.

Many civilians have been displaced by conflicts,
losing their dignity with the destruction of their homes
and livelihoods, including the loss of family life,
as well as essential facilities and infrastructure. In
many conflicts, especially in Africa, insurgency and

Women and children are the most vulnerable in
civilian casualties. And it is well known that women
rarely initiate violent conflicts, yet they suffer its
worst consequences on multiple fronts: physically,
psychologically, economically, socially and politically.

50/57

23-14550

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Often, women fall victim to predatory warlords who
systematically use rape and sexual violence as a weapon
of war. Women’s suffering is compounded by their
exclusion from key decision-making processes that
might enhance peace and stability. We must therefore
redouble our efforts and engage in new and creative
thinking to resolve persistent gaps and structural
barriers to women’s participation and leadership, as
well as in the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
That can be done, among other ways, through the
crafting of women’s protection subsystems ensuring
full participation of women in all societal processes
whether in war or in peace.

on Ukraine, which we strongly condemn, and the
indirect consequences of that heinous aggression on
the global food security crisis are a stark reminder
of the crucial importance of respecting international
humanitarian law.

As we prepare for the Sustainable Development
Goals summit this September and the summit of the
future next year, it is pertinent that the international
community demonstrate more commitment to the
repatriation of illicit financial flows and assets, debt
relief for developing countries and assistance towards
the modernization of agriculture in Africa.

The annual report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/345) further emphasizes the gravity of conflictinduced food insecurity and the critical need to protect
vital civilian infrastructure and essential services. We
must reflect on the implementation of resolutions 2417
(2018) and 2573 (2021), which can play a significant
role in addressing conflict-related hunger and ensuring
the safety of essential services.

Nigeria remains unwavering in its commitment to
ensuring the dignity and the security of civilians in
conflict and working alongside all Member States to
uphold all international and human rights, including
humanitarian law. In addition, Nigeria is also
committed to addressing food insecurity and provision
and the protection of essential services for civilians
in conflicts.
My delegation hopes that our discussions today
will serve as a catalyst that will translate to concrete
action for a paradigmatic shift towards economic equity
and fairness, the reduction of conflicts, the safety of
civilians and a much-needed food security for all and
sundry, especially in situations of conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Greco (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statements delivered on behalf of the European Union
and the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians.

Respecting international humanitarian law is
paramount in preventing hunger during conflicts and
safeguarding the lives of civilians. As we all know,
international humanitarian law explicitly prohibits the
use of starvation as a method of warfare and provides
special protection for objects essential to the survival of
civilian populations.

Italy, as the host country of the Rome-based United
Nations food agencies, is particularly committed to
addressing the critical issue of global food insecurity. In
that context, the recent renewal of the Black Sea Grain
Initiative remains a beacon of hope for maintaining
open food chains and lowering and stabilizing global
food prices. We strongly support the efforts of the
Secretary-General and Under Secretary-General
Griffiths in that regard.
Furthermore, Italy recognizes the urgency of
providing vital assistance to other humanitarian crises
in the global South. Tomorrow, we will be hosting a
humanitarian pledging conference on the Horn of Africa
in collaboration with the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, the United States, the United
Kingdom and Qatar. We kindly encourage the high-level
participation and substantial financial contributions of
Member States to support that important initiative.

We would like to thank the Swiss presidency of the
Security Council for organizing this annual open debate
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict with a
specific focus on the urgent issues of food insecurity
and the safeguarding of essential services.

In addition, as the Chair of the humanitarian affairs
segment of the Economic and Social Council, Italy has
identified food insecurity as a key theme this year. In collaboration with Kenya, we are co-facilitating the annual humanitarian resolution aimed at reinforcing the language on food security and addressing protection risks.

Today those topics are more urgent and alarming
than ever before. The devastating impacts on civilians
caused by the illegal Russian military aggression

Let me also highlight that Italy is honoured to
host the upcoming stock-taking moment of the United
Nations Food Systems summit in Rome in July 2023.

23-1455051/57

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

This event will provide a valuable opportunity to
assess innovative and inclusive solutions to address the
complex challenges of food security.
In conclusion, we urge the international community
to redouble its efforts and take decisive action to
address the pressing challenges of food insecurity,
protect essential services and create a safer and more
dignified future for all civilians affected by conflicts
worldwide. Italy is ready to do its part.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Lahsaini (Morocco): I would like to thank the
Permanent Mission of Switzerland for convening and
presiding over this important meeting.
The interest of the Kingdom of Morocco in
promoting security, combating hunger and fostering
sustainable agriculture emanates from a deep awareness
of the challenges of food security in the world in general
and on the African continent in particular. According to
the Global Report on Food Crises 2023, armed conflict
and other threats to security pushed 139 million people,
especially in Africa, into acute food insecurity in 2021,
which represents an increase of almost 40 million people
compared to the year before. In 2023, the situation has
gotten worse. The effects of climate change, the impact
of the coronavirus disease and current geopolitical
tensions are felt across the globe. Inflation and debts
heavily affect domestic food productivity.
In 30 years, Africa will have to feed twice its
current population. Unfortunately, the continent
continues to import over $43 billion in food annually,
net, and therefore remains dependent on imports to
feed its growing population. This situation has major
repercussions for the stability of the most vulnerable
countries, as the scarcity of resources and the sudden
increase in food prices fuels social unrest. In this
vein, allow me to share with the Security Council
a few perspectives from Morocco on how to better
ensure the security and dignity of civilians in conflict,
especially in addressing food insecurity and protecting
essential services.
First, it is evident that conflicts, especially on a
large scale and of long duration, have a direct impact
on food security, not only where the fighting takes
place, but often also in neighbouring countries and
beyond. It is therefore important to help mitigate
the impacts of armed conflict on food security by
52/57

23/05/2023

avoiding the destruction of crops, agricultural land and
critical infrastructure. When such destruction occurs,
starvation of civilians becomes a huge humanitarian
challenge — hence the importance of protecting the
infrastructure necessary to produce food and drinking
water, especially in conflict areas.
Secondly, international cooperation needs to
prepare rapid response plans and coordinate anticipatory
action to reinforce weak points in conflict zones. This
requires in-depth knowledge of the evolving local
challenges that civilians in conflicts face and therefore
necessitates the involvement of local stakeholders
that are the closest to the population. In this vein,
partnerships and collaboration between local actors and
international humanitarian organizations is paramount.
Thirdly, sustainable change in the global food
and agriculture system is needed if we are to feed
the 800 million people who are hungry today and the
additional 2 billion people who will be undernourished
by 2050. The Kingdom of Morocco has always invested
in agriculture and fertile fertilizers, particularly
through South-South cooperation in Africa, which
has more than half of the world’s uncultivated arable
land. Under the royal guidelines set out by His Majesty
the King Mohammed VI, food security is a strategic
priority for Morocco and is at the heart of its new
development model for 2035.
Africa has a young population and a huge
continental market of over a billion people. Morocco
therefore strongly supports the African free trade area,
which has the potential to stimulate the exchange of
food products between African countries at lower cost,
improve farmers’ income and promote agroindustry. In
order to build resilience, it is also imperative to invest in
sustainable food systems and foster new opportunities
in this sector for women farmers and young people.
Strengthening the agricultural sector can create jobs
and nourish self-sufficiency, including for countries in
vulnerable situations.
The protection of civilians is primarily the
responsibility of States. Peacekeeping operations, when
mandated, play a critical role in this regard by ensuring
and strengthening the political process and deploying
in areas where civilians are potentially at risk. The
humanitarian action to protect civilians must be clearly
dissociated from political objectives and protected
from instrumentalization by any party to the conflict.
23-14550

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

In order to better protect humanitarian personnel
and ensure the smooth delivery of humanitarian
assistance, mandated missions should deploy adequate
protection mechanisms to ensure that civilians are not
targeted by any armed groups. All parties, in particular
host countries, must respect international humanitarian
law, fulfil their obligations to protect civilians and
ensure access and delivery of humanitarian aid to
intended recipients. Increased coordination between
Member States, the United Nations and its agencies and
civil society organizations active in the humanitarian
field is necessary to avoid any violations of international
humanitarian law and ensure safe and secure access to
humanitarian assistance for civilians. Humanitarian
actors must be able to carry out their noble mandate
safely and without political interference.
Furthermore, we consider it to be of paramount
importance to encourage a preventive approach to
the protection of civilians, which can be developed
through capacity-building in the countries concerned,
the rule of law, the guarantee of good governance,
the entrenchment of a culture of human rights and the
establishment of early-warning mechanisms capable
of detecting pre-conflict situations and avoiding their
transformation into open and deadly confrontations with
heavy casualties and damage among civilians. Armed
conflicts and economic, political and environmental
factors should not be seen as isolated. Rather, they are
mutually reinforcing and often cyclical in nature. Over
time, they erode people’s resilience, which has severe
humanitarian consequences.
In conclusion, I would underline that Morocco
remains convinced that innovative partnerships in
this area will make it possible to deepen and develop
promising synergies to ensure the security and dignity
of civilians in conflicts.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mrad (Lebanon): Allow me, through you, Mr
President, to thank, on behalf of my delegation, the
Permanent Mission of Switzerland for organizing today’s
open debate held in the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Alain Berset, President of the Swiss Confederation.
(spoke in Arabic)
At a time where crises are more frequent, complex
and severe than ever before, and with far-reaching
implications, defenceless civilians remain the first

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

victims, whether these crises stem from human-made
conflicts, such as armed conflicts, or natural disasters,
where they have no hand in what is happening to them.
The theme of today’s meeting, thankfully selected
by the Swiss presidency of the Security Council for
consideration by the Council, revolves principally and
exclusively on ensuring the security and dignity of
civilians in armed conflicts.
I come from a country whose citizens have known
armed conflicts, starting with the civil wars that tore
it apart, burdened its economy, displaced its people
and claimed the lives of many unarmed people who
left behind grieving mothers who wait for the return of
their husbands or sons. In time, those mothers have lost
hope that they will ever come back alive. I represent
a country where unarmed people have paid the price
for regional armed conflict — with their lives and
their livelihoods.
The images of the soft bodies of children and
mothers, unarmed civilians, who turned to the Fijian
battalion of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon in the south of our country in 1996 for
refuge from Israeli shelling in order to find shelter
under international legitimacy, remain clear and vivid
in the national memory of Lebanon. These images
are a burden on the conscience of the international
community, one of whose sites, belonging to the United
Nations and sheltering defenceless people, had been
exposed to deliberate, intense and systematic Israeli
shelling that claimed the lives of women, children and
elderly people.
Armed conflicts punish citizens who have nothing
to do with these conflicts. They have not participated
in nor contributed to the conflicts. They have no say
in them. They are just on the receiving end. At times
they are used as human shields, in the truest sense
of the word as well as metaphorically, between the
parties to the conflict. They are used to as a means
to punish opponent Governments and regimes just as
economic embargoes or unilateral coercive measures
are used to suffocate defenceless civilians and ruin
their livelihoods.
When we speak about the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts, including ensuring their food security,
it is incumbent on the international community to exert
pressure to open the ports and land and air routes to
deliver humanitarian assistance and supplies and food
items to all defenceless civilians under siege without

23-1455053/57

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

discrimination. Humanitarian assistance to unarmed
citizens and the identification of who is in need is not a
matter of à la carte choosing.
At times of conflict, civilians are at the highest level
of vulnerability, in particular in their safety and security,
be it food security or otherwise. What if those civilians
belong to vulnerable groups that are on the receiving end
of what is happening and are in no way part of it? In this
regard, it is important to highlight the direct targeting
of reporters and correspondents during their coverage of
these conflicts. Their only weapon is their pens, helmets
and vests. A stark example of this is the killing last year
of Palestinian journalist Shireen Abu Akleh.
As we see the arms race heat up and the area of
armed conflicts in the world expand, it is time to change
approaches and reprioritize. As we are seeking to
identify the most effective ways to protect civilians in
times such as this, it is incumbent on the international
community to put an end to the roots of conflict and the
causes of its proliferation. I refer in this regard not just to
the arms trade, but also international proxy wars. Instead
of interfering in a post facto manner so as to contain the
consequences of the crisis and conflict, we might instead
address the root causes of conflict and adopt a package
of precautionary measures that have at their core the
objective of inclusive and sustainable development
governing all aspects of life.
In conclusion, as we are preparing for the landmark
Sustainable Development summit, we call on the
international community, together with all the States
Members of the United Nations that are making policy
in the decision-making bodies of the Organization, to
pay due attention today to the humanitarian development
nexus, find sustainable solutions and increase the
capability of people to adapt and persevere, and
strengthen concepts of security and stability.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Swiss presidency for convening this
important meeting.
As the Secretary-General underlines in his report
(S/2023/345), the strengthened protection of civilians
requires far greater political will and commitment to
respecting international humanitarian and human rights
law than what has been seen until now. This must clearly
be the key objective.
54/57

23/05/2023

In its almost 30 years of aggression against my
country, since the early 1990s, Armenia committed
multiple war crimes, resulting in the deaths of tens
of thousands of civilians, massive ethnic cleansing,
extensive destruction and cultural erasure. The
frequency and timing of the attacks, their deliberate
targeting of the civilian population and civilian objects,
including homes, schools and hospitals, the use of heavy
explosive weapons and cluster bombs against densely
populated areas and the resulting scale of destruction
testify to the clear intent and purpose to terrorize, kill
or expel Azerbaijani civilians and prevent the displaced
population from returning to their homes.
The scale of the brutalities is also evidenced by
almost 4,000 citizens of Azerbaijan going missing in
connection with the conflict, including 719 civilians,
whose fate Armenia refrains from clarifying. Most
of the Azerbaijani captives were subjected to severe
torture, including beatings, mutilation, starvation and
humiliation. The perpetrators of numerous atrocities
committed against the Azerbaijani civilians and other
protected persons remain unpunished, in clear disregard
of international law. Furthermore, despite the ending
of the conflict, Armenia refuses to share accurate
and comprehensive information about the hundreds
of thousands of landmines it laid on the territory of
Azerbaijan that continue to kill and maim civilians.
Essential civilian infrastructure was also targeted. For
example, in the fall of 2020, Mingachevir, an Azerbaijani
city hosting a key water reservoir and electricity plant,
was subjected to repeated missile attacks during the
hostilities. Had the missiles succeeded in hitting the
facilities, they would have caused devastating floods that
would have stretched over 240 kilometres and deprived
the population of access to drinking water and electricity.
The aggression also caused long-term and severe
damage to the environment of Azerbaijan, with
widespread deforestation, land degradation, pillaged
and destroyed water infrastructure and polluted water
resources. In particular, the neglect and mismanagement
of the Sarsang water reservoir, dam and irrigation
canal in the formerly occupied territories of Azerbaijan
provoked a humanitarian crisis, as 400,000 Azerbaijanis
living in the downstream regions were deprived of
water both for vital domestic and agricultural purposes,
and caused severe environmental impacts such as
soil erosion, dehydration and desertification. Those
negative impacts remain ongoing to date, along with
the continued pollution of transboundary rivers flowing
from Armenia into Azerbaijan.
23-14550

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

In its resolution of 26 January 2016, the Parliamentary
Assembly of the Council of Europe described Armenia’s
actions as environmental aggression aimed at creating
humanitarian and environmental problems for the
citizens of Azerbaijan. Earlier this year, Azerbaijan
commenced an inter-State arbitration under the Bern
Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife
and Natural Habitats to hold Armenia accountable for
its extensive destruction of Azerbaijan’s environment
and biodiversity.
In conclusion, I would like to respond to the
statement made earlier by the Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Armenia. The allegations in his
statement of the imposition of a so-called blockade of
the Lachin-Khankandi road, the disruption of electricity
and natural gas by Azerbaijan in its Garabagh economic
region and the “genocidal intent” of ethnic cleansing
are patently false and provocative. Azerbaijan has never
created impediments to the freedom of movement of
residents on the roads or their use for the supply of food
and medicine or for any other humanitarian purposes,
or for access by the International Committee for the
Red Cross. This is supported by abundant documented
evidence that exposes Armenia’s fabrications.
As to the establishment of the border checkpoint,
it is an undeniable sovereign right of the Republic
of Azerbaijan — the same right as that of any other
State — to secure and protect its borders and establish
border control. This right is grounded in the foundational
principles of territorial sovereignty and integrity and
the duty of Azerbaijan to guarantee the security of
persons, vehicles and cargo moving along its roads.
The Security Council has repeatedly reaffirmed that
securing their borders is the sovereign prerogative of
States Members of the United Nations. Armenia must
understand that misinformation and disinformation
are detrimental to the objectives of peace, stability
and reconciliation.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I should like to extend our congratulations
to the President of the Swiss Confederation, Mr. Alain
Berset. I thank him for convening today’s Security
Council meeting. We would also like to thank the Swiss
delegation for organizing this very important open debate
on the protection of civilians in times of armed conflict,
with particular attention on addressing food insecurity
and protecting essential services. We also wish to thank

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Secretary-General António Guterres and Ms. Spoljaric
Egger. President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, for their valuable briefings.
Conflicts remain ongoing all over the world and
are the main driver of the rise of acute food insecurity.
Conflicts usually result in the destruction or disruption
of
civilian
infrastructure,
livelihood-impinging
impediments to essential services and displacement.
They also obstruct the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, result in flare-ups in prices for food, fertilizer
and fuel, exacerbate climate change and increase of
humanitarian needs, as flagged by the Secretary-General
in his most recent annual report on the protection of
civilians (S/2023/345).
The Kingdom of Bahrain is aware of the correlation
between the environment, natural resources, climate
change, human security, food and water. We therefore
need a comprehensive, coordinated approach that would
address the issue in all of its dimensions — humanitarian
and development — and respond to food crises by
investing in lasting peace and development. We would
like to underscore the importance of ensuring the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts by upholding
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. Furthermore, we must commit ourselves to
implementing resolutions 2417 (2018) and 2573 (2021).
We recently welcomed the extension of the Black
Sea Grain Initiative for an additional two months. This
agreement is a milestone that will contribute to the
promotion and achievement of food security the world
over. We would like to extend our appreciation for the
efforts of the Republic of Türkiye and the United Nations,
which led to this agreement and its extension. We
welcome and support all international efforts aimed at
resolving the Ukrainian issue peacefully, in accordance
with the United Nations Charter and international law.
Moreover, we welcome the signing of the Jeddah
declaration between representatives of the Sudanese
Armed Forces and Rapid Support Forces from our
brotherly republic, the Sudan. The parties have committed
themselves to protecting civilians and ensuring their
freedom of movement and access to humanitarian
and medical assistance, all of which is in keeping
with international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. We welcome the efforts deployed by
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United States of
America aimed at settling the Sudanese crisis through
peaceful dialogue.

23-1455055/57

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

We remain convinced that the survival and dignity
of civilians in times of armed conflict is an issue of
paramount importance. We are also mindful of the
fact that preventive measures and preparation are
vital if we are to protect basic civilian infrastructure
and productive capacity, which is necessary for the
distribution of food, water, energy, infrastructure and
medical assistance. To that end, the Kingdom of Bahrain
stresses the need for the international community to
focus on the following action points.
First, we must highlight all internationally
recognized norms that clearly set out the obligations
of parties to a conflict in terms of protecting basic
civilian infrastructure, civilian objects and individuals.
Secondly, we must support countries affected by
conflict to enable them to build resilience in the face of
their various challenges, including drafting emergency
readiness plans that prioritize the protection of basic
civilian infrastructure, civilian objects and persons.
Thirdly, we need to promote dialogue between parties
to armed conflicts so that they can de-escalate, settle
disputes and eventually achieve peaceful outcomes.
Fourthly, we need to encourage parties to conflicts
to respect international humanitarian law, including
the principles of distinction, proportionality and
precaution, in order to avoid harming civilians and their
livelihoods. Fifthly, we must ensure that humanitarian
actors enjoy unhindered, safe and sustainable access so
that they may provide necessary assistance and support
to affected communities.
In conclusion, we support all initiatives that seek
to protect civilians, circumscribe the impact of armed
conflicts on human life, and develop preventive
measures that can help to uphold the safety, security
and dignity of civilians in armed conflict — all with
a view to achieving the aspirations of people the world
over to peace, stability and growth.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Yoseph (Ethiopia): We thank Switzerland,
President of the Security Council, for the month of
May, for organizing this open debate. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General, the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the other
briefers for their remarks this morning. I also recognize
the Heads of State and Government who took part in
today’s important open debate.
56/57

23/05/2023

Food insecurity and extreme poverty constitute both
the cause and consequence of conflicts. Recognizing
the exacerbating effects of conflicts on food insecurity,
we must redouble our efforts and pursue a peaceful
path towards preventing and resolving conflicts.
Furthermore, we must address the underlying causes
of conflicts, including poverty, lack of resilience and
adaptation to the extreme impacts of climate change. It
is against this backdrop that I would like to highlight
the following three brief points, based mainly on my
country’s experience.
First, we recognize that conflict is one of the
factors contributing to food insecurity. The reason food
insecurity continues to be the unfortunate experience
of people in conflict situations in Africa and other
developing countries relates to the structural vulnerability
of these countries’ economies. Accelerating economic
growth and sustainable development and addressing
the challenges in and around the agricultural sector are
therefore extremely critical. It is important to support
national programmes to improve food production and
productivity. This has to be coupled with the critical
tasks of ensuring macroeconomic stability and debt
relief, restructuring and cancellation and addressing
investment bottlenecks — all of which contribute
to the efforts aimed at alleviating food insecurity.
Such measures ensure resilience when instability and
conflicts emerge.
Secondly, timely and adequate provision of
humanitarian support to those in need of assistance is
extremely important. While States bear the primary
responsibility to fulfil the humanitarian needs of their
populations, we also see a great need for enhanced
international cooperation. For humanitarian assistance
to meet its objectives, it is extremely crucial that all
humanitarian actors operate in full respect of the
principles of humanity, neutrality and independence
and comply with the laws and sovereignty of
host countries. Humanitarian assistance should never
be politicized or used to leverage influence or political
gain against States. We also see a practical need to give
equal consideration to the lives of all people facing
humanitarian disasters and to avoid discriminatory
practices in humanitarian cooperation.
Thirdly, acting on climate-change commitments
to providing developing countries, especially those
in Africa, with the necessary resources to adapt to
and mitigate the effects of climate change is crucial.
The disastrous effects of climate change on water
23-14550

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

resources, vegetation coverage, weather patterns and
soil fertility continue to pose an existential challenge
to the populations that have contributed the least to
global warming. We call on all States to discharge
their climate-action obligations and invest in building
resilience and adaptation to the effects of climate change.
In conclusion, we believe that those measures will
help to address the vulnerabilities that underpin the
immediate and causal relationship between conflict and
food insecurity. The primacy of the peaceful resolution
of conflicts and the innate neutrality of humanitarian
operations must also be upheld at all times.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of India has asked to make a further statement. I now
give him the floor.
Mr. Setia (India): I will be brief, in the interests of
time. It is unfortunate that Pakistan has chosen to once
again misuse a Security Council meeting to propagate
false and malicious propaganda against my country and
distract from the theme and focus of today’s debate.
The union territories of Jammu and Kashmir
and Ladakh were, are and always will be an integral
and inalienable part of India. No amount of rhetoric
and propaganda from any country can negate that
fact. Pakistan has no locus standi to pronounce on or
interfere in matters that are internal to India, including
the Indian territories under Pakistan’s illegal and
forcible occupation. The desire for peace and security
and progress on the Indian subcontinent is real. It is
also widely shared and can be realized. That will
surely happen when cross-border terrorism ceases,
when Governments come clean to the international
community and to their own people, when minorities
are not persecuted and not least when we recognize
those realities at meetings such as today’s.
Going on its past practice and its compulsive
obsession with India, Pakistan may speak again and
continue its malicious false propaganda against my
country, but I shall refrain from responding to it out of
respect for the work we have to do.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of Pakistan has asked to make a further statement. I
now give her the floor.

S/PV.9327 (Resumption 1)

Mrs. Ijaz (Pakistan): I am compelled to take
the floor to respond to the remarks made by the
representative of India against my country.
India continues to perpetuate a factually incorrect
position year after year. Jammu and Kashmir is
internationally recognized as a disputed territory and
not an integral part of India. Repeating a wrongful
position does not make it acceptable at any point in
any forum. The right of the Kashmiri people to selfdetermination has been recognized and promised to
them by the Security Council through its resolutions.
For more than seven decades, through force and fraud,
India has prevented the Kashmiris from exercising that
right and from holding a United Nations-supervised
plebiscite to enable them to determine their own
political destiny.
India’s talk of terrorism is merely an attempt
to camouflage its own State terrorism. India has
imprisoned the entire Kashmiri leadership; illegally
detained thousands of young Kashmiris, including
women and children; summarily executed young boys;
violently repressed protests and burned down entire
neighbourhoods and villages. Indian-occupied Jammu
and Kashmir is the most militarized zone in the world,
where close to 900,000 security forces personnel
have been deployed by India to curb the legitimate
struggle of the Kashmiris. Such measures serve only
to strengthen the resolve and resilience of the Kashmiri
people to continue their struggle against the illegal
Indian occupation and intensify their fight for the right
to self-determination. Even in the face of the worst
atrocities, as evidenced by the thousands of unknown
and unmarked mass graves in illegally Indian-occupied
Jammu and Kashmir, the innocent people of Jammu
and Kashmir remain firm in their claim to the right to
self-determination.
Pakistan will keep exposing Indian brutality and
inform the international community of the Kashmiris’
plight. We ask the world, including the United Nations,
to demand that India end its State terrorism and abide
by its obligations under international law, including by
implementing the relevant Security Council resolutions.
The meeting rose at 8.15 p.m.

23-1455057/57
