S/2019/467

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 June 2019
Original: English

United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report provides an account of the activities of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) for the period from 15 March to 29 May
2019, pursuant to the mandate set out in Security Council resolution 350 (1974) and
extended in subsequent Council resolutions, most recently resolution 2450 (2018).

II. Situation in the area of operations and activities of the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
2.
During the reporting period, the ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic was maintained notwithstanding a number of violations of the Agreement
on Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces (Disengagement of Forces
Agreement) of 1974, which are set out below. While the overall security situation in
the UNDOF area of operations remained stable, there was some military activity in
the area of separation and across the ceasefire line. As reiterated by the Security
Council in its resolution 2450 (2018), there should be no military activity of any kind
in the area of separation.
3.
In employing its best efforts to maintain the ceasefire and see that it is
scrupulously observed, UNDOF reports all breaches of the ceasefire line that it
observes. All incidents of firing into the area of separation and across the ceasefire
line, as well as the crossing of the ceasefire line by individuals, constitute viol ations
of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. In its regular interactions with both sides,
the leadership of UNDOF continued to call upon the parties to exercise restraint and
prevent any miscalculation that might lead to an escalation of the situation.
4.
During the reporting period, there were several breaches of the ceasefire line.
On the evening of 27 May, the Israel Defense Forces informed UNDOF that they had
carried out a strike on a location in Tal al-Shaar in the area of limitation on the Bravo
side in retaliation of Syrian air defence system fire that had targeted an Israel Defense
Forces aircraft. The Syrian authorities informed UNDOF that the Israel Defense
Forces strike killed three military personnel and destroyed a military vehicle. In the
late afternoon of the same day, UNDOF had heard the firing of approximately
30 heavy machine gun rounds from a distance of some 2 km from Camp Faouar.
UNDOF was not in a position to confirm any casualties caused by the Israel Defense

19-08861 (E)

070619

*1908861*

S/2019/467

Forces strike or determine the point of origin or impact of the earlier heavy machine
gun rounds. UNDOF liaised with both parties to de-escalate the situation and
reminded them of their obligation to respect the 1974 Disengagement of Forces
Agreement and the importance of liaison with UNDOF accordingly to prevent any
further incidents and escalation of the situation across the ceasefire line.
5.
On 8 May, UNDOF observed the Israel Defense Forces fire three tank rounds
into the area of separation. UNDOF assessed that the firing was aimed at deterring
shepherds and other persons from crossing the ceasefire line from the Bravo side. On
12 March, the Israel Defense Forces had released a video statement on Twitter
claiming that a group known as “Golan File” or “Golan Portfolio” were operating
around the village of Hadar within the area of separation. The Israel Defense Forces
claimed that the alleged group was a Hizbullah-backed group that was conducting
reconnaissance operations and attempting to recruit locals within the area of
separation and limitation on the Bravo side. The Israel Defense Forces had previously
made allegations to UNDOF about the presence of such groups.
6.
On 1 May, UNDOF observed Israel Defense Forces soldiers laying razor
concertina wire in the area between the Israeli technical fence and United Nations
position 37B. UNDOF troops deployed to the location, where they saw approximately
20 Israel Defense Forces soldiers and main battle tanks deployed near the technical
fence on the Alpha side (Israeli-occupied Golan), with some of the Israel Defense
Forces soldiers deployed on high ground in the area of separation. The Israel Defense
Forces soldiers informed UNDOF that the purpose of the wire was to prevent persons
from the Bravo side from approaching and crossing the technical fence. While this
activity was taking place, the armed forces of the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic deployed close to position 37B and informed UNDOF that they were there
to monitor the activity of the Israel Defense Forces. The leadership of UNDOF liaised
with the Israel Defense Forces and the Syrian authorities to de-escalate the situation
and urged the soldiers of both sides to leave the area of separation. Subsequently, the
soldiers of both sides left the area. On 29 May, the Israel Defense Forces carried out
their planned reinforcement operations to lay razor concertina wire between the
ceasefire line and the Israeli technical fence in the central part of the area of limitation
on the Alpha side. UNDOF had informed the Syrian authorities of the Israel Defense
Forces operations. UNDOF had deployed troops to a location in the central part of
the area of separation in the vicinity of the ceasefire line to prevent violations of the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and de-escalate any tension during the Israel
Defense Forces operations.
7.
Sporadic heavy explosions and bursts of heavy machine gun and small arms fire
persisted throughout the reporting period in the northern, central and southern parts
of the areas of separation and limitation on the Bravo Side. UNDOF assessed that this
military activity was due to controlled detonations of unexploded ordnance as part of
clearance and training by the Syrian armed forces. On 17, 18 and 19 May, UNDOF
observed several anti-aircraft rounds and ammunition bursts on the Bravo side.
UNDOF also saw, on 17 May, four surface-to-air missiles being launched westwards
from the vicinity of Tal al-Harrah in the area of limitation on the Bravo side. UNDOF
was not in a position to determine the point of origin or impact of the anti-aircraft
rounds or the impact of the missiles. UNDOF observed an increase in the presence of
personnel of the Syrian armed forces, some of whom were armed, staffing a number
of checkpoints within the area of separation, including in the vicinity of Ba’th and
Khan Arnabah, as well as along the main road connecting Qunaytirah to Damascus.
UNDOF was occasionally notified that the routes in the area of limitation on the
Bravo side planned for patrol by the military police of the Russian Federation may
involve their entering the area of separation. UNDOF was not in a position to confirm
the presence of the military police in the area of separation.
2/8

19-08861

S/2019/467

8.
The military violations on the Alpha side included the presence of Iron Dome
systems and multiple rocket launcher systems within 10 km of the ceasefire line,
which are considered unauthorized military equipment in the area of limitation
pursuant to the terms of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement.
9.
UNDOF continued to observe daily crossings of the ceasefire line by
unidentified individuals from the Bravo side. UNDOF assessed that these individuals
were shepherds and farmers from the surrounding areas tending livestock.
10. UNDOF protested to the parties all violations of the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement that it had observed, including the crossings of the ceasefire line by
civilians from the Bravo Side, the presence of unauthorized equipment and personnel
in the areas of separation and limitation and the firing into the area of separa tion and
across the ceasefire line.
11. On 25 March, the United States of America issued a presidential proclamation
recognizing the sovereignty of Israel over the occupied Syrian Golan. This was
followed by peaceful public protests in the UNDOF area of operations, particularly
in Madjal Shams on the Alpha side, and in Ba’th, Khan Arnabah, Jaba and Rafid on
the Bravo side.
12. Despite the improvement in the security situation in the UNDOF area of
operations, open sources reported the presence of armed groups. On 12 April, open
sources alleged that a group called the Popular Resistance claimed responsibility for
a car bomb attack on pro-Government forces on the Harrah to Zimrin road, within the
area of limitation on the Bravo side.
13. During the reporting period, UNDOF did not observe any internally displaced
persons or tents in the area of separation. On 28 April, UNDOF facilitated the return
of two Syrian nationals from the Alpha side through the Qunaytirah crossing. One of
the Syrian nationals had been detained on the Alpha side since 2008 and the other
since 2005. Both Syrian nationals were brought by the Israel Defense Forces to Camp
Ziouani, where they were interviewed by representatives of the International
Committee of the Red Cross before being transferred to the Syrian authorities.
14. Pending its return to full operations carried out on the Bravo side prior to its
relocation in August 2014, UNDOF continued to maintain visibility, albeit limited, of
the area of separation and the ceasefire line. UNDOF maintained its positions on
Mount Hermon and at Camp Faouar and United Nations positions 32 and 37, in the
central part of the area of separation, 80, in the southern part of the area of separation,
and 22, on the Alpha side. UNDOF operations continued to be supported by the
military observers of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO)
in Observer Group Golan, who are under the operational control of UNDOF, and have
maintained five fixed and three temporary observation posts along the ceasefire line,
as well as four temporary observation posts on Mount Hermon. Additionally,
Observer Group Golan also continued to maintain temporary observation posts in the
vicinity of vacated United Nations observation posts 56, 71 and 72. The military
observers in Observer Group Golan will not be deployed at observation posts in the
area of separation on a permanent basis until such time as the security conditions
permit, when adequate accommodation and appropriate force protection measures are
in place. The focus of Observer Group Golan remains on continuous static
observation and situational awareness.
15. UNDOF made progress towards its gradual return to the area of separation as it
continued to develop the infrastructure of and improve the living conditions at Camp
Faouar. The Mission conducted clearance of United Nations positions 27, 37 and 85
in preparation for the reconstruction and reoccupation of the positions. The

19-08861

3/8

S/2019/467

refurbishment of Observer Group Golan observation posts 72 and 56 is expected to
commence in June.
16. Through Observer Group Golan, UNDOF continued to carry out fortnightly
inspections of equipment and force levels in the area of limitation on the Alpha side.
Liaison officers from the Alpha side accompanied the inspection teams. With the
improvement in the security situation on the Bravo side, UNDOF plans to resume,
during the next reporting period, inspections in the area of limitation, which were
suspended for security reasons.
17. Engagement between UNDOF and the Israel Defense Forces continued, with a
view to addressing restrictions on movement and access to United Nations positions
in the area of separation and to reducing the delays and challenges experienced by
United Nations personnel in crossing the technical fence to United Nations
observation posts. The leadership of UNDOF continued to remind the parties of their
obligation to scrupulously abide by the terms of the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement, to ensure the safety and security of United Nations personnel on the
ground and to extend all cooperation to UNDOF in the fulfilment of the tasks under
its mandate.
18. UNDOF, in consultation with both parties, continued to review the situation in
the area of separation as the Mission advanced its return to vacated positions in the
area of separation. UNDOF conducted more than 180 operational patrols on routes in
the northern and central parts of the areas of separation and limitation. In addition,
the UNDOF mechanized infantry company and force reserve company continued to
carry out assessment visits and protected patrols to United Nations position 68 and
observation posts 52, 56 and 72. Liaison officers of the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic accompanied UNDOF personnel on all patrols and assessment visits.
19. UNDOF regularly used the Qunaytirah crossing to move equipment and
personnel between the Alpha and Bravo sides. Pending the reoccupation of the United
Nations position at the Charlie gate, UNDOF military police continued to deploy at
the crossing point during the limited opening hours only, to liaise with the respective
sides on UNDOF personnel crossings. UNDOF continues to liaise with both sides
with regard to their facilitation of the crossing of UNDOF and Observer Group Golan
personnel at the Qunaytirah crossing, including the need for the United Nations
personnel to use only documents issued by UNDOF to cross and for an increase in
the opening hours of the crossing.
20. UNDOF continues to assess that there is a significant threat to United Nations
personnel in the UNDOF area of operations from explosive remnants of war,
including unexploded ordnance and mines, and from the possible presence of sleeper
cells of armed groups, including listed terrorist groups. UNDOF continues its
assessment of the security situation in the southern part of the area of separation in
view of the planned deployment to positions in that area.
21. In accordance with the provisions of Security Council resolution 2450 (2018)
and the UNDOF operational concept, UNDOF continued its efforts to deploy
appropriate technology to ensure the safety and security of UNDOF personnel and
equipment. A surveillance trailer to support UNDOF observation tasks remained
deployed on the Alpha side at Camp Ziouani and United Nations position 22, while
another was maintained at Camp Faouar.
22. UNDOF continued to conduct and update its contingency planning for the
reinforcement and evacuation of United Nations positions and observation posts on
both the Alpha and Bravo sides, as well as facilities in Damascus. UNDOF conducted
regular rehearsals, exercises and training for identified contingencies. Risk mitigation
measures, including force protection measures, continued to be developed at United
4/8

19-08861

S/2019/467

Nations positions and observation posts and at the UNDOF operational base at Camp
Ziouani and headquarters at Camp Faouar.
23. As at 13 May, UNDOF comprised 935 troops, including 41 women
peacekeepers. Troops are deployed from Bhutan (3), Czechia (4), Fiji (246), Ghana
(13), India (194), Ireland (137), Nepal (334), the Netherlands (2) and Uruguay (2). In
addition, 74 military observers, including 13 women from UNTSO serving in
Observer Group Golan assisted UNDOF in carrying out its tasks.

III. Implementation of Security Council resolution 338 (1973)
24. In its resolution 2450 (2018), the Security Council called upon the parties
concerned to immediately implement its resolution 338 (1973). It decided to renew
the mandate of UNDOF for a period of six months, until 30 June 2019, and requested
the Secretary-General to report every 90 days on developments in the situation and
the measures taken to implement resolution 338 (1973). The search for a peaceful
settlement of the conflict in the Middle East, in particular the efforts made at various
levels to implement resolution 338 (1973), was addressed in my report on the situation
in the Middle East (A/73/322), submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolutions
72/15 on Jerusalem and 72/16 on the Syrian Golan.
25. Since the discontinuation of indirect peace talks in December 2008, there have
been no negotiations between the parties. I look forward to the resumption of efforts
towards a comprehensive, just and durable peace settlement, as called for by the
Security Council in its resolution 338 (1973) and other relevant resolutions.

IV. Financial aspects
26. The General Assembly, by its resolution 72/298 of 5 July 2018, appropriated the
amount of $60.3 million for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from 1 July
2018 to 30 June 2019.
27. As at 20 May 2019, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account for
UNDOF amounted to $14.6 million. The total outstanding assessed contribution for
all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to $1,962.8 million.
28. Reimbursement of troop costs has been made for the period up to 31 January
2019, while reimbursement of the costs of contingent-owned equipment has been
made for the period up to 31 December 2018, in accordance with the quarterl y
payment schedule.

V. Observations
29. I note the generally calm situation in the UNDOF area of operations. However,
I am concerned about the continued violations of the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement. I am particularly concerned about the developments of 27 May involving
the parties to the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. Furthermore, I am also
concerned about the continued military activities and presence of the Syrian armed
forces in the area of separation and the crossing of the ceasefire lin e by the Israel
Defense Forces on 1 May. There should be no military forces in the area of separation
other than those of UNDOF. The Israel Defense Forces should refrain from firing
across the ceasefire line. The continued presence of unauthorized weapons and
equipment in the areas of limitation on both the Alpha and Bravo sides is also of
concern. These developments have the potential to jeopardize the Disengagement of

19-08861

5/8

S/2019/467

Forces Agreement. I urge the parties to exercise maximum restraint. I encourage
members of the Security Council to support efforts to sensitize both parties to the risk
of escalation and the need to preserve the long-standing ceasefire between Israel and
the Syrian Arab Republic.
30. It remains critical that the parties maintain their liaison with UNDOF to prevent
any escalation of the situation across the ceasefire line. All violations of the ceasefire
line increase tensions between the signatories to the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement and undermine progress towards stability in the area. The continued
liaison of UNDOF with parties has contributed to de-escalation during times of
heightened tension.
31. I note the continued support of the parties in facilitating the return of UNDOF
to full operations on the Bravo side. It is important that the parties provide all
necessary support to allow full utilization of the Qunaytirah crossing by UNDOF in
line with established procedures. It is critical that UNDOF be able to carry out its
operations without facing any administrative obstacles. This is even more important
as UNDOF increases its operations on the Bravo Side to facilitate effective and
efficient mandate implementation.
32. The continued commitment of both Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic to the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and support for the presence of UNDOF remains
essential. The full return of UNDOF to the area of separation continues to be a priority
for the Mission. I count on the continued cooperation of both parties to facilitate the
advancement of the Mission’s plans for an incremental return to operations and
positions in the area of separation and to ensure that the Mission can implement its
mandate. It remains important that UNDOF be able to deploy the technology and
equipment necessary to enhance its observation of the area of separation and the
ceasefire line and to augment force protection. In that regard, the support and
cooperation of both Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic is essential. At the same time,
the parties must continue to support the enhancement of the liaison function of
UNDOF.
33. It is equally important that the Security Council continue to bring to bear its
influence on the parties concerned to ensure that UNDOF continues to be accorded
the ability to operate in a safe and secure manner and is allowed to operate freely in
accordance with the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. The support of the parties
in facilitating the clearance of mines, unexploded ordnance and remnants of war in
the UNDOF area of operation is crucial. It is also necessary for UNDOF to continue
to have at its disposal all means and resources necessary for it to return fully to the
area of separation, conditions permitting.
34. The confidence and commitment of troop-contributing countries in UNDOF
remain key factors in the Mission’s ability to carry out its mandate. I continue to count
on the support of troop-contributing countries as UNDOF advances the
implementation of its agreed plan to increase operations in the area of separation. I
am grateful to the Governments of Bhutan, Czechia, Fiji, Ghana, India, Ireland,
Nepal, the Netherlands and Uruguay for their contributions, commitment, resolve and
consummate professionalism. I am also thankful to the Member States that have
contributed military observers to UNTSO.
35. I consider the continued presence of UNDOF in the area to be essential. I
therefore recommend that the Security Council extend the mandate of the Force for a
period of six months, until 31 December 2019. The Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic has given its assent to the proposed extension. The Government of Israel
also has expressed its agreement.

6/8

19-08861

S/2019/467

36. Finally, I wish to remember and honour Major General Francis Vib-Sanziri,
UNDOF Head of Mission and Force Commander, who passed away suddenly on
19 April 2019, for his distinguished leadership of and dedicated service in UNDOF. I
also wish to express my appreciation to the interim leadership of UNDOF and all
military and civilian personnel, who continue to perform the important tasks assigned
to them by the Security Council with efficiency and commitment under challenging
circumstances.

19-08861

7/8

S/2019/467

8/8

19-08861
