S/2021/785

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 September 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 14 September 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and
the Permanent Representatives of the members of the
Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the 8853rd meeting of the Security Council
convened on 9 September 2021 under the item entitled “The situation in Afghanistan”.
The interventions of the briefers and Council members as well as of Afghanistan, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Kazakhstan, Pakistan and Turkey will be published as an
official record of the Security Council (S/PV.8853).
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for the
8853rd meeting, the following delegations submitted written statements, copies of
which are enclosed: Australia, the European Union, Germany, Indonesia, Italy and
Japan. These statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council in
accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from the
President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of the
members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of the
extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID -19)
pandemic, and reference to the document will be made in S/PV.8853.
(Signed) Geraldine Byrne Nason
President of the Security Council

21-12881 (E)

240921

*2112881*

S/2021/785

Annex I
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Australia to the
United Nations, Mitch Fifield
The people of Afghanistan are facing a looming humanitarian crisis. Our
interests, and those of the international community, are best served by reinforcing
regional stability. This includes through our humanitarian support mechanisms, with
the effective distribution of aid to those who are in need. We must ensure that
humanitarian assistance does not fund or contribute in any way to terrorist objectives.
Now, more than ever, we need to be working together and coordinating
responses, in particular to ensure that women and girls continue to participate fully in
public life, including through access to work and education. When women are fully
included in decision-making, societies are more likely to prevent and resolve conflict.
Women should have the opportunity to decide on policies and programmes that
determine their safety and security.
Like many, we are now focused on those who remain in Afghanistan and those
who want to leave. The international community needs to work together to establish
protection and support to foreign citizens and to visa holders, to facilitate their lea ving
Afghanistan safely and freely, should they so wish. We call on the Taliban to uphold
their promise of free passage.
We want to work with other nations on very clear and firm engagement with the
Taliban regime, including ensuring that there are consequences for violations of the
norms of international conduct. Counter-terrorism is a significant focus for Australia,
deterring any transnational terrorism resurgence. A key component is to ensure that
funding for terrorism is stifled. We are particularly concerned about any potential
impacts in South-East Asia.
We will judge the Taliban by their actions, and we will work with you to require
the Taliban to adhere to their commitments. The announcement of the interim regime is
a very poor start. The new cabinet includes senior members of the Haqqani Network,
well known for its criminal and terrorist activities; no members from the Hazara
community, which comprises 20 per cent of the Afghan population; few from other
ethnic minorities; and no women at all. This is in no way an inclusive government.
Without such, Afghanistan will not be able to reach a peaceful settlement of the conflict.
As an international community, we need to hold the Taliban responsible for its
actions, particularly for violations of human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law, including specifically the rights of women and girls. This is vital
to the stability of Afghanistan and the region.
We urge the Taliban to recognize that the only path to legitimacy is through
constructive engagement in the political process and a fully inclusive,
representational government. We urge the Taliban to recognize the benefits of a more
inclusive government and society, where the gains made over the past 20 years are
maintained and built upon, in line with international norms and standards.
Australia’s Special Representative on Afghanistan will be leading Australia ’s
diplomatic work from our embassy in Doha in Qatar, where Australia ’s interim
admission to Afghanistan is currently located.
We commend the advocacy of the United Nations in obtaining guarantees from
the Taliban authorities this week for continued humanitarian access to those Afghans
most in need and for the safety and security of humanitarian staff, including for the
critical work that will be delivered by female humanitarians. The role of the United
Nations is more important than ever as Afghanistan faces a humanitarian crisis.
2/10

21-12881

S/2021/785

Annex II
Statement by the Head of Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations, Olof Skoog
The consequences of the violent takeover of power in Afghanistan by the
Taliban are still materializing, but we are monitoring the developments closely.
The humanitarian situation of the Afghan people is reaching crisis proportions
and needs urgent attention. The European Union has increased the humanitarian
contributions almost fourfold, and the European Union member States are also
increasing their contribution to the humanitarian efforts. To ensure that the assistance
is delivered, we need the United Nations. The steadfast promise to “stay and deliver”
is needed and deeply appreciated.
Afghanistan is facing an economic and governance crisis which will only get
worse if a functioning system of governance is not established quickly. The
announcement of a caretaker cabinet by the Taliban this week showed no intention to
ensure the inclusion of other political stakeholders, minorities or, crucially, women.
The achievements from the past 20 years are under severe threat. This is not th e
time to disengage, but to continue our partnership with the people of Afghanistan,
guided by our principles and values with the aim of assisting them.
The European Union will closely monitor the actions of the caretaker cabinet in
Afghanistan, and our engagement will be based on the actions taken by the Taliban.
At last week’s meeting, the European Union foreign ministers agreed on the following
five benchmarks for engagement with the Taliban:
1.
The commitment that Afghanistan will not serve as a base for the export
of terrorism to other countries.
2.
Respect for human rights, in particular women’s rights, the rule of law and
freedom of the media.
3.
The establishment of an inclusive and representative transitional
government through negotiations.
4.
Free access for humanitarian aid, respecting our procedures and conditions
for its delivery.
5.
Allowing the departure of foreign nationals and Afghans at risk who wish
to leave the country in line with what was already decided by Security Council
resolution 2593 (2021).
In order to assess the actions of the Taliban, and to what extent the benchmarks
are met, the European Union has initiated plans for a joint presence in Afghanistan,
provided that the security conditions for such a presence can be established. In this
regard, we note with concern reports of the violation of evacuated foreign embassies
by the Taliban in Kabul.
The European Union will continue its operational engagement for the Afghan
people, but this does not constitute political recognition of the Taliban or its caretaker
government.
The political, humanitarian and economic consequences of the Taliban ’s
takeover of power will impact Afghanistan’s neighbours, our regional partners. The
European Union will continue, and strengthen, our engagement and assistance to help
create capacity to receive Afghans who are leaving, to prevent the spread of terrorism
and to fight against organized crime, including drug and human trafficking. We do
this in close cooperation with the United Nations.
21-12881

3/10

S/2021/785

The European Union will not abandon the Afghan people. We will continue to
promote the principles and values that the State of Afghanistan itself has signed up to
in international treaties and conventions. We expect these international commitments
to be honoured and will hold those in power accountable for this.
The Taliban must now show that they are willing and able to establish
meaningful relationships with the outside world, to conduct dialogue and to respect
human rights. To give Afghanistan a safe and stable future, they must embrace the
diversity of the people and engage in an inclusive form of governance and human
rights, especially of minorities, women and children.

4/10

21-12881

S/2021/785

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Germany to the
United Nations
As Afghanistan is entering into a new phase in its already difficult history,
Germany is deeply concerned about the future of the country and reaffirms its
solidarity with the people of Afghanistan. They will not be forgotten!
The Secretary-General, together with the Security Council in its resolution 2593
(2021), sent clear and important messages with a view to the immediate and the next
phase in Afghanistan. Germany echoes the calls for the utmost restraint, for safe, rapid
and unimpeded humanitarian access, for an immediate end to violence, for the safety,
security and rights of all Afghans to be respected and for adherence to Afghanista n’s
international obligations, in particular under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
Fight against terrorism
Germany strongly condemns the attacks of 26 August 2021, near Hamid Karzai
International Airport in Kabul, for which responsibility was claimed by the Islamic
State in Khorasan Province. Violence in Afghanistan must stop. Afghanistan must
never again become a safe haven for terrorism or a source of terrorist attacks.
Humanitarian assistance and access
The Secretary-General warned that Afghanistan faces a looming humanitarian
catastrophe. We thank him for convening a high-level ministerial meeting in Geneva
on 13 September 2021 to address the growing humanitarian needs in the country.
Germany calls on all parties to allow full, safe and unhindered humanitarian access
for the United Nations, its implementing partners and all humanitarian actors to
ensure that humanitarian assistance reaches all those in need, with a particular focus
on forthcoming winter season programmes.
The people in Afghanistan can continue to rely on our support and solidarity.
Germany has provided emergency humanitarian assistance for many years and has
been reacting in a swift, targeted and flexible manner by significantly increasing its
humanitarian assistance for Afghanistan and neighbouring countries by €100 million.
We plan to dedicate another €500 million, also partly for humanitarian assistance.
Human rights
We are deeply concerned about recent reports that human rights are severely
restricted and that human rights violations occur throughout the country, in particular
against women and girls. We stress the importance of adhering to the rule of law and
of respecting and protecting the human rights and freedoms of all Afghans, including
the rights of women, girls and ethnic and religious minorities.
Government
Our future engagement with and the legitimacy that we lend to any future
Afghan Government will be assessed on the basis of its actions. The respect for its
international obligations and commitments, in particular with regard to human rights,
will play a key role. It is also essential to establish an inclusive and representative
government which includes the full, equal and meaningful participation of women
and all minority groups. The most recent announcements of the Taliban do raise
serious questions. They do not meet the expectations of the international community.
Nevertheless, we must maintain channels of communication with the Taliban in order
21-12881

5/10

S/2021/785

to achieve essential commitments with regard to humanitarian access, the secure
operation of airports and the safe passage of Afghans who want to leave their country.
International cooperation
The situation in Afghanistan is posing major challenges for the international
community and for the neighbouring countries in particular. Foreign Minister Heiko
Maas therefore travelled to Turkey, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Pakistan and Qatar last
week and discussed the security and geopolitical impact of the latest developments.
The international community, including the countries in the region, must be
united and speak with one voice in order to achieve stability and security in and
around Afghanistan. Germany will continue its political and humanitarian
engagement and strongly supports international efforts to support Afghanistan. All
regional and international stakeholders should be involved. There is no alternative:
international cooperation is crucial if we want to deal with the risks and challenges
emanating from the new situation in Afghanistan.
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
The international community will of course not be able to deliver on what is
needed in Afghanistan and the region without the United Nations. We highly welcome
the presence and further recommend an active role of the United Nations in
Afghanistan and call on all members of the Security Council to send a strong signal
of support by extending the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) now.
We share the penholders’ assessment that, under the current circumstances, a
rollover of the current UNAMA mandate, followed by a report of the Secretary General, is the best way forward. The mandate should then be adapted in the light of
the realities on the ground.
As facilitator of the resolution on Afghanistan in the General Assembly,
Germany also stands ready to help when it comes to possible action in the Assembly.
We intend to adapt the Assembly resolution on the situation in Afghanistan
accordingly and in close cooperation with partners.

6/10

21-12881

S/2021/785

Annex IV
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission
of Indonesia to the United Nations, Mohammad K. Koba
I thank all briefers for their insightful briefings.
Indonesia is closely following the situation in Afghanistan and calls on all
parties to exercise restraint and ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance to the
people of Afghanistan.
We also would like to voice our full support to the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in fulfilling this essential role for the
people of Afghanistan.
On this note, let me focus on three points.
First, the work of UNAMA needs to continue.
While situation on the ground has changed, the role of UNAMA remains
important to fulfil the growing needs on the ground, especially in the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. This is even more crucial as Afghanistan is still fighting to
curb the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
Moreover, Indonesia hopes for the continued work of UNAMA in supporting
the continuation of an Afghan-owned and Afghan-led national reconciliation dialogue
that could lead to the formation of an inclusive government in Afghanistan.
Given the importance of the work of UNAMA as well as other United Nations
agencies in Afghanistan, we emphasize the importance of ensuring the safety and
security of all personnel and assets of United Nations Member States and entities
operating in the country.
Second, ensuring that women’s rights and participation are continuously respected
and promoted: Indonesia firmly believes that all elements of Afghan society, especially
women, have a stake in participating in the development of their country.
Hence, we call on all stakeholders to ensure the protecti on of women’s rights
and participation in Afghanistan.
All stakeholders need to ensure that all progress achieved in Afghanistan could
be sustained and further progressed in the years to come.
Third, commitments on counter-terrorism must be upheld.
Indonesia joins the international call on all stakeholders to ensure that
Afghanistan should never be the base for the activity of any terrorist organizations.
We call on the Security Council as well as other relevant stakeholders to increase
their partnership in the global fight against terrorism.
In the end, Indonesia is confident that peace and stability are what the people of
Afghanistan and the international community are truly wishing for.
We welcomed the Council’s prompt response to the rapid developments on the
ground. We hope that the Council will remain united to ensure that UNAMA will have
the necessary mandate in a timely manner.
Indonesia remains committed to supporting the formation of a united, inclusive
and representative government that respects women’s rights and participation in
Afghanistan.
We are ready to work together to support UNAMA in this endeavour.
21-12881

7/10

S/2021/785

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Italy to the United Nations
Italy would like to start by thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Lyons and her staff for their tireless efforts during the last challenging
months.
Afghanistan is now at a crossroads that we would have rather not reached: all the
progress painstakingly made over the last 20 years by Afghan society, especially in
terms of women’ rights, is at risk. The international community must do its utmost to
avoid the materialization of this risk while continuing to stand by the Afghan people.
The rapid unfolding of past weeks’ events required an unprecedented effort,
focused on evacuations. Through this complex operation, Italy was also able to
transfer and host 4,890 Afghan civilians, more than half of whom were women and
girls.
Now that this emergency is over, a new phase must begin, the objective of which
should be the definition and implementation of a sustainable strategy on the Afghan
dossier. The main challenges ahead are effectively managing migration flows,
combating terrorism and narco-trafficking, allowing the delivery of humanitarian
assistance and guaranteeing the protection of universal rights. To achieve these
important goals, close cooperation among all relevant international actors should be
pursued, as the Afghan crisis clearly points to the need for a more effective and
inclusive multilateralism.
One key issue will be the position towards the Taliban authorities in Kabul. Italy
is of the opinion that the Taliban rule will have to be judged on the basis of its actions
rather than in the light of its statements. In this respe ct, five parameters will be
essential: (a) the rejection of terrorism and cooperation in fighting narco -trafficking;
(b) respect for human rights, particularly of women and minorities, and respect for
the rule of law and freedom of the press; (c) the inclu siveness of the political and
social system that the new “de facto” authorities will establish in Afghanistan;
(d) unconditional and secure humanitarian access for international organizations,
particularly United Nations agencies and entities; and (e) safe passage for those who
intend to leave the country, in line with Security Council resolution 2593 (2021).
Looking to the support that can be provided to the Afghan people, Italy ’s
National Action Plan rests on five pillars: first, providing humanitarian assistance;
second, devising a structural response to the flow of refugees from Afghanistan to
neighbouring countries and, potentially, to Europe, with the help of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the International Organization
for Migration; third, creating educational opportunities for Afghan university
students; fourth, promoting initiatives in international forums, starting with the
United Nations, for the protection of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of
Afghans, first and foremost of Afghan women and girls; and fifth, contributing to the
elaboration of a shared strategy among international partners, assessing also the
possibility of using the Group of 20 platform.
All these efforts, both at the national and international levels, should target one
common overarching objective: preserving the advancements that the Afghan society
has reached, with great sacrifice and investments, in the past 20 years in terms of
human rights and civil liberties.
The international community helped this development to happen and should
now help to ensure that these gains are preserved. Not abandoning the Afghan people
now is in our interest and, at the same time, represents our moral duty.
8/10

21-12881

S/2021/785

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations, Ishikane Kimihiro
I thank the President for convening this debate on Afghanistan. I also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Deborah Lyons, for her briefing and
her leadership at a time when the support of the United Nations for the people of
Afghanistan is most needed.
Afghanistan is a country that holds the key to peace and stability in the region
and the world. Japan hopes that true peace and prosperity will come to Afghanistan,
which is blessed with natural resources and young and talented people.
Japan reiterates its strong belief that a sustainable peace in Afghanistan can only
be achieved by a political settlement that reflects the voices of all segments of society.
Japan has supported all efforts to this end while urging all parties concerned to cease
acts of violence. In this light, it is with strong pain and regret that we continue to
witness further suffering and loss of life among the people of Afghanistan.
Japan stresses the need for the international community to speak with one voice
in sending a clear and united message to Afghanistan. Japan underlines the need to
maximize our leverage to ensure the full implementation of Security Council
resolution 2593 (2021).
Japan will continue to urge the Taliban to ensure the safe passage and departure
of those who still wish to leave Afghanistan. At the same time, Japan will be persistent
in calling on the Taliban to ensure the following three points.
First, to protect the lives and property of all Afghans, regardless of ethnicity or
religious sect, and restore social order.
Second, to safeguard and advance basic human rights, in particular the rights of
women.
Third, to pursue nation-building that upholds an inclusive political process
where diverse ethnic and religious groups are included.
If these are put into practice under the new administration, Afghanistan will be
able to regain the trust of the international community, resulting in the return of the
people, funds and support needed to rebuild the country.
In the midst of continued tensions in Afghanistan, Japanese Foreign Minister
Motegi visited several Middle Eastern countries and concurred with each country on
the need to work together to prevent the current situation in Afghanistan from
becoming a further destabilizing factor. In the light of the growing need for
humanitarian assistance in Afghanistan and neighbouring countries, Japan is ready to
offer total assistance of around $200 million this year, including $65 million in new
assistance in such areas as shelter, health, water and sanitation, food, agriculture and
education through international organizations. Japan will continue its efforts to help
achieve peace and stability in Afghanistan in coordination with the concerned
countries.
The people of Afghanistan must be at the centre as the international community
helps the country address both its immediate humanitarian needs and mid - to longterm challenges of stability and socioeconomic development. An approach based on
the humanitarian-development-peace nexus is essential. While we await the
restoration and strengthening of governance, we will have to focus on delivering aid
to people and communities on the ground by all means.

21-12881

9/10

S/2021/785

Under the current circumstances, the United Nations is one of the few entities
that can deliver assistance on the ground. Now, the United Nations system is being
tested as to whether it can deliver as one under the concept of human security, and
Member States need to be united in supporting the Organization ’s efforts. In this
regard, Japan believes that the role of the United Nations Assistance Miss ion in
Afghanistan will remain critical, while recognizing the need for the Security Council
to review its mandate in due course.
Afghanistan, with the help of the international community, has made significant
progress over the past two decades, in particular with the development of
infrastructure, the promotion of education, and increased participation of women and
youth in the public domain. It is to the benefit of the people of Afghanistan to preserve
and promote those gains.
As a long-standing partner of Afghanistan, Japan reaffirms its commitment to
addressing the country’s immediate humanitarian needs as well as supporting its longterm path to peace and prosperity. As we watch the evolving situation and the actions
of the Taliban, Japan will continue to actively engage all stakeholders to explore the
best possible way to assist the country and its people.

10/10

21-12881
