United Nations

S/PV.6061

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6061st meeting
Tuesday, 6 January 2009, 5 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kouchner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Spindelegger
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Zhang Yesui
Mr. Ballestero
Mr. Jurica
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Shalgham
Mr. Heller
Mr. Yakovenko
Mr. Babacan
Mr. Butagira
Mr. Miliband
Ms. Rice
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-20097 (E)

*0920097*

S/PV.6061

The meeting was called to order at 5.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite the representatives of Egypt,
Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, Norway, Qatar and
Saudi Arabia to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council’s agenda, without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite His Excellency Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, President
of the Palestinian National Authority, whom I
welcome, to participate in this meeting in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the
previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
extend an invitation to participate in this meeting,
under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, to His Excellency Mr. Amre Moussa,
Secretary General of the League of Arab States.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

This is a moment of great urgency. The
international community is mobilizing, as attested to
by the presence of President Abbas, the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, the Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States and Ministers from Arab
States, countries members of the Council and other
States. The number of victims is in the hundreds, and
in the thousands if the wounded are included. Many are
civilians. Just today we have seen the tragedy at the
Al-Fakhoura School, near Jabaliya. In the face of that
tragedy, my country has decided to do everything
possible to bring an end to the violence.

2

Following two days of discussions in the
region — in Sharm el-Sheikh, Jerusalem, Ramallah,
Damascus and again in Sharm el-Sheikh — the
President of the French Republic has achieved the
undertaking of negotiations on a permanent ceasefire.
At a press conference with President Sarkozy,
President Mubarak has in fact just proposed a plan
aimed at finding a way out of the crisis. In particular,
President Mubarak has called for Israel, the Palestinian
Authority and Palestinian factions to meet in order to
take every step necessary to end the escalation,
including border security and the reopening of border
crossings. We await Israel’s response, but we have the
hope that it will be positive. The Security Council
should encourage and support those promising efforts.
All States of the region should support this momentum
and contribute to this hopeful initiative aimed at
moderation and restraint.
The immediate priority is to end the violence. My
country has condemned Israel’s ground offensive
against Gaza, just as it has condemned the continued
launching of rockets. We call for an immediate
humanitarian truce. The fate of civilians is the most
urgent concern.
France reiterates is call for a complete and
immediate cessation of rocket launchings, and for a
halt to all Israeli military operations. France would also
like to reiterate the need to establish the necessary
conditions and guarantees for a lasting ceasefire, the
main elements of which are well-known. They include
supervision of the implementation of the ceasefire; a
return to normality in Gaza, which includes the
permanent opening of crossing points; and a halt to the
smuggling of weapons into Gaza. International
oversight mechanisms may prove to be necessary, and
we are prepared to contribute to them.
Beyond that, it remains crucial to return to peace
negotiations. There is no military solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, not in Gaza or anywhere
else. The solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
must be based on the process charted at Annapolis and
on the establishment of a viable Palestinian State living
side by side with Israel in peace and security. In
particular, we must work on the basis of the Arab Peace
Initiative to address the Israeli-Palestinian and IsraeliArab conflicts in a comprehensive and practical
manner.

09-20097

S/PV.6061

Europe encourages the essential reconciliation
that must take place among Palestinians. We support
efforts by everyone to that end.
France has acted with all its partners in the
international community, in particular those in the
European Union, to put an end to this crisis. My
country believes that the Security Council has an
essential role to play, which should take into account
the reality of the situation on the ground in order to
effectively establish the conditions for a lasting
ceasefire. In that regard, I shall listen to the various
statements to be made here. I hope that we will be able
to take decisive action in the Council in support, in
particular, of Egypt’s efforts, as well as those of the
League of Arab States committee and others, along the
two fronts that I have outlined, namely, an immediate
halt to violence and the establishment of the necessary
conditions for a lasting ceasefire.
I welcome the presence among us of His
Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, to whom I
give the floor.
The Secretary-General: As the Council meets to
address the grave crisis in Gaza, I welcome the leader
of the Palestinian people, President Mahmoud Abbas,
who is recognized by the members of this body as the
legitimate representative of the Palestinian people. His
presence, and that of high-level representatives of
members of the Security Council, as well as of Arab
and other Member States, is a reminder that we must
move from debate to action, and must do so
immediately.
The situation on the ground demands nothing
less. The Israeli military operation, with the stated
purpose of bringing an end to rocket attacks by Hamas
militants and a change in the security conditions in
southern Israel, is in its eleventh day. Israel has
intensified its air bombardment and sea attacks into
Gaza. These attacks have caused damage and
destruction both to Hamas militants’ facilities and to
public infrastructure, mosques, schools and homes.
Hamas militants have continued to fire rockets at
Israel, most recently reaching 30 kilometres from Tel
Aviv. Three days ago, in a further escalation, Israeli
troops entered the Gaza Strip. There have been fierce
clashes in heavily populated areas, including in and
around Gaza City and in refugee camps.

According to the Palestinian Ministry of Health
and media sources, over 570 Palestinians have already
been killed and over 2,700 injured. United Nations
teams are unable to confirm figures due to the
dangerous situation on the ground, but objective
assessments, including those based on visits to
hospitals, suggest that the numbers are credible.
Israeli sources have confirmed the deaths of five
soldiers and another 50 are injured, in addition to four
civilians killed and dozens injured by the more than
500 rockets launched in the last 11 days, some of
which have struck homes and schools.
As this conflict has escalated, I have repeatedly
condemned indiscriminate rocket attacks by Hamas and
the excessive use of force by Israel. I have called for an
immediate end to the violence, and I have warned that
if these appeals went unheeded, civilians were
inevitably going to continue to be killed in large
numbers. Today, at United Nations facilities in Gaza,
that is exactly what has happened. Three United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) schools, set up by
the United Nations as places of refuge for civilians
fleeing the fighting, have been hit in adjacent Israeli
strikes. The third strike, at a school in the Jabaliya
refugee camp, has killed dozens of civilians.
These attacks by Israeli military forces, which
endanger United Nations facilities serving as places of
refuge, are totally unacceptable and should not be
repeated. Equally unacceptable are any actions by
Hamas militants that endanger the Palestinian civilian
population. Today’s events underscore the dangers
inherent in the continuation and escalation of this
conflict. I call once again for an immediate ceasefire.
In the midst of this fighting, the civilian
population of Gaza faces a humanitarian crisis. Entire
families, including women and children, have perished
in the violence, as have United Nations staff and
medical workers. There are no shelters for the vast
majority of the civilian population. Food and fuel
supplies are insufficient. A million people have no
electricity. A quarter of a million have no running
water. The only answer is an end to the violence.
Whatever the rationale of the combatants, only an end
to violence and a political way forward can deliver
long-term security and peace.
I have been actively engaged with regional and
world leaders to bring the violence to a speedy end. I

09-20097

3

S/PV.6061

stressed to President Bush today the importance of
acting immediately, and I had valuable consultations
with Arab leaders yesterday and today, including
President Abbas. My envoys and I have been working
to facilitate the emergence of a consensus, and I will
continue my efforts with regional and world leaders,
including many already gathered here in New York.
I am gratified by the most recent initiative by
President Mubarak and President Sarkozy for a way
out of the current impasse.
I also intend to travel next week to Israel and the
occupied Palestinian territory and to regional capitals.
But I do not believe we can wait until then to end the
violence. We must achieve that now.
To do so, there must be an immediate ceasefire,
that is durable and respected fully by all sides.
Immediate humanitarian measures, including open
crossings for humanitarian assistance, should be
ensured.
In addition, viable international mechanisms will
be required to ensure that borders are properly
functioning. This must include a plan to ensure that the
crossings operate as envisaged in the 2005 Agreement
on Movement and Access and that smuggling from any
direction is addressed. Third parties will need to
provide assistance, both on the ground and in terms of
diplomatic support, to supervise and safeguard all the
various elements of a ceasefire.
Gaza’s enormous social relief and reconstruction
needs will have to be addressed. A consolidated
account of the current humanitarian needs, including
the urgent appeal by UNRWA, has been issued by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. I
urge all Member States to respond promptly and
generously to this appeal.
We urgently need to achieve Palestinian unity and
the reunification of Gaza with the West Bank within
the framework of the legitimate Palestinian Authority.
We must also see the urgent continuation of
negotiations for a political solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, which we worked so hard for in
2008 but did not achieve.
This Council has the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security. I
hope that the Council will act swiftly and decisively to
put an end to this crisis.

4

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, President of the Palestinian
National Authority.
President Abbas (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I
have come bearing a message from a wounded people
who are being subjected to a new tragedy of
destruction, killing, siege, unremitting violence and
lack of respect for the most basic human rights.
The massacre today in the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) school at the Jabaliya refugee camp is
new proof of the heinous crimes being committed
against our people. I come to bear witness to the
suffering of the people of Gaza. Children fall before
their mothers. Roofs fall on entire families. The cries
of the innocents, in their agony, rise. Death and
destruction spread throughout every village and every
camp.
Gaza today is witnessing a new Palestinian
catastrophe. It has been over 60 years since our first
catastrophe. The Israeli machine of destruction
continues to kill and to commit the most heinous of
crimes. It continues to do so despite unprecedented
international unanimity in calling for an end to this
massacre of innocent civilians, who do not deserve
such brutality or such blind aggression.
Before laying out the details of possible solutions
to the impasse we face, I call on this Security Council
to take the necessary first step to save our people in
Gaza. This Council must adopt a resolution calling for
an immediate and full cessation of Israeli aggression.
The cannons must fall silent so that the voice of
dialogue can be heard and a political settlement to this
major crisis and this human tragedy can be found. Any
delay in ending the fighting and killing will only
deepen the tragedy that we have all lived in the past
few days. Any delay will make all our people,
particularly the young, feel that placing hope in peace
and relying on international legitimacy and
commitment to international law are all pipe dreams
that will never bear fruit and that the present and future
offer nothing but more extremism, violence and
destructive wars.
The choice before the members of the Security
Council is clear-cut. Any message they choose to send

09-20097

S/PV.6061

to the peoples of our region — indeed, to all peoples of
the world — calling for an end to the aggression will
reiterate and underscore the fact that the United
Nations will not ignore the tragedy of our people today
or allow the Middle East to fall victim to a cycle of
bloodshed, extremism, violence and new hatred.
The widows and mothers of Gaza who walk with
their children in the streets; the thousands of wounded
in hospitals; the corpses under the roofs of mosques,
schools and homes; the mothers and fathers who
cannot bury their children under the hail of bombs and
fire; the Arab and Islamic peoples and, indeed, public
opinion around the world will accept nothing less than
an urgent intervention by the Security Council to halt
the firing and stop the aggressor.
That is my message, which I believe cannot be
subject to any compromise, procrastination or delay.
There is an urgent need to lay a firm foundation upon
which we can build towards a comprehensive political
settlement of this destructive and bloody conflict. Let
me state that a commitment to respect any agreement
we may reach is necessary to avoid the tragedy being
repeated. It means providing effective and sufficient
protection for all our people and establishing an
international force that will help them regain security
and peace, contribute to ending the unjust siege that
has suffocated Gaza for so long, assist us in opening all
border crossings — particularly those between the
Gaza Strip and Israel and at Rafah between the Gaza
Strip and Egypt — in accordance with international
agreements and ensure a comprehensive, reciprocal and
permanent ceasefire.
In that regard, I would like to express my
appreciation and support for the plan set in motion
today by Presidents Mubarak of Egypt and Sarkozy of
France.
Our people in the West Bank, in Al-Quds
Al-Sharif and in the Gaza Strip have suffered enough
under Israeli occupation, the settlements, the separation
wall, the hundreds of checkpoints and the detention of
over 11,000 of our people in Israeli jails. It is enough.
All those present are aware of that and of our belief in
international legitimacy. We seek and defend
international legitimacy to confront the policy of
occupation and its measures, to put an end to Israel’s
stranglehold on our future and to ensure our right to
independence and self-determination.

09-20097

That is why we seek above all the application of
international law and agreements with regard to the
borders and crossing points. We do not want anyone to
feel threatened. No one’s security should be threatened
and we want no one to threaten our security. I do not
believe that, in the context of the settlement we seek,
the Council can condone the ongoing unjust siege and
blockade imposed on our people in Gaza, where all
elements of a normal life are negated. How can a
people — any people — remain deprived of food,
medicine, electricity, water and all necessities for
development, construction, movement and travel?
A lasting end to the siege is non-negotiable. It is
essential if peace is to prevail. Let me stress that when
the aggression against our people stops, we shall
relentlessly continue to work to overcome our internal
Palestinian crisis by restoring national unity, based on
the resolutions adopted by the Council of the League of
Arab States, which provide for a national unity
Government that would oversee simultaneous
legislative and presidential elections. The only way to
restore unity is through dialogue.
In that regard, we would like to express our
sincere appreciation for the efforts being made by
President Mohamed Hosni Mubarak of sisterly Egypt
to encourage national reconciliation and unity and for
the unanimous resolutions of the League of Arab States
on the need to pursue efforts in that regard.
I should like to emphasize that we will accept no
formula that would impose the status quo through
separation and allow steadfast Gaza to remain an entity
separate from the body of Palestine. The Gaza Strip has
undergone all the stages of our national struggle and
has fought hard to maintain our Palestinian national
unity. It was the birthplace of our national liberation
movement and has held high the flame of independence
and freedom. How can we accept a fate for Gaza other
than that of being an integral and proud part of a united
Palestinian nation — one independent Palestinian
State, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital?
I should like, Sir, to thank you, your friendly
country and the entire international community for
their sincere messages of peace, calling for an
immediate end to the aggression. I would like to pay
tribute to the important role played by the agencies of
the United Nations, particularly UNRWA, to save our
people and to ensure that they receive the basic
essentials of life. I appeal to all to provide the

5

S/PV.6061

necessary assistance to those agencies, to all civil and
international organizations that are saving the lives of
our wounded people and to those seeking to convey an
accurate picture of the new catastrophe to the world. I
should like to thank all Arab and friendly countries that
were quick to provide humanitarian and medical
assistance. Let me express the hope that such support
will grow to contain the huge consequences of the
tragedy we are facing. I should like to express my
appreciation for the efforts being made by Egypt and
Jordan to ensure that this assistance reaches its targets.
The experiences of the past few decades have
proved that military aggression, however massive,
cannot be a viable and lasting solution to conflict. The
continued suffering of our people through killing and
destruction will not bring our people to its knees. That
people, like any other, will accept nothing less than
freedom and justice. We shall remain committed to the
path of just peace, committed to continuing the
political process and true to the commitments we have
undertaken, based on the balanced solution set out in
the Arab Peace Initiative and under international law
and resolutions of international legitimacy.
We know that some Powers wish to abort the
two-State solution. They wish to bury the chances for
peace under the rubble of the war against steadfast
Gaza. We put our trust in this Council’s role and in its
determination to prevent such nefarious circles from
harming the interests of our peoples.
The resolution to be adopted by the Security
Council on the cessation of aggression and war against
Gaza must reiterate the need for the political process to
continue under genuine and effective international
supervision in order to ensure that an independent
Palestinian State will be created within the 1967
borders and with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital; that
a just and agreed solution will be found to the issue of
Palestinian refugees in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 1948; and that all
detainees and prisoners will be released.
Like all the rest of the Palestinian people
everywhere, the people of Gaza are a people of peace.
They have fought for peace in the past and will
continue to fight for peace in the future. Let us give
them the peace that they deserve today and put an end
to the genocide and destruction. Let us not allow the
killing of one more Palestinian child. Let us not allow
one more Palestinian mother to cry for her children.

6

We must not allow it. We must put an end to the
massacre of my people. Let my people live and let my
people be free.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Ms. Shalev (Israel): I thank the SecretaryGeneral for honouring this meeting with his presence.
Eight years: For eight years the citizens of
southern Israel have suffered the trauma of almost
daily missile attacks from Gaza. For eight years more
than 8,000 rockets and mortar shells have targeted
Israeli towns and villages. For eight years the residents
of these towns have had a bare 15 seconds to hurry,
with their children and their elderly, to find cover
before rockets and missiles land on their houses and
schools. Fifteen seconds would not give the members
of this Council time to leave this room. No State would
permit such attacks on its citizens; nor should it. But
Israel sought every way to avoid the current conflict.
In 2005 Israel removed from Gaza every one of
its soldiers and every one of its 8,000 civilians, along
with their homes and schools, their synagogues and
cemeteries. We did this to try to create an opening for
peace, and for Palestinians to build a prosperous
society.
But the Hamas regime that brutally seized control
of Gaza, murdering scores of fellow Palestinians, has
no interest in peace and prosperity. It is vehemently
opposed to negotiations between Israelis and
Palestinians. It rejects the Annapolis process which
was commended by this Council last month in
resolution 1850 (2008). Hamas has no interest in
making peace with the enemy. For Hamas, peace is the
enemy. Its only interest is in establishing a regime of
tyranny for Gazans and of terror for Israelis.
Hamas likes to tell the Palestinians that it was
terrorism that brought Israel to withdraw from Gaza in
2005. But the truth is plain to see: it was the hope for
peace that led us to withdraw from Gaza, and the
terrorism of Hamas that compelled us to re-enter. In
our efforts to avoid confrontation, we also agreed six
months ago to an Egyptian-brokered tahadiya — a
situation of calm. Hamas violated this arrangement on
a daily basis. Over 365 rockets and mortar shells were
fired during this period. And all the while it used the
so-called calm to build up its supplies of weapons and

09-20097

S/PV.6061

rockets, smuggled through tunnels into the Gaza Strip.
Yet still we restrained ourselves.

around schools and United Nations facilities, with
tragic results.

But then, Hamas unilaterally announced the end
of the tahadiya and began to wage a new campaign of
rocket attacks against Israel’s citizens with the
weapons it had smuggled into Gaza during the calm.
Then, we could not restrain ourselves any longer. With
its new Iranian-made missiles, Hamas is now able to
reach as far as the cities of Ashdod and Beer Sheva,
placing over one million Israelis in the shadow of its
terror.

For Israel, every civilian death — Israeli or
Palestinian — is a tragedy. In responding to terrorist
attacks that show no respect for human life, either
Israeli or Palestinian, Israel takes steps to protect both.
It takes every possible measure to limit civilian
casualties, even where those measures endanger the
lives of our soldiers or the effectiveness of their
operations. The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) have
dropped tens of thousands of leaflets and made
thousands of phone calls to Palestinian civilians,
beseeching them to leave the areas of terrorist
operation to avoid harm. But let this be clear: failing to
respond to terrorists simply because they are using
civilians as cover is not and cannot be an option. To do
so would simply broadcast an invitation to every
terrorist group in the world to set up shop inside a
hospital or a kindergarten.

Many in this Chamber have condemned Hamas’s
terrorist attacks, and we welcome this statement of
basic principle. But the families at home in the city of
Sderot and the children at school in Kibbutz Netiv
Ha’asara will not be protected by these condemnations.
In the face of such terrorism we have no choice.
We have to defend ourselves, not from the Palestinian
people, but from the terrorists who have taken them
hostage; not to gain territory or power, but to
demonstrate that our restraint was not weakness and to
give our citizens the basic right of a normal life.
In this campaign, Israel has dealt the Hamas
infrastructure a major blow. Dozens of its terrorist
factories and training bases have been destroyed, its
stockpiles of rockets have been significantly depleted
and many of the tunnels used to smuggle weapons have
been put out of action. But we have not only sought to
change reality for our citizens; we have also sought to
uphold the values that set us apart from the terrorists.
Hamas rejects every core humanitarian principle.
Instead of waging its battle openly between
combatants, it directs its attacks against civilians.
Some have called these attacks “indiscriminate”, but
that is not the case. Hamas attacks are very
discriminate, directed deliberately at innocent men,
women and children. In the past week alone, Hamas
rockets have landed on a school and on a kindergarten.
Hamas shows a similar disdain for the lives of
Palestinians. It has adopted the terrorist tactic — the
coward’s tactic — of using civilians as shields while its
leaders themselves flee from combat with Israel’s
soldiers and make pathetic demonstrations of bravado
from their bunkers. It hides its missiles and terrorist
bases in homes, hospitals and mosques, and, as we saw
earlier today, deliberately launches attacks from in and

09-20097

Unlike the Hamas regime, which has targeted
crossing points to prevent the entry of aid and has
prevented Palestinians from boarding ambulances,
Israel respects its humanitarian responsibilities. It has
permitted Palestinians in need of medical aid to enter
Israel for treatment and has set up a special
humanitarian situation room to coordinate with the aid
organizations working in Gaza. Since the start of the
fighting, Israel has facilitated the entry into Gaza of
more than 540 trucks, delivering more than 10,000 tons
of humanitarian assistance. In fact, just a few days ago,
Israel was asked by the World Food Programme to halt
supplies of food shipments since the warehouses were
full.
It is time for the international community to place
responsibility for the humanitarian situation in Gaza
where it lies: on the shoulders of the terrorists who
have chosen violence over peace. It lies on the
shoulders of those Hamas leaders who, from their
bunkers and luxury hotels in Damascus, have
abandoned the people of Gaza and have chosen to
endanger and exploit them rather than protect them.
This conflict is a fundamental clash between two
world views, between moderates and extremists,
between those who seek to preserve life and humanity
and those who glorify death and destruction. As Hamas
spokesman Fathi Hamad was proud to announce on
Al-Aqsa Television,

7

S/PV.6061

“Palestinians have created a human shield of
women, children the elderly and the jihad
fighters, as if to say to the Zionist enemy, ‘We
desire death as you desire life’”.
For that reason, there is — and can be — no
equivalence between Israel and the Hamas terrorists we
are confronting. There is no equivalence between a
State that equips civilian homes with bomb shelters and
a terrorist regime that fills them with missiles. There is
no equivalence between military commanders who
struggle daily to ensure that their operations are
conducted in accordance with the requirements of
international humanitarian law and the terrorists who
flout that law by keeping Corporal Gilad Shalit captive,
without even allowing the International Committee of
the Red Cross access to see him — for 930 days. There
is no equivalence between a State using force in
exercise of its right to self-defence and a terrorist
organization for which the very resort to violence is
unlawful.
No doubt, there will be much discussion today
about the credibility of the Council and the need for a
resolution. But the credibility of this Council is
measured not by the pieces of paper it issues, but by
the values it upholds. Is the Council’s credibility
strengthened when it calls for a ceasefire that
effectively equates a terrorist group with a State
defending itself against it? Does anyone here truly
believe that Hamas will heed the words of this
Council?
This is not about a “ceasefire” with terrorism or a
mutual cessation of hostilities. It is about ensuring the
end of terrorism from Gaza and the end of smuggling
weapons into Gaza, so that there is no longer a need for
Israeli defensive operations.
This conflict will end not when terrorism is
appeased or accommodated, but when the international
community stands determined and united against it.
Anything less than that will only embolden Hamas,
lengthening this round of the conflict and accelerating
the next. Anything less will reward Iran, the coward’s
coward, which hides behind terrorists as they hide
behind civilians, and encourage its worldwide efforts
to use Hamas and other terrorist groups to fight its
wars on the cheap. And anything less will be a major
setback for hopes for peace and prosperity for the
Palestinians. As long as Hamas rules Gaza, rejecting

8

the Quartet principles and seeking Israel’s destruction,
Gaza can never be part of a Palestinian State.
There are many in this Council who speak in
favour of peace. But it is not enough to support peace;
we have to confront those who work to destroy it. For
that reason, the current military operation is not an
obstacle to peace; it is a prerequisite for peace.
We, the people of Israel, listened to the
international community when you told us to withdraw
from Gaza and promised that that would give us the
credibility to respond forcefully should Gaza turn into
a launching pad for terrorism. We listened when you
promised us that acting with restraint during the period
of calm would give us the credibility to fight back
should the rocket attacks resume. Now is the time for
you to make good on those promises. In the clash
between life and death, between building societies and
destroying them, Hamas has taken its side. Now there
is no choice but for the international community to take
a side itself.
The President (spoke in French): I now invite
His Excellency The Right Honourable David Miliband,
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, to take the floor.
Mr. Miliband (United Kingdom): There could
not be a greater contrast between the daily regime of
delicate diplomacy at the United Nations and the dayto-day reality of death and destruction in Gaza, but the
two are linked. The United Kingdom believes that the
crisis — and I use that word advisedly — in Gaza is an
indictment of the collective failure of all of us, over a
long period, to bring about the two-State solution,
which offers the only hope for security and justice for
Israelis and Palestinians alike.
The two speeches that we have just heard, from
President Abbas and Ambassador Shalev, define the
challenge for this Council. Both were moving, deeply
felt and passionate. I believe that, in this debate, we
cannot simply restate our national positions; we have a
wider responsibility to support all efforts to achieve an
immediate ceasefire and to chart a course back to the
common vision set out just three weeks ago in Security
Council resolution 1850 (2008).
As we meet, lives are at stake and new initiatives
are under way, notably from President Mubarak and
President Sarkozy, to engineer new action for a

09-20097

S/PV.6061

ceasefire that engages Israel and responds to its
security concerns. The United Kingdom supports those
initiatives. We in the Council now need to use our
discussions over the next 24 hours to be clear in our
principles and practical in our conclusions to reinforce
those efforts.
The truce of June to December 2008 was, in
truth, less than that. Rockets were fired into Israel,
Palestinians died in Israeli military action and the
people of Gaza suffered greater and greater
deprivation. However, the immediate trigger for Israeli
military action was the end of the truce. Hamas
rejected its extension and fired almost 300 rockets
between 19 December and 27 December 2008. Those
rockets are not just a danger and a provocation —
though they are that. They demonstrate a choice by
Hamas, not just to target the people of Israel, but also
to target the fragile negotiations for peace, sponsored
over the past year by the United States.
However, the immediate consequence of Israeli
military action over the past 10 days is also clear: 600
dead, many of them civilians and children — the horror
of war piled upon months of deprivation. The
confirmation just a few hours ago that 30 civilians
were killed today in a United Nations school in Gaza is
a devastating reminder of the urgency of our
responsibilities.
Earlier today, the Quartet envoy called the
situation in Gaza “hell”. The shortages of food, fuel
and medicine are, according to our reports, acute. The
scale of the suffering is immense. The need for
humanitarian supplies is urgent. In this context, it is
right to salute the leadership not just of the SecretaryGeneral, but also of the brave United Nations workers
trying to relieve suffering in Gaza.
The United Kingdom stands four square behind
the Security Council statement of 28 December calling
for an immediate halt to all violence. I reiterate today
the call of my Prime Minister for an immediate
ceasefire. But we are enjoined to come to the United
Nations not just to make declarations, but to seek
common ground and to find common purpose, so we
must focus on the substance and permanence of a
ceasefire, as well as on its timing.
Israel is right to say that the flow of illegal arms
into Gaza is a threat to its citizens and needs to be
curbed. We say that we need to support countries in the
region in developing the tools to tackle the trafficking

09-20097

of weapons from land and sea. This will be a complex
and difficult task, but it is essential.
Meanwhile, the Palestinian Authority is right to
say that it concluded an agreement in 2005 on the
opening of crossings for people, goods and aid into
Gaza. We say that we need to open those crossings and
re-establish the authority of the Palestinian Authority
over them. This will help the people of Gaza. It will
also undercut the smuggling trade.
The permanence of a ceasefire depends on
something else. President Abbas is a powerful and
consistent advocate for the interests of all Palestinians,
whether they live in Gaza or the West Bank. The unity
of Palestine is essential to any decent vision of the
future. It is also a precondition for a democratic
politics of consent in which there is one legitimate
authority and in which every Palestinian has a voice in
the only process that counts: the peace process.
The test for us over the next 24 hours is simple:
will we help to bring an end to the current conflict and
pave the way back to the vision the Council set out
three weeks ago? Our starting point must be the goals
of an immediate ceasefire, an end to arms trafficking
and an opening of the crossings. But we also have a
responsibility to keep alive the vision of a peaceful
Middle East in which Palestinians have the dignity of
statehood and Israelis have recognition and security
from their neighbours. That is the responsibility of the
Council, that is our task today and those are
responsibilities and tasks that the United Kingdom
wants to help resolve.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Ali Babacan, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Turkey.
Mr. Babacan (Turkey): This is the first official
Security Council meeting that Turkey is attending as a
non-permanent member. I would like to pay tribute to
the French presidency.
Let me also welcome President Mahmoud Abbas
and the Ministers of the Arab League delegation, who
are here to brief us about the current situation in Gaza.
We are confronted with a tragic situation. Today
is the eleventh day of the attacks against Gaza and the
fourth day after the launch of the ground assault. As
Israeli forces continue to operate in Gaza, the crisis
further deepens in scope and impact and civilians

9

S/PV.6061

continue to take the brunt of the misery. Every step in
escalation takes us further away from peace.
The situation in Gaza is indeed very grave. In this
regard, we deeply regret the loss of civilian life. It is
highly regrettable that civilians have become victims.
Just today for instance, a United Nations-run school in
a Palestinian refugee camp in Gaza was hit by Israeli
missiles, killing more than 40 people who were using
the school as a shelter. The people of Gaza are also
faced with a severe shortage of all basic needs,
including food and medical supplies. Infrastructure is
almost entirely damaged. Thousands of people have
lost their homes. In short, what we face in Gaza is a
human tragedy. Israel’s military operations against
Gaza constitute a disproportionate and excessive use of
force and must therefore be immediately stopped.
Such punitive measures, which harm the wellbeing of the entire population, can serve nothing but
fomenting further resentment. Let us not forget that the
Palestinians, who are being bombed and attacked
today, will be Israel’s neighbours forever. In the same
way, it is impossible to understand the closure of the
crossings to humanitarian assistance for weeks and
months, leaving the Gaza people in total isolation and
deprivation.
Given all these facts, we cannot allow the
situation to continue any longer. The international
community and the Security Council cannot stand idly
by while innocent civilians lose their lives. We must try
to put an immediate end to the ongoing tragedy in the
region. Otherwise, the responsibility of inaction and
indifference will be impossible to bear.
Moreover, the tragedy in Gaza could have very
negative implications on the whole region. Efforts
towards stability and a durable peace have already
taken a serious blow. Bearing in mind all of this, and
bearing in mind the dire consequences that we may
face, we urge all the sides to act with restraint and in a
responsible manner. No one has anything to gain from
this dangerous scenario.
It is within this approach that Turkey continues
its active diplomatic efforts, trying to contribute to a
course of action which will help bring peace, security
and stability to the region. To that end, our Prime
Minister has visited Egypt, Jordan, Syria and Saudi
Arabia to meet with his counterparts, including
President Mahmoud Abbas. We also hosted the
extraordinary ministerial meeting of the Executive

10

Committee of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference last Saturday. Based on those visits and our
extensive contact with all other interested parties, we
believe that at this stage the priority must be to ensure
an immediate halt to Israel’s military operations and a
full cessation of hostilities, to agree on a sustainable
ceasefire and to open the border crossings to Gaza so
as to end the blockades.
In parallel, we should also do all that we can to
address the pressing humanitarian and economic needs
of the people in Gaza. This is an equally urgent need,
as the people in Gaza are faced with grave shortages of
food, fuel and medical supplies. Turkey, for its part,
has already stepped up its efforts in that direction, but
more should be done. Israel must be cooperative in
allowing unhindered access for humanitarian assistance
and in reopening all border crossings.
In addition to those two most urgent steps, the
achievement of unity among the Palestinians is also of
paramount importance in this course of action. Without
such unity, it will be very difficult for the Palestinians
to achieve their goal of an independent, peaceful and
prosperous future.
Finally, Israelis and Palestinians should be
brought back to the negotiation table and encouraged
to work toward a comprehensive and lasting peace on
the basis of the principles set out by the Quartet and
the Annapolis Joint Understanding and the Arab Peace
Initiative. After all, only through a meaningful and
effective dialogue can we achieve our ultimate
objective of comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
These, we believe, are the elements of a course of
action that needs to be urgently put into effect for the
cessation of hostilities and return to normalcy. Within
this framework we can, and maybe should, also
consider deploying an international monitoring mission
to the region. In light of the publicly expressed views
of the parties to the conflict, it is our understanding
that the acceptability and viability of a ceasefire, as
well as a sustainable end to the blockade, depend on an
international commitment to guarantee it.
The international community must act, and must
do so quickly and with clear ends in mind. The risks of
inaction are enormous and are getting bigger every day.
Turkey, for its part, will continue its endeavours to help
restore calm in the region so as to open the way for
full-fledged efforts for a lasting and comprehensive
peace. We believe that the Security Council should also

09-20097

S/PV.6061

play its due role in this regard and live up to its
responsibilities under the United Nations Charter by
helping to bring this crisis to an end.
The President (spoke in French): I next invite
the Secretary of State of the United States of America,
Her Excellency Ms. Condoleezza Rice, to take the
floor.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I wish to
thank President Abbas for his presence here, and also
the Ministers from the Arab League States who have
joined us.
The United States is, of course, deeply concerned
about the situation in Gaza, which is clearly worsening.
We have been working around the clock to try to end
the violence there. The ongoing attacks against Israel
and the decision by Hamas not to respect the previous
period of calm show us that when this ends there must
be new arrangements in place, not a return to the status
quo ante. It is imperative that any ceasefire be durable
and sustainable and that it ensure the safety and
security of Israelis and Palestinians alike.
The situation before the current events in Gaza
was clearly not sustainable. Hundreds of thousands of
Israelis lived under the daily threat of rocket attacks.
Frankly, no country — none of our countries — would
have been willing to tolerate such a circumstance.
Moreover, the people of Gaza watched as insecurity
and lawlessness increased and as their living conditions
grew more dire because of the actions of Hamas, which
began with the illegal coup against the Palestinian
Authority in Gaza. A ceasefire that returns to those
circumstances is unacceptable, and it will not last.
We need urgently to conclude a ceasefire that can
endure and bring real security. That will begin a period
of true calm that includes an end to rocket, mortar and
other attacks on Israelis and allows for the cessation of
Israel’s military offensive. It must also include an end
to the smuggling into Gaza and a reopening of
crossings so that Palestinians can benefit from
humanitarian goods and basic supplies. The November
2005 Agreement on Movement and Access provides a
basis for reopening those crossings. We must find a
way, with the consent and full cooperation of likeminded Governments, to prevent any arms or
explosives from entering Gaza, and the reopening of
the tunnel systems that have allowed rearmament of
Hamas must be prevented.

09-20097

Our goal must be the stabilization and
normalization of life in Gaza. That will require a
principled resolution of the political challenges in Gaza
that
ultimately
re-establishes
the
Palestinian
Authority’s legitimate control and facilitates the
normal operation of all crossings. The November 26
Arab League statement will serve as an important
guide in these efforts, efforts that are led by Egypt.
The international community should adopt an
intensive reconstruction initiative, perhaps through a
donors conference, that would complement the efforts
of the Palestinian Authority in Gaza, because the
Palestinian Authority actually devotes 58 per cent of its
budget to Gaza. There should be an effort to
reconstruct Gaza.
As we strive for a ceasefire, the United States
remains deeply concerned about innocent Palestinians
and Israelis who are suffering. Let me assure the
Council that we understand the urgency of an end to
the fighting and that we are working around the clock
to bring it into being. In that regard, we are pleased by
and wish to commend the statement of the President of
Egypt, and we wish to follow up on that initiative.
But we also are very concerned about the
humanitarian situation in Gaza. From American
partners on the ground I have had detailed reports
about the difficult circumstances in Gaza. I have
discussed them in detail with Prime Minister Olmert
and Foreign Minister Livni. The Prime Minister has
informed me that as of tomorrow Israel will open a
humanitarian corridor so that there can be some relief
for the people of Gaza. That is something we will
follow up on, but we will also help you, Mr. SecretaryGeneral, to follow up on that through the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA), because
the problem, as I understand it, is that even if goods get
into Gaza it is not possible to distribute them there.
The United States will work actively to relieve that
circumstance. Moreover, the United States — which
has already provided $85 million for humanitarian
work in Gaza in the last year — will contribute more
emergency aid, if that is needed.
We very much need to find a solution to this
problem in the short term. But this time it really must
be a solution that does not allow Hamas to use Gaza as
a launching pad against Israeli cities. It has to be a
solution that does not allow the rearmament of Hamas,

11

S/PV.6061

and it must find the way to open crossings so that
Palestinians in Gaza can have a normal life.
Just three weeks ago we sat in this Chamber to
vote on resolution 1850 (2008). It described the
principles to chart a better future for Israelis and
Palestinians alike. Resolution 1850 (2008) noted that
lasting peace can only be based on an enduring
commitment to mutual recognition, freedom from
violence, incitement and terror, and the two-State
solution, building on previous agreements and
obligations.
I think the members of this Council know that
President Bush and I personally have been very
dedicated to that goal. We remain dedicated to that
goal, and the United States of America will remain
dedicated to that goal, because we know that the time
has long since come when Palestinians, who deserve to
live in their own State, should get that State, and when
Israelis, who will live in peace and security when they
have a peaceful neighbour, should have that peace and
security.
I do not mean in any way to diminish the dangers,
the urgency, the challenges of this moment in Gaza.
This is a crisis that we must resolve, and resolve
urgently. But we must also stay focused on creating the
conditions that will ultimately lead to a real peace
between Israelis and Palestinians.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
now to the Secretary of the General People’s
Committee for Foreign Liaison and International
Cooperation of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, His
Excellency Mr. Abdurrahman Mohamed Shalgham.
Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): On 27 December 2008, the Israelis
launched their destructive aggression, making use a
wide variety of the most lethal weapons against
defenceless people, having previously besieged and
starved them and having deprived them even of water,
medicine and other necessities — acts which met with
astonishing silence from the Security Council. The
Israelis claim to have carried out these actions in
response to the firing of rockets from the Gaza Strip,
which, according to them, was a violation of the truce
agreed upon in June 2008.
Here, we must stop for a moment and consider
the facts. Members know that the Gaza Strip has been
under siege since the middle of 2007. Under Egyptian

12

auspices, the Israelis and the Palestinians reached a
Gaza truce in June 2008. Both parties undertook to
cease all forms of violence, and, for its part, the Israeli
side committed itself to lifting the blockade, opening
the border crossings and returning to the situation that
had existed prior to June 2007. This agreed lull was
intended to put an end to aggression and fighting for a
period during which the two parties concerned would
observe the ceasefire as a stage on the way towards a
just and final settlement of the Palestinian issue.
But from the very first days of the ceasefire, the
Israelis, through their Prime Minister, have adopted a
highly negative position. They have preferred to
employ force, escalation and aggression at the expense
of lasting peace. Israel has essentially not been a party
to the ceasefire, which it unjustifiably violated more
than 195 times, martyring 25 individuals.
Israel has not lifted the siege or reopened the
crossings. On 4 November 2008 the Israeli army
carried out an incursion into the eastern Gaza Strip
with no provocation from the Palestinian side; during
that incursion six Palestinians were killed. That was a
serious violation of the truce. It is only normal that
there should be a response. The ceasefire must not be
respected by the Palestinians only.
Yet in spite of this, in all that time the
Palestinians did not fire a single shot, even though they
were entitled to do so because they are under
occupation and are entitled to respond to Israeli
aggression.
Since 5 November 2008, in full view of the entire
world, the Israelis have imposed a complete air, land
and sea blockade on Gaza. The United Nations
considers that to be a clear violation of international
law. The blockade even prevents humanitarian
assistance from reaching Gaza: trucks and assistance
provided by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) are unable to enter the Gaza Strip. This
means that the Agency has had to suspend its
distribution of basic goods to those in need. As
everybody knows, that means half of the population of
Gaza. The result is that they have starved those people.
On 18 December 2008 (see S/PV.6049), my
country described the various repercussions of the
blockade and the total paralysis of economic activity.
Bakeries have closed; 80 per cent of households are
living below the poverty line; there are grave water and

09-20097

S/PV.6061

sanitation problems — the people of Gaza have water
only once a week. Water treatment plants are no longer
in operation, which means that stagnant water now lies
in the streets of Gaza. There is virtually a complete
lack of medicine. The Council has heard from
numerous United Nations agencies that 150 essential
medicines are not to be found. Many people have died
for lack of medicine and because they are being
prevented from seeking treatment outside Gaza.
The electric power plant that provided more than
half of Gaza’s electricity is basically shut down. Banks
are no longer operating and are on the verge of
collapse. The World Bank has drawn attention to this
issue, because the Israelis have prevented Bank funds
from entering the Gaza Strip.
The multifaceted fallout from the blockade is
well known.
All of this has been done in the full view of the
Security Council and in spite of numerous appeals and
warnings from officials of United Nations agencies.
The Council has failed to take action.
The underlying causes and principal reasons for
this situation are the occupation, the denial to
Palestinians of their rights and the immoral and illegal
practices of the Israelis.
The Israeli authorities are occupation authorities;
they have clear obligations under international law, in
particular under the Fourth Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War.
Obligations under the Fourth Geneva Convention
include provision of security, food and medical
services and the facilitation of emergency services. But
the Israeli authorities have nonetheless violated all of
their obligations and have imposed collective
punishment. They have perpetrated extremely grave
crimes, as everyone knows. All of this has taken place
after the international community’s unanimous
declaration on genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes.
In spite of that, the Council has failed to take
action. The fact that the Council has taken no action
has encouraged the Israeli authorities in their actions
since 27 December 2008. Air raids, employing cuttingedge weaponry, have been stepped up. There we see
the origins of the crimes of genocide and crimes
against humanity.

09-20097

Through their Minister of Defence and other
officials, the Israeli authorities continue to state that
these crimes are only the beginning, and that Israel will
continue and expand its aggression. Israel will continue
the blockade, which is starving Palestinians. Israel has
rejected humanitarian appeals for a 24-hour lull to
make it possible to deliver humanitarian assistance.
Now there has been a very serious escalation: the
ground attack that began on Saturday, 3 January 2009.
The result, we fear, has been a major surge in deaths
and injuries. There has been destruction, even of
UNRWA schools — even though Karen AbuZayd,
Commissioner-General of UNRWA, has said that the
Palestinian resistance is not using the Agency’s
infrastructure, facilities or schools as human shields.
In spite of the Security Council’s urgent
consultations on 3 January 2009, no common position
has been adopted, not even a statement to the press.
The Israelis have once again demonstrated that
they are not interested in peace. What they are
interested in is new territory. They are perpetrating
terrorism against the Palestinians and are using every
means available to them. They are starving, arresting
and killing Palestinians on a mass scale. The aim of
what the Israelis are methodically doing is clear. The
means they use are also clear, What the Israelis
continue to do is to perpetrate the greatest violence in
the history of the Israeli occupation. That is Israel’s
response to resolution 1850 (2008) of 16 December
2008.
The vacillation of the Council and its hesitation
on taking a decision and adopting a resolution have
permitted the Israeli war machine to continue to
perpetrate the worst of horrors against a defenceless
people and to ignore international law. The Council is
now repeating what it did in 2006, when it gave Israel
the leeway to keep killing Lebanese civilians and to
destroy Lebanon’s basic infrastructure in order to
achieve the aims of certain parties.
The fact is that the massacre perpetrated by Israel
in Gaza continues and has claimed the lives of some
600 Palestinians, more than a fourth of them babies,
women and children and 80 per cent of them civilians.
In addition, 2,800 have been wounded, 20 per cent of
whom are in critical condition; mosques, homes,
schools and official buildings have been destroyed. The
deterioration in the humanitarian situation that we are
seeing today is astonishing. A school was targeted

13

S/PV.6061

today and dozens were killed; the school was not a
bunker. The Council should ensure that the criminals
responsible do not escape punishment.
My delegation has submitted a draft resolution to
the Council. We have made several changes to take the
concerns of various members into account. We hope
that the Council will adopt the draft resolution. Every
minute that passes means more suffering, destruction,
killing, hatred and desire for vengeance. Any delay
would send the wrong message to the aggressor, who
would continue with its aggression and crimes.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
His Excellency Mr. Michael Spindelegger, Federal
Minister for European and International Affairs of
Austria.
Mr. Spindelegger (Austria): As this is the first
time that Austria is taking part in a formal meeting of
the Council as one of the new non-permanent
members, let me begin by saying that it is an honour
for my country to serve the interests of peace and
international security in this capacity. During the two
years to come, Austria will strive to exercise this
important responsibility in the interest of the entire
membership of the United Nations.
I should like to thank Foreign Minister Kouchner
for taking this very timely initiative. You, Sir, can
count on Austria’s full support and active cooperation
in all your efforts to end the bloodshed in Gaza and
southern Israel.
We greatly appreciate the presence of the
Secretary-General. Austria has taken good note of his
appeal to the Security Council and of his intention to
travel to the region soon. He has our full support.
The importance of today’s meeting is also
highlighted by the presence of so many foreign
ministers around the table and in the Chamber. More
specifically, I wish to acknowledge the presence of
President Mahmoud Abbas, who has just had to leave. I
listened very carefully to his statement, as well as to
that of the Ambassador of Israel.
For many years, Austria has maintained close and
friendly relations with all the countries of the Middle
East. We are therefore extremely concerned about the
serious further deterioration of the situation in and
around Gaza.

14

Austria deeply regrets that calls by the Security
Council, the Middle East Quartet, the European Union
and others for an end to the violence have gone
unheeded. We also regret that the Security Council was
unable to formally agree on a call for an immediate,
permanent and fully respected ceasefire during its
emergency meeting on Saturday.
In the meantime, the European Union and France,
as well as other members of the Council, have
reinforced their efforts to help resolve the crisis.
Nonetheless, hostilities have so far continued unabated,
with an ever-increasing number of civilian victims.
Austria has repeatedly condemned the rocket
attacks by Hamas from Gaza on Israel. We respect the
right of Israel to safeguard the security of its citizens,
but we also believe that the military operations under
way are clearly disproportionate and continue to inflict
an unacceptable toll on Palestinian civilians. We
therefore call on both sides to adhere to an immediate
and permanent ceasefire, which needs to be effectively
monitored. There must be an unconditional halt to
rocket attacks by Hamas on Israel and an end to Israeli
military action.
Austria remains greatly concerned about the ever
more desperate humanitarian situation in the Gaza
Strip and its effects on the civilian population. We
therefore call on all parties to take all necessary
measures to alleviate the serious humanitarian situation
on the ground and to ensure the continuous provision
of humanitarian supplies to Gaza, including through a
lasting and normal opening of all border crossings. An
effective end to the smuggling of arms and ammunition
into the Gaza Strip is an indispensable prerequisite in
that regard. Moreover, we also call upon all parties to
strictly observe the rules of humanitarian and human
rights law.
If violence is not brought to an end, a resumption
of the diplomatic process towards a political solution
will become more and more difficult. The hostilities
have gravely disrupted the various channels of
communication that had been successfully established
during recent months. Continuing violence will have a
lasting negative effect, not only on the follow-up to
Annapolis but also on other developments towards
comprehensive regional peace, in particular along the
Israeli-Syrian track. Against that backdrop, Austria
welcomes the most recent diplomatic initiative in the
region, in particular the important statement made

09-20097

S/PV.6061

today by President Mubarak
undertaken by President Sarkozy.

and

the

contacts

The Security Council must remain actively
engaged in encouraging and supporting all efforts to
end the conflict and to bring about what peoples in the
region have been yearning for during decades — the
creation of a viable, independent, democratic and
sovereign Palestinian State living in peace and security
with Israel within recognized international borders.
We continue to believe that the objective of the
Security Council must be the rapid resolution of the
current crisis based on the following elements: a call
for an immediate, permanent and fully respected
ceasefire; free access for humanitarian supplies into
Gaza, including through the lasting and normal
opening of all border crossings; an effective end to the
smuggling of arms and ammunition into the Gaza
Strip; a call on all parties to fully respect their
obligations under humanitarian and human rights law;
full support for the regional and diplomatic efforts
under way to solve the crisis; and a call on Israelis and
Palestinians to continue negotiations for a
comprehensive solution as envisaged in resolution
1850 (2008).
I am convinced that that is an outcome that would
be in the interest of all parties. Austria will do
everything to help you, Mr. President, to move this
matter forward along those lines as rapidly as possible.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important and timely
meeting of the Security Council and for personally
presiding over it. I also wish to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his statement, as well as
President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian National
Authority and the foreign ministers of Arab countries
for their participation. I also thank Ambassador Shalev
of Israel for her participation.
My delegation has followed with profound
concern the sharply escalating situation in the Gaza
Strip over the past few days, which has been taking a
lamentable toll in innocent lives and causing
widespread destruction to infrastructure and the private
property of innocent Palestinians since Israel launched
its military operations into Gaza.
We are gravely concerned about the worsening
humanitarian crisis faced by Palestinians in Gaza as a
result of the ongoing military actions, the continued

09-20097

closure of border crossings, the obstruction of access to
humanitarian aid, including food and medicine, and the
reduction in fuel and electricity supplies.
Every passing day is another day we see the lives
of more innocent Palestinian civilians, many of them
women and children, lost or harmed and those of
innocent Israelis threatened. We are strongly convinced
that all indiscriminate attacks against civilians are
unjustifiable under any pretext and that there cannot be
a military solution to the current conflict.
My delegation calls upon the parties concerned to
exercise the maximum restraint, cease all military
activities and acts of violence and return to the
negotiating table to resolve outstanding issues by
peaceful means. We urge Israel to stop the excessive
and disproportionate use of force and its military
operations and immediately withdraw its forces from
Gaza.
While recalling both parties’ mutual obligations
to comply with international humanitarian and human
rights laws, including the provisions of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, we
underline the urgent need to cease all restrictive
measures and open border crossings in order to
facilitate the delivery of food, medical aid, fuel and
other humanitarian supplies to the suffering people in
Gaza, the evacuation of the injured and the unhindered
access of humanitarian workers.
We pay tribute to the United Nations agencies, in
particular the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), and
other humanitarian organizations for their work under
challenging circumstances on the ground.
We call upon the international community to
extend further emergency and humanitarian assistance
to the civilian population in Gaza.
At this critical juncture, when every opportunity
to make peace and bring an immediate end to the
current crisis should be treasured, my delegation fully
supports the intensified and coordinated efforts of the
international community to establish an immediate,
permanent, effective and monitored ceasefire between
the parties concerned and thus ensure long-term peace,
security and stability in the region.
The Security Council, which is mandated to
maintain international peace and security, can and

15

S/PV.6061

should play its due role in finding a durable solution to
this crisis by adopting a resolution that will stop the
continued loss of civilian lives, prevent the recurrence
or further escalation on the situation and put the peace
process back on track. Along these lines, my delegation
is prepared to work constructively with other Council
members on the draft resolution proposed by Libya on
behalf of the League of Arab States with a view to
achieving consensus and its early adoption.
Finally, my delegation would like to reaffirm Viet
Nam’s steadfast support for the peaceful settlement of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the realization of
two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
peace, within secure and recognized borders, on the
basis of the road map, the Arab Peace Initiative, the
Annapolis understanding and relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008).
Mr. Kafando (spoke in French): We thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this meeting of the
Security Council on the situation in the Middle East, in
particular the serious crisis currently taking place in
Gaza. We have greatly appreciated the presence here of
the President of the Palestinian Authority in this
debate. We also welcome the presence of the SecretaryGeneral and of all the ministers and representatives
here today.
The
unprecedented
mobilization
of
the
international community that we are witnessing
unquestionably demonstrates the clear awareness that
we all have of the seriousness of the situation and of
the urgent need to find an appropriate and timely
response to it. We are deeply concerned by the ongoing
hostilities between Israel and Hamas, which have
worsened since Israel launched military ground
operations in Gaza on 3 January.
Whatever can be said in terms of the
responsibilities of the various parties, we must
acknowledge that recourse to force, whoever
undertakes it and in whatever way it is used, cannot be
the appropriate solution to any conflict, much less the
current crisis. Quite the contrary, it has no other effect
than to further worsen tensions. We are particularly
distressed by the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Gaza, which was already of great concern.
As hostages to the situation, the civilian population is
paying a very heavy toll for those confrontations.

16

This is why my delegation calls for an immediate
ceasefire, with a reliable monitoring mechanism, the
opening of crossings to allow for humanitarian access,
the rejection of the military option and the re-launching
of a political process that is credible and carried out in
good faith.
The urgency of the situation requires effective
and rapid action by the Security Council. Everyone has
acknowledged this. The Council owes as much to the
Palestinian people, in particular the people in Gaza,
who are under embargo and whose untold suffering
challenges our conscience as human beings. It owes it
to the Israeli people who have been victims of Hamas
rocket attacks. It owes it to stability in the region and
to international peace and security.
We would like to commend the many and varied
initiatives under way to bring about a settlement to the
crisis. No effort or expression of goodwill is or will be
superfluous in terms of contributing to putting an end
to the tragedy unfolding before us.
The results that we hope to achieve in the short
term must be followed up and sustained by a firm
commitment by all parties to undertake a search for the
ways and means to bring about a lasting solution. To
that end, we need to take into account the important
gains already achieved on the path to peace, in
particular the Arab Peace Initiative, the Quartet road
map and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
But it is, above all, up to the parties themselves to
demonstrate greater political will, which requires that
they fully comply with their commitments. The parties
need to establish the minimum conditions for trust that
will be necessary for building a solid and lasting basis
for peace. In particular, we urge Israel to put an end to
the settlements and the blockade of Gaza. At the same
time, we call upon Hamas to end the rocket and mortar
attacks against Israeli territories.
Clearly, the settlement of the crisis in the Middle
East, including the current crisis, is a collective and
shared responsibility. The direct actors in the
international community need to play their respective
parts. We reiterate our full support for all negotiating
efforts under way currently, particularly the most
recent efforts undertaken by President Mubarak and
President Sarkozy to bring about a rapid ceasefire and
the restoration of calm.

09-20097

S/PV.6061

For its part, the Security Council needs to take
action, and take it quickly, not only to help to put an
end to the human and humanitarian tragedy under way,
but also to avoid others in the future. We are prepared,
along with all the other members of the Council, to
provide our modest contribution to this.

the Council expressed the need to reopen the way to
finding a political solution to the Middle East issue.
We hoped that those statements of the Council would
prevent the serious situation that we are experiencing
and regretting today. Unfortunately, the situation has
shown that we were wrong and that it was not enough.

Mr. Ballestero (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation is pleased to see you here in New York,
Mr. President, to preside over this meeting. We also
welcome the presence of President Abbas, the
Secretary-General, Secretary of State Rice, the various
ministers and deputy ministers for foreign affairs and
the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States.

Today’s meeting should not be a mere declaration
of good intentions. Little more than three weeks ago,
Minister Miliband said here that “the perils of inertia
are clear; inactivity and confrontation are the recruiting
sergeants for extremism” (ibid., p. 6). The political
process and the situation on the ground are inseparable,
and it is therefore necessary for this Council to demand
an immediate end to all military action, using all the
instruments and powers stipulated in the Charter of the
United Nations.

My country has been a member of the Security
Council for the past 12 months. Throughout that
period, we have tried to give meaning to our presence
here by promoting the observance of international law
in the Middle East, the fulfilment of the commitments
of the parties and the implementation of the resolutions
of the Security Council. During the entire time, we
have also called for the Council to take significant
steps to alleviate tensions and strengthen the peace
process. We have called for the Council to play a
significant role in what we feel to be one of the most
serious threats to international peace and security.
We have not been as successful in that goal as we
had hoped. In recent weeks, the members of this
Council unanimously agreed on what became
resolution 1850 (2008), the first resolution on this topic
since 2004, which broke the silence of this Council.
That resolution, as Secretary of State Rice said at the
time, aimed to describe “the contours of the
negotiations” and to define “the role of the
international community, which will prevent a return to
violence and hopelessness”. I repeat: “which will
prevent a return to violence and hopelessness”
(S/PV.6045, p. 3). For Russian Minister Lavrov, the
resolution’s aim was “to strengthen the continuity and
irreversibility of the political process … and give that
approach the strength of international law” (ibid., p. 5).
Today, the situation on the ground demonstrates that
resolution 1850 (2008) was not enough to achieve
those lofty aims.
Subsequently, the beginning of the Israeli military
offensive generated a press statement that expressed
shared concern at the escalating violence, terrorist acts,
the fate of the civilian population and the terrifying
humanitarian situation in Gaza. In it, the members of

09-20097

In this Chamber, there are voices defending the
errors of all the parties. For that reason, as we already
said some months ago, this Council can be part of the
problem and not part of the solution to the crisis in
Middle East. It is important to shake off our inertia by
moving away from the eye-for-an-eye approach, which
only leads to the blindness of all, and by adopting a
courageous position that can create an environment
conducive to negotiations.
Costa Rica echoed the words of the French
delegation when, in this very Chamber on 16 December,
Ambassador Ripert stated “the absolute need for
respect for humanitarian law” which “unreservedly
prohibits terrorist acts that blindly strike civilian
populations” and “also prohibits any form of collective
punishment” (ibid., p. 9). His delegation called upon
the members of the Council not to forget that those
rules must provide guidance in addressing the situation
in Gaza. Costa Rica supports his words.
Costa Rica is ready to contribute to the adoption
of a draft resolution that urgently calls for an
immediate
cessation
of
the
hostilities,
the
establishment of an effective and lasting truce and the
opening of all border crossings with controls and
guarantees accepted and respected by all, so as to allow
a return to the path of negotiations that will ultimately
lead to the establishment of a viable and democratic
Palestinian State, living side by side with Israel and
jointly promoting the well-being and development that
their peoples deserve and desire.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
representative of Croatia.

17

S/PV.6061

Mr. Jurica (Croatia): I, too, would like to thank
you, Sir, for convening and presiding over this very
important meeting of the Security Council. I would like to
begin by welcoming Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
the President of the Palestinian National Authority His
Excellency Mahmoud Abbas, Secretary-General of the
Arab League Amre Moussa, and all the ministers
present here today.
Croatia shares the sense of extreme urgency that
has brought us together. I would like to convey my
Government’s deepest concerns at the suffering of
civilians in and around Gaza and to reiterate the need
to end all violence. We continue to appeal to the parties
to exercise maximum restraint, to adhere to the tenets
of international humanitarian law and to avoid civilian
casualties. We reiterate the call for unhindered access
to humanitarian assistance and supplies.
We understand that, in order to avoid an
escalation of violence and the further deterioration of
the humanitarian and security conditions on the
ground, it is essential to achieve an immediate and
permanent ceasefire that will be respected by all, put a
stop to the persistent rocket attacks targeting southern
Israel and end the suffering and deprivation in Gaza.
We are deeply disturbed by the latest reports of
military movements into Gaza. We also understand that
the Israeli military operations are not aimed at the
Palestinian population, but should be seen in the
context of the continuing threat coming from Hamas,
which denies Israel’s right to exist and has intensified
the scope and frequency of its attacks on the population
of southern Israel. Israel has an inherent and legitimate
right to defend itself and the obligation to defend and
protect its citizens. However, it is vital that civilians in
Gaza be protected.
Our previous discussions have demonstrated that
we all share the conviction that an effective, permanent
and credible ceasefire is needed if we want to secure
permanent peace and lasting improvement in the
humanitarian, social and economic conditions in Gaza.
We appreciate the new initiative presented to us today,
which aims to secure the adoption of a Security
Council resolution on that matter. It is a timely call,
and my delegation is ready to work with others in
bringing that forward.
In the interests of a durable and credible
ceasefire, it is important that such steps not amount to
returning to the status quo. Only if the conditions on

18

the ground are such that they can guarantee a ceasefire
that will be fully respected by both sides, that Israel
can be assured that its population will not be exposed
to the continuing terror of rocket attacks and that the
smuggling of weapons by Hamas will not be tolerated
can we hope to reach a sustainable solution to the
crisis.
In the interests of a lasting state of calm, it is
imperative that there be confidence in the mechanisms
on the ground. While reiterating the call on all parties
to adhere to an immediate and comprehensive
ceasefire, we should not forget that the political
dialogue and diplomatic efforts mean that Hamas must
recognize Israel and its right to exist, abide by the
commitments of the Palestine Liberation Organization
and, in particular, cease the terror of daily rocket
attacks that threaten the population of southern Israel.
Croatia continues to believe that a political
dialogue is the only way to achieve a lasting peace
based on the two-State solution. Resolution 1850
(2008), which was adopted only three weeks ago,
charts the way forward. We find it essential that the
Council remain guided by the objectives reaffirmed by
resolution 1850 (2008) in our efforts to find a solution
to this unfolding crisis.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to thank the
French presidency for organizing today’s extremely
important meeting on the serious situation in and
around Gaza. Since this is my first formal statement to
the Council during the new term, I pledge on this
occasion Japan’s commitment to promoting global
peace and security through the efficient and effective
work of the Council.
Japan is deeply grateful to the Secretary-General
for his statement today, which is extremely useful in
addressing the serious security and humanitarian
situation on the ground and for guiding our course of
action. The participation of President Abbas, SecretaryGeneral Amre Moussa of the League of Arab States
and so many ministerial representatives in today’s
meeting clearly demonstrates the gravity and urgency
of the issue at hand.
Japan is deeply concerned about the deteriorating
situation in and around the Gaza Strip. We are
particularly concerned that Israeli ground troops

09-20097

S/PV.6061

operations are continuing in the Gaza Strip, despite
urgent calls from the international community for a
ceasefire. It is regrettable that there are so many
Palestinian civilian casualties every day. At the same
time, Japan deplores the rocket attacks against Israel
from the Gaza Strip that preceded current events and
are still continuing, causing serious harm to civilian
life in southern Israel.
We must make every effort urgently to achieve an
effective ceasefire to give assurance of calm in the
area. A ceasefire can be effective only when it is
immediate, permanent and fully respected. The cycle of
violence must come to an end and further increases in
civilian casualties must be prevented. To that end,
Japan calls on Israel to exercise the utmost selfrestraint. Foreign Minister Nakasone has spoken with
Foreign Minister Livni, and Prime Minister Aso spoke
with Prime Minister Olmert, calling for an immediate
ceasefire. At the same time, Japan strongly calls on
Palestinian militants and Hamas to stop attacks from
the Gaza Strip against Israel.
Japan appreciates and strongly supports the
regional and international intermediary efforts by
concerned countries to achieve the immediate cessation
of violence — most notably, the efforts on the part of
President Mubarak of Egypt, the Prime Minister of
Turkey, President Sarkozy of France and other political
leaders, including those of the European Union, the
United States and Russia. We also appreciate the
efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy
and representatives. We very much hope that these
efforts will bear fruit very soon.
We also need to address urgently the dire
humanitarian situation. Japan sympathizes deeply with
the innocent civilians who are suffering in Gaza. Prime
Minister Aso requested Prime Minister Olmert to take
necessary measures to allow humanitarian supplies into
Gaza. On 3 January, Prime Minister Aso called
President Abbas to express his full support for the
President and to convey Japan’s condolences to the
Palestinian victims. We support Palestinian unity under
the leadership of President Abbas.
The people in Gaza require immediate
humanitarian assistance, and Japan will provide $10
million in aid, of which $3 million will be provided
immediately through the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
All necessary humanitarian and economic aid should

09-20097

be allowed to go unhindered through the crossings. The
crossings into Gaza need to be reopened, under
legitimate control, in order to allow necessary supplies
to reach the population in need and to provide medical
treatment for the injured. In opening the crossings, we
are concerned about the smuggling of arms into Gaza,
which undermines the safety of crossings as well as the
security of both Palestinian and Israeli civilians.
Effective measures need to be taken to prevent such
illegal smuggling of weapons.
Japan believes that it is important for the Security
Council to address these serious issues and forge a
unified voice urgently. Japan is committed to playing a
constructive role in resolving the situation speedily.
Peace and stability will be attained not through
violence, but through political and diplomatic means.
We fully support the principles laid out in Security
Council resolution 1850 (2008). A lasting peace will
only be achieved through an enduring commitment to
mutual recognition, freedom from violence, incitement
and terror, and the two-State solution, building upon
previous agreements and obligations. We must
continue to encourage the moderate forces that seek
peace.
Japan, along with others in the international
community, stands ready to support the parties in their
efforts to achieve peace. We sincerely hope that the
political process will soon again be on track to realize
a comprehensive, just and lasting peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Upon
assuming its responsibilities as a member of the
Security Council, Mexico would like to express its
profound concern at the violence unleashed in recent
days in the Gaza Strip, which has resulted in numerous
victims among the Palestinian civilian population.
Mexico condemns the excessive use of force,
represented by the bombardment and subsequent land
operations carried out by the Israeli army in Gaza,
which has now been going on for 11 days. We also
condemn the launching of rockets into Israeli territory
from the Gaza Strip, which has also claimed victims
among the civilian population. It is necessary to break
the vicious cycle of violence that, far from improving
security in the region and solving the root causes of the

19

S/PV.6061

conflict, will only contribute to a situation of increased
uncertainty and fear.
Echoing the press statement issued by the
Security Council on 28 December 2008, Mexico calls
for the cessation of hostilities and of all military
activity in order to address the humanitarian crisis on
the ground, including by opening border crossings to
ensure the provision of humanitarian supplies — food,
fuel and medicines — as well as to generate the
minimal necessary conditions to boost peace talks in
the region.
Of particular interest to Mexico is that the parties
should recognize that it is imperative to respect the
provisions of international humanitarian law, especially
those contained in the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War.
Mexico therefore urgently calls for the granting of
access to international organizations and humanitarian
aid in order to avoid further loss of human life and to
guarantee the security of the civilian population, as
various agencies of the United Nations have already
demanded.
Peace in the Middle East, including the resolution
of the Palestinian question, depends on the
implementation of relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), which would lay
the foundations for a peaceful and definitive solution to
the conflict. The search for a comprehensive and longterm solution to the Middle East conflict is not
conducted through the use of arms. Rather, that
solution is linked to a political approach based on
constructive dialogue, in accordance with international
law and the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.
Resolution 1850 (2008), which the Security
Council adopted on 16 December, clearly establishes
that a lasting peace can only be based on an enduring
commitment to mutual recognition, freedom from
violence, incitement and terror, as well as on bilateral
negotiations, building on previous agreements and
obligations.
From the 1991 Madrid Conference and the Oslo
process to the most recent efforts made through the
2002 Arab Peace Initiative and the Annapolis
Conference, the imperative need to build a region in
which two democratic States, Israel and Palestine, can
live side by side in peace and within secure and

20

recognized borders has become increasingly obvious.
Mexico supports the efforts of the Secretary-General
and the Quartet to seek an immediate cessation of
military activities and to address the humanitarian
crisis, as well as the essential efforts of all those
neighbouring States that are genuinely interested in
contributing to a lasting and mutually acceptable
solution.
All States have the right to protect their security
and, even more, the obligation to guarantee it for the
benefit of their citizens. In their actions, however, they
must comply with international humanitarian law,
without which civilized coexistence is impossible.
Likewise, all terrorist activities, which run counter to
the achievement of a political solution that guarantees
respect for the right of peoples to a stable and lasting
peace, must be stopped. In that context, it is essential
to put an end to illegal trafficking in weapons and
military equipment, and to all activities that promote
terrorism.
The Security Council must contribute decisively
to finding a solution to the conflict, support the peace
process and build confidence in the quest for a political
solution. The credibility and effectiveness of the
Security Council in shouldering its responsibility to
promote international peace and security depend on
that. The Council must constructively propose
guidelines that will help to create a more favourable
atmosphere for negotiations and a just and lasting
peace process, not just react to immediate events.
Finally, Mexico believes that, given the continued
deterioration of the situation on the ground, including
the Israeli bombing of a United Nations school today,
the efforts of the international community — including
the initiative announced today by President Mubarak of
Egypt — must come together in an operational
resolution aimed at finding a solution to the conflict in
all its aspects. That will require that the Security
Council define and establish a monitoring mechanism
that guarantees observance of the ceasefire by the
parties, as well as other commitments to be undertaken
in various areas referred to during this debate, in order
to create an environment conducive to achieving a
lasting peace in the region. Mexico is willing to
support a Security Council resolution containing those
elements.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of Uganda.

09-20097

S/PV.6061

Mr. Butagira (Uganda): Uganda is pleased to see
you, Mr. Minister, chairing this important meeting. I
wish to thank you for organizing this meeting, given
the situation in the Middle East.

to the situation that prevailed earlier. In other words,
the ceasefire must not be abused by those who might
wish to cause violence. Thus, it must be sustainable
and durable and must be monitored effectively.

At the outset, I wish to acknowledge the presence
in our midst today of His Excellency President
Mahmoud Abbas and the Foreign Ministers of various
countries. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his statement.

Secondly, there is an urgent need for access to
Gaza for humanitarian assistance. The ceasefire will
facilitate that, but the border crossings should also be
opened in order to improve the humanitarian situation.

Uganda has followed with deep concern the
escalation of violence in the region. This has had a
disastrous impact on the civilian population, with many
lives lost and livelihoods disrupted. The humanitarian
tragedy is shameful and must be put to an end. The
violence further complicates efforts to reach a
negotiated and peaceful solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, even more so after the Council, a
few weeks ago, unanimously adopted resolution 1850
(2008).
Much as we are appalled by the ongoing violence
and counter-violence, I do not think that we will do
justice if we do not also address what was the
immediate cause of this escalation. So, we must not
keep silent on the issue of rockets being fired at Israel,
injuring civilians. At the same time, we must not turn a
blind eye to what Israel’s response has been in relation
to the unfolding tragedy. In other words, we should be
balanced and look at the picture in toto.
That said, the escalation is a reminder that the
international community, and the Council in particular,
should remain firmly engaged, working with the parties
to achieve a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
That will be achieved only through negotiations
between the parties with the support of the
international community. It is for that reason that
Uganda welcomes this meeting, as it serves as a
reminder to the Palestinians, the Israelis and the
international community of our obligation to support
peace. To that end, we call for and support intraPalestinian reconciliation, national dialogue and unity.
Given the current escalation, the first priority is
an immediate end to the violence. My delegation has
called for an immediate and permanent ceasefire whose
implementation must be monitored to ensure full
compliance. Uganda would like to express its support
for those who have called for a ceasefire that is durable
and sustainable. The Council would be engaged in a
futile exercise if we called for a ceasefire only to return

09-20097

Uganda will continue to support all efforts aimed
at reducing tension and achieving a comprehensive
peace in the Middle East, consistent with the relevant
United Nations resolutions. We commend all those
countries and organizations, particularly the Arab
League, that have worked tirelessly in recent days in
pursuit of that goal.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of China.
Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I wish to thank His Excellency SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his briefing. We welcome the
presence at today’s meeting of His Excellency
Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, President of the Palestinian
National Authority; Mr. Amre Moussa, Secretary
General of the League of Arab States; and the Foreign
Ministers of a number of Arab countries.
China is greatly concerned at the heavy casualties
and the loss of property caused by the most recent
outbreak of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and is
deeply worried about the ongoing humanitarian crisis
in Gaza. The top priority now is for the parties
concerned to achieve an immediate ceasefire to avoid
further civilian casualties. We urge Israel to halt its
military operation immediately and open all the border
crossings in Gaza to ensure unfettered access of
humanitarian supplies to the area. The armed
Palestinian faction also needs to stop its rocket firings.
We urge the international community to provide further
assistance to ease the humanitarian crisis in Gaza.
The Security Council, which shoulders the
primary responsibility for maintaining world peace and
security, has every reason to play an active role.
Regrettably, however, the three emergency meetings
held by the Council since the outbreak of the conflict
have achieved no result. We hope the Council will
respond to the will of the international community and
the appeal of Arab States and take swift actions to
adopt a resolution so as to send a positive and clear

21

S/PV.6061

signal to the parties concerned and push for an
immediate ceasefire.
China always opposes the use of force in settling
disputes and condemns all violent activities against
civilians. What has happened over the past 60 years
shows that military means are not a way out of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The cycle of violence does
no good to either side and cannot bring about security
for any party. We hope that the parties concerned will
exercise maximum restraint, exhibit courage and
wisdom and continue to resolve their differences
through dialogue.
We call on the international community to make
vigorous efforts for the peace process, push for a just
and equitable settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian issue
and work towards real and enduring peace in the area.
The President (spoke in French): I now invite
the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation, His Excellency Mr. Alexander Yakovenko.
Mr. Yakovenko (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I am pleased to greet you, Mr. Minister, in
the President’s chair. We have listened to your
statement with great interest, and also to the
assessments put forward by the Secretary-General, by
President Abbas and by the various ministers.
The Russian Federation is deeply concerned by
the serious escalation of the crisis in Gaza since the
beginning of the Israeli ground operation. These
current tragic developments are fraught with potential
for further destabilization of the situation in the
Palestinian territories and in the Middle East in
general. The information coming in through the United
Nations channels attests to the many civilian victims.
The situation in Gaza has become a humanitarian
disaster.
Humanitarian deliveries and evacuations of the
wounded in Gaza must be allowed to ease the situation
in that sector. The civilian population’s safety cannot
be ensured while there are widespread military
operations under way in Gaza. If this is not ended in
the near term, then the number of victims will be much
greater. In this alarming situation, Russia sent
humanitarian assistance on 2 January through Egypt to
the population of Gaza. We are preparing a second
delivery. An air-mobile hospital from the Russian
Ministry of Emergency Situations will also be
deployed in the conflict zone.

22

Today, the views put forward repeatedly by the
Council and the international community are more
relevant than ever in determining an end to the
situation. There needs to be a guarantee here that there
will be no resumption of violence. We are certain that
tanks and aircraft, just like rocket attacks, will not
resolve any of the challenges facing the region. The
advancement of a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the region is possible only via a peace
dialogue and implementation by the parties of all
relevant international obligations.
It is particularly concerning that the dramatic
situation in the Gaza area began when there were
increased international efforts for an Arab-Israeli
settlement. Essentially, preparations were under way
for convening the Moscow meeting. It is necessary to
ensure that these efforts will be successful. But for that
to happen, we need above all to address the Gaza crisis
through political means. In this regard, we have been
interested in the peace initiative advanced by President
Mubarak of Egypt and President Sarkozy of France.
The steps needed for a peaceful settlement to the crisis
in Gaza are being pursued actively by the Russian
leadership, which has been in intensive contact with all
Middle East and international parties without
exception. The end to this crisis is dependent upon
them.
The President (spoke in French): I now invite
His Royal Highness Prince Saud Al-Faisal, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Saudi Arabia, to take the floor.
Prince Al-Faisal (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
We meet today as the Palestinian people in the Gaza
Strip continue to suffer hugely from a savage
aggression that is unrelenting and unforgiving at the
hand of the Israeli war machine. It has led to the deaths
of hundreds and wounded thousands, including
children, women and the elderly. It has caused terrific
destruction to property and infrastructure.
It is a wide human catastrophe that has beset
Gaza: overall death and destruction. Israel has turned
its munitions falling from the sky into an unbearable
hell on the ground, using every conceivable weapon of
destruction invented by the human mind to scourge by
fire an unarmed people besieged from the air, the land
and the sea. The destruction and killing during the
aerial bombardment seem insufficient to slake the
Israelis’ thirst or indeed to convince the Security
Council to move swiftly and immediately to prevent

09-20097

S/PV.6061

the further escalation
circumstances.

expected

in

such

grave

The call for the convening of this meeting
proceeds from our appreciation of what is expected
from the Security Council in such circumstances, as
provided by the Charter of the United Nations. The
Security Council is the body entrusted with the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Although the provisions of the Charter state that when
a certain conflict leads to fighting as soon as possible,
it seems that the Security Council has set that role
aside this time. The Israeli aggression against Gaza has
continued for more than 11 days now. This places a big
question mark over the credibility of the Security
Council and the entire system of international peace
and security.
What we find astonishing and surprising is the
deafening silence in the face of the attack on Gaza.
Indeed, some claim that the operation is nothing more
than Israel exercising its right to self-defence. While
following, for example, the armed conflict in Georgia,
we saw the international community move most
urgently and effectively and mobilize all measures
necessary to contain the situation, end the conflict and
ensure a withdrawal of forces. Palestinian blood
continues to be shed. Destruction is spreading in a way
that cannot be justified in any way whatsoever.
War no longer evokes glory and pride, only rage
and condemnation on the part of the international
community. What is happening in Gaza now can only
be described as a horrendous humanitarian crime that
will only lead to more violence and extremism and put
the goal of peace and security, which Israel uses to
justify its acts of aggression, further out of reach.
Israel’s security can be achieved only by the
establishment of a just peace that responds to the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. Those rights
have been recognized in instruments of international
legitimacy, including Security Council resolutions.
They have also been affirmed by the Geneva
Conventions and enshrined in every agreement and
initiative put forth to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, including the Arab Peace Initiative.
Israel bears full responsibility for the grave
situation and the ferocious siege on the Palestinian
people and the closure of crossing points. Israel
violated the truce agreed by the two parties in June
2008, in return for a ceasefire and an understanding

09-20097

that the crossing points would be opened and the siege
lifted. The Palestinian side fulfilled its obligations
under the agreement, whereas Israel maintained its
stranglehold on 1.5 million Palestinians in Gaza — an
immoral act and humanitarian tragedy to which the
international community failed to respond.
In referring to that painful reality, our goal is not
to engage in unproductive arguments; rather, it is to
describe the situation as it is and to prompt us to work
seriously towards a ceasefire that will end the armed
conflict that is causing death and destruction in Gaza
as we speak. There is no way out of this crisis but
through a clear and explicit resolution calling for an
immediate ceasefire and the lifting of the siege.
The members of the League of Arab States have
today presented the Security Council with the
resolution adopted by the extraordinary meeting of the
League’s foreign ministers held in Cairo on
31 December 2008. That document formulates a vision
for a resolution to the crisis on the basis of an
immediate halt to all military action in Gaza, the lifting
of the siege, the opening of the crossing points and an
end to the policy of collective punishment imposed on
Palestinians that led to this serious deterioration. The
Arab proposal aims both at putting an end to the
military operation and at addressing the causes that led
to it. Lifting the siege, calming the situation and
establishing the necessary monitoring mechanism will
ensure a lasting solution. That will serve to meet
Israel’s security concerns and pave the way for a
resumption of the peace process and the revitalization
of negotiations to end the occupation and establish an
independent, viable Palestinian State. That is the only
way to ensure the security of Israel and Palestine, as
well as the security and stability of the region.
Arab countries are committed to international
law, the principles of international legitimacy and the
resolutions of the Security Council. Unfortunately, we
are confronted by delays, procrastination and attempts
to undermine the peace efforts of Arab countries.
Either the Security Council must address our legitimate
issues responsibly and seriously on the basis of those
principles or we shall be forced to turn our backs and
consider other options.
Palestinians are dying at this very moment.
Children are being orphaned. Parents are losing loved
ones for no reason save for the fact of where they find

23

S/PV.6061

themselves. Is the Council going to allow that to
continue for even another hour?
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Amre Moussa, Secretary
General of the League of Arab States.
Mr. Moussa (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I
should like to extend our congratulations to you, Mr.
President, on France’s assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the first month of the new
year. France will thereby shoulder its share of
responsibility for addressing the grave situation in the
Middle East — a historic role that will also resonate in
the region. I should also like to express our
appreciation for the efforts of French President
Sarkozy to urgently and seriously address Israel’s
grave and indiscriminate acts of aggression against the
Gaza Strip without distinction between civilians and
non-civilians. I would also like to commend the former
President of the Council on his presidency.
As many speakers before me have stated, it has
now been 11 days since Israeli occupation forces began
the aerial, naval and ground bombardment of the Gaza
Strip that has resulted in an extremely tense and
dangerous situation. A military occupying force is
attacking a territory under its own occupation,
blockading it and isolating its population on the pretext
that the Palestinian resistance is launching rockets that
threaten the security of the inhabitants of southern
Israel — as if the people of Gaza were not themselves
also endangered by weapon fire.
Today we learned of the bombing of a Palestinian
school where Palestinians had taken shelter, and of the
resulting dozens of deaths. We also heard the briefing
by Mr. Maxwell Gaylard, United Nations humanitarian
coordinator for the Palestinian territories, who stated
that
(spoke in English)
“People could not reach available food. Children
are hungry, cold, without electricity and running
water. And above all, they are terrified. That, by
any measure, is a humanitarian crisis”.
(spoke in Arabic)
Can the Security Council remain silent in the face
of such a situation?
While reaffirming its well-known position on the
need to provide protection for civilians in time of war,

24

the League of Arab States would also like to reiterate
that it is keen to provide protection for Palestinian and
Israeli civilians alike. However, we would also like to
put things in their proper perspective. We are
essentially dealing with a situation of Israeli military
occupation of Palestinian territories and its
consequences vis-à-vis the rejection of that occupation
by the population. As part and parcel of the occupied
territories,
Gaza
has
suffered
long
and
disproportionately under the strangulating aerial, naval
and ground blockade that has led to the complete
destruction of its infrastructure. That is in addition to
the repeated starvation campaigns resulting from the
closing of crossing points between Israel and Gaza and
the ongoing refusal to allow basic goods to enter Gaza.
If we allow the Israeli propaganda machine to
describe the situation regarding the psychological
repercussions suffered by some inhabitants of southern
Israel because of Hamas rocket attacks, how can we
possibly ignore the humanitarian tragedy to which the
entire population of Palestine is subject due to the
military Israeli occupation and the complete blockade
within which millions of Palestinians have to live?
Furthermore, if the Israelis reassert the claim that
their armed action is being carried out in self-defence,
to combat terrorism, and that what is happening now is
actually part of the war on terror, then the time has
come to denounce this untrue claim. The whole
situation is due to the occupation. The whole world
wants to see an end to that occupation, which has led to
an extremely unstable situation. Continued Israeli
aggression and actions against civilians have generated
tension and rage in the Arab and Islamic world as a
whole. This situation will not be helped by efforts that
do not put an end to the events taking place in Gaza.
Once again, I would like to repeat the Arab
rejection of attacks against innocent civilians on either
side. The facts indicate that civilians on the Palestinian
side are the primary victims not only of the most recent
events, but also of the situation that prevailed before
the current hostilities. I reiterate that the facts indicate
that civilian Palestinian victims are in the hundreds as
compared to one victim on the Israeli side.
Occupation is not the only reason for the current
hostilities. There is also the failure of the peace
process, the slightest progress in which would have
calmed the situation. The lack of such progress has
created a feeling of frustration and despair. We hope

09-20097

S/PV.6061

that 2009 will mark a new beginning for the peace
process that will enable us to address seriously and
sincerely the most important problem — the Israeli
occupation of Arab territories and its rejection of the
establishment of a Palestinian State.
The time has come to put an end to all
procrastination and delays, which will only lead to
further humanitarian and material losses. The time has
come to put an end to the siege, to aggression, to the
confiscation of land and to its partition by Israeli
settlers, none of which can lead to a healthy situation.
The events in Gaza today as a result of this unhealthy
situation is proof of that. The may actually spin out of
control if we cannot put an immediate end to it through
this Council.
The Security Council is the main body of the
United Nations entrusted with the maintenance of
international peace and security. The credibility of the
Council in shouldering its responsibilities and the
credibility of the United Nations are both at stake
today. The Security Council should deal with such
situations firmly, justly and objectively in a manner
that furthers the goal of maintaining international
peace and security.
Here, I would like to pay tribute to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and express to him our deep
appreciation for his important statement today and for
his position on the aggression against Gaza. I would
also like to pay tribute to the United Nations entities
that are working in extremely difficult circumstances
over there, in particular the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
We have repeatedly complained of the Security
Council’s failure to swiftly take a firm position in
addressing extremely serious situations that may
threaten international peace and security. A serious
precedent was set in 2006 when Israel attacked
Lebanon and the Security Council did not take action
for over a month, hoping that Israel would achieve its
goals if given enough time. When that did not happen,
the Security Council had to act. Israel had already
stopped fearing the consequences of its continued
aggression. We do not want a repeat of that tragedy.
The high-level Arab delegation is here for the
next few days, and we are more than willing to help the
Council if it is ready to shoulder its responsibilities.
However, we cannot give Israel enough time to achieve

09-20097

its objectives; that is something that we cannot accept
or be part of.
Here, I would like to mention a statement made
yesterday by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel.
Israel called upon the world to allow it to work to
achieve its objectives until it declares to have done so.
This was printed today in the New York Times. This is
a clear message addressed to the Security Council. It
must be clear that all these messages are addressed to
us and we must react to them.
We have therefore insisted on presenting to the
Council the draft resolution mentioned by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, His
Royal Highness the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Saudi Arabia and the President of Palestine.
The fact is that the Council has come under
attack. Certain unusual remarks have been made by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel describing
Security Council resolutions as “dead letters”. Many
might support her in her opinion, and that would be
confirmed if the Security Council should fail to stand
firm and address these threats to international peace
and security. As stated by the Arab Group’s
representative on the Security Council, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, we are
submitting a draft resolution in this regard, because the
situation cannot wait any longer.
We have expressed our support for the initiative
enunciated by President Mubarak and President
Sarkozy. We see no contradiction between that
initiative and the work of the Security Council. In fact,
they complement each other. President Mubarak has
stated that Egypt, which has opened the door to peace
in the Middle East, cannot accept a continuation of the
current situation, including procrastination by the
Security Council in shouldering its responsibilities.
Because the Security Council refuses to take action, the
Egyptian and French Presidents have had to act, not to
confront the Security Council, but rather to
complement what we do here, since our objectives are
the same.
Therefore, we support the initiative of the two
Presidents while also insisting on formally making the
position of the Arab Group very clear before the
Council. We call for an immediate and lasting
ceasefire, an end to all hostilities, violence and rocket
attacks, a withdrawal by the Israeli forces, an end to
the blockade and the opening of the crossings between

25

S/PV.6061

Israel and Gaza. We demand that Israel, as the
occupying military Power of the Palestinian territories,
allow for the safe passage of humanitarian assistance,
medical aid, food and fuel to Gaza. We call for the
establishment of a monitoring mechanism to provide
protection to civilians, for a ceasefire and for
restoration of calm in general.

desperation. It is a recipe for revenge and more terror.
Political goals, however legitimate, will not be reached
through war, military onslaught and destruction. After
this war will come the day when the people of Gaza
and Israel will still live next to each other. Palestinians
will still be deprived of their unity and of their State,
and Israelis will still be deprived of security.

In conclusion, I would like to say that we have
carefully listened as every speaker has highlighted the
importance of ensuring that the events in Gaza are not
repeated in the future and of the absolute need to move
effectively and quickly to end the crisis and to resume
negotiations towards a solution to the Israeli/Palestinian
and Israeli-Arab conflict.

The Security Council, which has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, has so far been incapable of making
any decision in the matter. That is a fact that I have a
hard time trying to explain to the people of my country,
who, together with hundreds of millions around the
world, see the flickering television images of great
human suffering day in and day out. Today, the news of
the shelling of the school where people had sought
refuge shocked us even more.

We hope that, with a new Administration, this
year will augur well for the peace process. We have
seen certain progress on that track, and we in the Arab
League will always be prepared to participate in any
peace effort that represents a true move towards the
objective sought by all of us, which is being impeded
by Israeli practices in the occupied territories in
complete disregard of Arab and international appeals.
Here, I would also like to object to what was stated by
our colleague from Israel that the world is divided
between moderates and extremists. Yes, we agree.
However, we may disagree over who are the moderates
and who are the extremists. We also believe that there
are even more divisions within those divisions — that
is, between those who respect the provisions of
international law and those who do not.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor His Excellency Mr. Jonas Støre, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Norway.
Mr. Støre (Norway): I am grateful for this
opportunity to address the Security Council on the
critical situation in Gaza. As Norwegian Foreign
Minister, I add my voice tonight to all those who
demand an immediate, effective and verifiable
ceasefire and cessation of hostilities. The launching of
rockets by Hamas targeting civilians inside Israel must
stop. The Israeli shelling of Gaza from the air, sea and
land must stop. Norway condemns the heavy ground
operations that are exposing thousands and thousands
of civilians and killing innocent women, men and
children.
That escalation does not lead to peace and
security for Israelis and Palestinians. It is a dreadful
road to death, destruction, hatred and more

26

I therefore hope that the French-Egyptian
initiative for an immediate ceasefire will succeed. As
that initiative takes shape, I would hope that the details
will be confirmed by a Security Council resolution.
A ceasefire must not be a return to the status quo
ante, and therefore a ceasefire and the political process
must address the critical outstanding issues: a stop to
smuggling and the clandestine import of arms and their
accessories and the immediate opening of border
crossings for urgent humanitarian needs, followed by
the presence of international monitors. Then, and soon,
we need to address the challenge of new and urgent
human needs caused by the current violence.
That is also why I would like to take the
opportunity tonight to address the Security Council as
Chair of the donor support group to the Palestinian
Authority, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the
Coordination of International Assistance to Palestinians
(AHLC). As members will remember, just one year
ago, Norway and France, together with the European
Commission and Quarter Representative Tony Blair,
hosted the donor conference for the Palestinians in
Paris. That was a very successful undertaking thanks to
France. The donor community made significant
pledges both to the running of Palestinian Authority
institutions and to the projects that could help boost the
Palestinian economy.
In May last year in London, the AHLC reviewed
the progress made by both the donors and the
Palestinian Authority. Four months later, we noted
further progress as we convened the AHLC here in

09-20097

S/PV.6061

New York with the assistance of the Secretary-General,
despite the numerous obstacles created by the
occupation, the limits to access and movement and the
growing number of settlements on Palestinian land.
Throughout recent years, Gaza has been a major
concern, not least as a result of internal Palestinian
strife and division, but also as a result of the Israeli
siege on the enclave. Before the outbreak of the war,
the isolation of Gaza had devastated the private sector,
increased poverty and malnutrition and undermined the
social and economic fabric of Gaza. The civilian
population has been caged and severely traumatized.
As this ongoing war escalates, the supplies of
water and energy, which were already insufficient,
have more or less completely stopped. The main
sewage plant in the north of Gaza is on the verge of
collapse. We urgently need to address this humanitarian
disaster. Two days ago, I received a letter from the
Palestinian Authority Prime Minister, Salam Fayyad,
outlining the budgetary outlook of the Authority for
2009. Despite some limited progress, deplorably the
Palestinian economy will continue to depend on donors
for a long time to come. Now, we need to add the
consequences of the devastation in Gaza and the dire
consequences that the war is having for the people, for
the infrastructure and for the economy.
In consultation with Prime Minister Fayyad and
the co-Chairs of the AHLC, Norway had originally
planned to convene the AHLC some time during the
first half of 2009. Under the present circumstances, I
propose that the AHLC be convened as soon as
possible. The situation is new and requires urgent
action. The humanitarian needs demand relief. I ask for
the Council’s support for the holding of a special donor
conference for Gaza, in conjunction with the AHLC
meeting, as soon as possible.
When the hostilities cease, we need to start
assessing both the immediate and the long-term needs.
Those will have to be determined by a fact-finding and
assessment mission led by the World Bank and the
United Nations. Before then, we must immediately
ease the suffering of the civilian population.
International humanitarian law is crystal clear.
Civilians should and must be protected. It is
unacceptable that Hamas exposes civilians by taking its
military arsenal and its fighting to densely populated
areas. We call on Israel to comply with its obligations
under the Geneva Conventions to allow the unhindered

09-20097

access of humanitarian supplies to Gaza. We urgently
call on Israel to ensure that food, water and medicines
gain access and unhindered distribution to the civilian
population. We must empower the most effective
providers of humanitarian assistance to conduct their
activities; the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East is critical in
that context.
I should like to add one point. Since the
beginning of hostilities, independent reporters have
been denied access to the war zone. That is regrettable
and unacceptable. We demand of Israel that reporters
be allowed to do their regular work inside Gaza.
Finally, the division among Palestinians is a
tragedy. Let me commend President Mubarak and
Egypt for their steadfast efforts to heal that division,
for which the citizens of Gaza have already paid a high
price. The question of the governance of Gaza must be
addressed. The people of Gaza deserve stable,
democratic and peaceful governance. A power vacuum
in Gaza after the end of hostilities will further plunge
the civilian population into misery. In that context, I
welcome President Abbas’s call for a national unity
Government and the holding of elections.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Norway for the
initiatives he has just announced.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Ahmed
Aboul Gheit, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt.
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): It is
10 days since the start of the Israeli military aggression
against the Gaza Strip. It is 10 days since the start of an
operation of killing and methodical destruction by
Israel against the people of Gaza. It is 10 days, and
Israel is telling us daily that it is about to achieve its
military objectives, while the media are showing us
daily, nay hourly, horrific scenes of the bodies of
children laid next to each other, families that have been
completely decimated and innocent civilians who have
been crushed by the Israeli military machine — almost
600 to date and 3,000 thousand wounded, and the
Council is still silent.
We cannot imagine what the Council needs to
assume its responsibility to stop that aggression. Does
it need more Palestinians killed and wounded before it
takes a decision that would commit Israel to stop its
military action? Perhaps it requires another solution

27

S/PV.6061

that would give the occupying Power some political
gains as another way of crowning its military
aggression. In this respect, the Council stalling has
undermined its credibility and the confidence of our
peoples in the Council and in its neutrality and
objectivity in dealing with the Palestinian question.
As members know very well, Egypt is in a unique
situation as far as the current events are concerned, as
the immediately adjacent neighbour of the Gaza Strip,
where the Israeli aggression is taking place, and
because its central role in having helped the Israelis
and Palestinians attain a period of calm that lasted six
months until just one week before the aggression and
despite violations by both sides. Furthermore, Egypt is
in a well-known position in view of its role in
sponsoring the Palestinian national reconciliation.
I should like to explain our view of a way out of
this situation. Let me quote from the statement made
this evening by President Mubarak in a joint press
conference with President Sarkozy:
“The situation in Gaza continues to
deteriorate for a second week, with continual
destructive and deadly Israeli attacks targeting
innocent civilians, causing tensions to escalate
and undermining regional stability.
“Egypt, which opened the door to peace in
the Middle East and has supported the Palestinian
cause for 60 years, cannot accept a continuation
of the current situation, with the Palestinian and
Israeli sides clinging to their positions and the
Security Council delaying the fulfilment of its
responsibilities.
“Egypt has been pursuing active efforts
since the first day of the hostilities, and today I
am putting forward an initiative specifically
designed to contain the situation, based on the
following elements.
“First, Israel and the Palestinian factions
shall agree to an immediate ceasefire for a
specified period to allow the opening of corridors
for aid to the inhabitants of the Strip and to allow
Egypt to pursue efforts towards a complete and
permanent ceasefire.
“Secondly, Egypt calls on Israel and the
Palestinian sides to meet immediately to conclude
arrangements and guarantees to prevent a
repetition of the present escalation. The causes of

28

that escalation, including the question of securing
the borders, should be addressed to allow for the
reopening of border crossings and the lifting of
the blockade. Egypt is prepared to take part in
these discussions along with the Palestinian and
Israeli sides, and with the European Union and
the other members of the Quartet.
“Thirdly, Egypt renews its call on the
Palestinian National Authority and all Palestinian
factions to respond to Egyptian efforts to bring
about Palestinian reconciliation, which is
indispensable for overcoming the challenges
facing the Palestinian people and the Palestinian
cause both in the current critical situation and in
the future.
“Egypt is carrying out its responsibility in
putting forward this initiative and expects the
Israeli and Palestinian sides, as well as other
regional and international parties, to fulfil their
responsibilities in order to stop the bloodshed and
renew hopes for peace.”
I would also like to reaffirm a crucial point: the
Gaza Strip is an integral part of the Palestinian territory
that was occupied by Israel in 1967 — which also
includes the West Bank and East Jerusalem. Therefore,
the occupying Power has responsibilities towards the
population of the land that it occupies. This
responsibility is well-known and must be recognized.
Since the beginning of the Israeli aggression, on
27 December, Egypt has made extensive efforts to
provide humanitarian assistance to the affected
population in the Gaza Strip. In this respect, Egypt has
since the first day used the Rafah crossing to enable
individuals to deliver some assistance in the form of
small shipments. The Egyptian Red Crescent, in
cooperation with the Palestinian side, has been able to
deliver some 120 tons of medicines and other medical
supplies through the crossing, in addition to some 300
additional tones of foodstuffs through the Karam Abu
Salem crossing. Egyptian hospitals have so far
received 120 injured persons and we are making
preparations to receive more wounded as the
Palestinian side is able and willing to transfer them
outside the Strip. Moreover, since yesterday, we have
sent approximately 500 tons of foodstuffs via Al-Aouja
through Karam Abu Salem crossing and onwards to the
Strip.

09-20097

S/PV.6061

Here I would like to express our thanks to all the
sisterly Arab and Islamic countries which offered their
services, especially medical services, to relieve the
suffering of the Palestinians in Gaza through Egypt.
Egypt has adequate capacity and will to deal with the
situation, and we will continue our extensive efforts to
deliver all the assistance from our brothers to the Gaza
Strip despite the current difficulties.
We have come here as an Arab ministerial
delegation to demonstrate the utmost importance
attached by all Arab countries to ending this aggression
immediately and to ridding the Palestinians of the
horrors of the Israeli military machine. But this does
not prevent us from calling upon the Council not to
turn a blind eye to the current events or to overlook the
fact that the main tragedy lies in the continued Israeli
occupation of Palestinian land. The effort that truly
must be made is the effort to end the occupation as
soon as possible and establish an independent
Palestinian State, with full and intensified international
support and encouragement for the negotiations that
are necessary to achieve our aim, as provided for in
Council resolution 1850 (2008).
I am certain that this is the real objective and that
it should not be overlooked by the Council. This
requires extensive efforts and follow-up by the
Council, as provided for in the resolution to which I
have just referred.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt for his proposals.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Salah
Bashir, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Jordan.
Mr. Bashir (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Permit me
at the outset to express our gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for responding to our request for an
open meeting and for working with us over the past
two days to achieve a result that will put an end to the
human tragedy unfolding in the Gaza Strip. Jordan
feels deep pain and concern at the grave situation, the
escalation of violence and the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip as a result of
the irresponsible and horrendous military aggression
carried out by Israel, in addition to its effects on the
peace process and the stability of our region, which has
long suffered from the scourge of war.
In addition to condemning this aggression, which
has claimed the lives of hundreds of innocent civilians,

09-20097

we call on the international community, led by the
Security Council, to shoulder its political, moral and
legal responsibilities by adopting a draft resolution that
will force Israel to end to its aggression and its policies
of collective punishment against Palestinian civilians
and will alleviate the human suffering caused by its
military operations, which are a flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law, the Fourth Geneva
Convention and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights.
The people and the Government of Jordan are
fully committed to supporting the Palestinian people in
their humanitarian crisis. His Majesty King Abdullah
Bin Al Hussein has from the beginning of the
aggression intensified his contacts with various
political leaders throughout the world in order to
achieve an immediate cessation of hostilities through
the Security Council. His Majesty the King has ordered
that all Jordanian hospitals be opened, that all
Jordanian capacities be placed at the service of our
Palestinian brothers and that field hospitals be prepared
and sent to Gaza. Hashemite charitable associations are
doing their utmost, and all of Jordan is prepared to
work around the clock to ensure the delivery of
international humanitarian assistance through its
territory.
Peace and security cannot be achieved by
carrying out military operations against a population
whose men, women, children and the elderly have
already been weakened by the siege. Those operations
will not help Israel, but will only arouse feelings of
anger among Arabs and Muslims throughout the world.
What we are now witnessing is inhuman Israeli
exploitation of the situation aimed at achieving false
internal gains. What Israel is doing does not reflect a
genuine interest in peace. Peace cannot be achieved by
shedding the blood of Palestinian children; peace
cannot be achieved by ignoring the appeals of the
international community; peace cannot be achieved by
violating international law, in particular those
provisions that impose responsibilities on occupying
forces towards their occupied population. Israel cannot
achieve security by killing innocent unarmed civilians
in the Gaza Strip, by targeting schools, universities and
houses of worship and by creating a humanitarian
tragedy for the Palestinian people. Past experiences
have proved those truths, and this aggression will be no
exception.

29

S/PV.6061

The Arab States have submitted a draft resolution
to the Security Council calling for a ceasefire. We have
worked and will continue working with the Council to
draft balanced language resulting in a resolution that
will fulfil the Council’s objective of maintaining
international peace and security. It would be senseless
should the Council fail, despite the urgency and
immediacy of the situation, to adopt a resolution that
would put an end to the sufferings of the Palestinians.
That would mean that our humanity had been defeated
by Israel’s intransigence.
Has the international community reached the
point where it can turn a blind eye to the killing,
displacement, fear and hunger that have been imposed
on the Palestinians in the Gaza Strip? Does the work of
the Council now serve the interests of one party,
without
taking
international
humanitarian
responsibilities into consideration? The international
community must recognize the rights of the people of
Gaza. The international community must not fail to
respond to their appeals and must stop justifying their
continued suffering with the Israeli excuse of selfdefence. The Security Council must recall that for
more than 40 years the Gaza Strip and all the
Palestinian territories have been subjected to an
aggression called military occupation.
The international community must shoulder its
responsibilities by providing the Palestinians with
protection and humanitarian assistance, by addressing
what is now occurring in Gaza and by dealing with the
conspiracy aimed at destroying the future of the
Palestinian people and their inalienable rights,
including the right to establish an independent
Palestinian State.
Today, the international community must impose
a ceasefire in order to stop the bloodshed. It must
establish arrangements that will prevent further
deterioration of the situation by alleviating the
humanitarian and economic distress of the Palestinian
people, putting an end to all military operations and
compelling Israel to withdraw to the positions it
occupied before 27 December 2008, to life the siege, to
open all border crossings under its control and to
permit medical and humanitarian assistance and the
evacuation of the wounded.
The international community must support and
facilitate the work of United Nations agencies and
organs create an international monitoring mechanism

30

to supervise the ceasefire, protect the Palestinian
people and ensure that all parties carry out their
obligations with a view to the emergence of Gaza from
the destruction it is suffering and the establishment of
an independent, contiguous and viable Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Israel must understand that peace can be achieved
only through dialogue and serious negotiations that
will provide the Palestinian Authority with legitimacy
in order to fulfil the aspirations of the Palestinian
people to establish an independent, viable and
contiguous State. Returning to the negotiating table is
the only way to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
in accordance with international legitimacy, including
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Road Map
and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Israel’s use of extensive military force not only
threatens the stability of the region, but also
undermines all efforts by the Security Council to
achieve peace in the Middle East in accordance with
resolution 1850 (2008). It also threatens the entire
peace process aimed at finding a solution to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict based on the two-State
formula, which is a sine qua non for peace and stability
in the region.
Jordan has great hopes for the sincere and
extensive efforts of the Security Council and
appreciates the Egyptian initiative, which should serve
as an incentive to make progress in ending this tragic
situation, by providing humanitarian assistance to the
brotherly Palestinian people, alleviating their suffering
and returning to serious negotiations in order to
achieve the two-State solution, which is the only way
to ensure security and stability in the region.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Fawzi Salloukh, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Lebanon.
Mr. Salloukh (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): First
of all, Mr. President, I would like to thank you, as well
as your friendly country, for your sustained efforts and
for clear, unequivocal position on the need for an
immediate and comprehensive ceasefire following
Israeli aggression against Gaza. We would also like to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his tireless
efforts and resolve.
We have come to speak to the Council on behalf
of the thousands of civilian casualties who have fallen

09-20097

S/PV.6061

in Gaza — on behalf of the children, women and other
innocent Palestinians, who continue to fall on an
ongoing basis under Israeli bombings. I speak on
behalf of the inhabitants of Gaza, who for decades now
have lived under blockade, occupation and a policy of
collective punishment.

without delay access for humanitarian convoys to those
in need. We must ensure that the Palestinian people are
not once again targeted by Israeli aggression, because
regardless of Israeli’s claims, the Palestinian people are
unarmed when compared to the behemoth of the Israeli
army.

We have come to say that every minute this
continues, it claims an additional innocent victim and
increases the number of orphans, widows and disabled
persons. As a result, the legal, political and above all
moral duty and responsibility of the Council require it
to adopt immediately and without further delay a clear
and binding resolution calling for an immediate and
complete ceasefire, the lifting of the unjust air, land
and sea blockade imposed by Israel on Gaza, and the
opening of all crossing points.

We must also note Israel’s responsibility, as the
occupying Power, for practices that are at odds with
international law and particularly international
humanitarian law, which require us to provide
appropriate protection for the Palestinian people. We
hope that the Council will not repeat the errors 2006,
when it acted late in putting an end to the Israeli killing
of the people of Lebanon. That is why we truly hope
that the Council will be able to take up the challenge,
that it will not disappoint unarmed civilians and that it
will be up to the task of upholding its responsibilities
to all humankind. In fact, this is a trial which we must
all undergo successfully. May we all live up to that
responsibility, because we would not wish to burden
our conscience with more massacres, such as that
perpetrated by Israel today by targeting the UNRWA
school in Jabaliya.

We must not lose sight of the fact that the Israeli
aggression hardly begin on 27 December 2008. In fact,
it has been going on for decades through occupation,
oppression, suffocating blockade, the closure of
crossing points, limitations imposed on the daily
routines and subsistence of Palestinians, denying them
the right to a decent life. Gaza remains under
occupation and, as the Council knows, occupation is
the most abject form of aggression. The siege persists,
and the blockade is another form of aggression.
This blind violence and these systematic crimes
by Israel are not aimed at a specific faction of the
Palestinian people, as is claimed by Israel. Israel seeks
first and foremost to undermine hope in the hearts of
the Palestinian people for a decent and safe life that
would allow them to fully recover their legitimate
rights through the option of peace and international
legitimacy. The dangers of Israel’s aggression are not
confined to its direct actions because they also
contribute to the exacerbation of bitterness and hatred
by undermining all hope for a future and a better day
tomorrow.
Because they jeopardize the peace process,
usurping force and the killing of civilians cannot
achieve security. Quite the contrary, a true and lasting
peace can only be the fruit of a credible political
process that engenders hope for a better future for
people. Consequently, it is vital that we achieve an
immediate, permanent and unconditional ceasefire with
the immediate withdrawal of Israel to pre-27 December
2008 Israeli positions; end the blockade and reopen
crossing points; and normalize life by authorizing

09-20097

The President (spoke in French): I now call on
His Excellency Mr. Taïb Fassi Fihri, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Morocco.
Mr. Fassi Fihri (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
The Security Council’s meeting today regarding the
very crucial and difficult situation in the Middle East —
the result of the horrendous Israeli aggression against
the Palestinian territories in Gaza. The continuous
menace has lasted for 11 days, the last four of which
have witnessed ever more serious escalations as a
result of the air, land and sea operations by the Israeli
military machine. Israel has used every indiscriminate
lethal weapon, destroying homes and their occupants,
exterminating entire families and creating orphaned
children and infants. Indeed, neither the mosques, nor
the schools, nor the funeral homes, nor the ambulances
have escaped the might of the Israeli military machine,
which has left a broad swath of destruction of property
and infrastructure. There has been heart-wrenching and
horrendous bloodshed, murder and the killing of
innocent civilians.
This painful situation imposes a special
responsibility on the French presidency of the Security
Council. You, Mr. President, represent a State that has
been fully versed in all aspects of the issue before the

31

S/PV.6061

Council for more than half a century. This issue has
many emotional and political implications, as
recognized in the proactive and responsible initiative to
harmonize positions undertaken in the context of the
President Sarkozy’s visit to the countries of the region.
I would also like to commend His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon and thank him for the firm and
principled positions he has taken since the beginning of
Israel’s aggression against the Gaza Strip.
The level and mandate of the committee of the
League of Arab States attest clearly to the grave
concern of people in Arab countries with regard to the
seriousness of the situation in Gaza and its implications
for the peace and stability of the region as a whole.
They also reflect the concern and commitment of Arab
countries to responsibly and constructively adopting
and implementing the decisive political positions
called for by current events.
The eyes of the whole world are on the Council
today. The world is hoping that it will assume its
responsibilities by putting an end to the bloodbath,
maintaining international peace and security and
compelling Israel to immediately halt the activities of
its military machine and lift the siege on the
Palestinian people, who have suffered hugely from the
scourge war and displacement. In the face of this
escalating crisis, the Security Council cannot but
assume its political, moral and humanitarian
responsibilities to the brotherly Palestinian people and
all the peoples of the region.
The Security Council and the international
community at large must call the occupying Power to
task on its legal and political obligations, including
with regard to the provisions of international law and
international humanitarian law and norms. In that
connection, the Security Council is called upon to
assume its responsibility to deter Israel from
continuing its aggression before it further escalates the
situation in a way that would have consequences of
which we are all aware. The Council must do so by
adopting a strong, enforceable and comprehensive
resolution.
The Arab Group has very carefully crafted its
draft resolution to respond to all objective and
reasonable elements proposed, as well as to take into
account the concerns of everyone. The Group has
always been prepared to discuss all the ideas put forth.
Given the escalation of the situation and the rising

32

number of victims, the Group of Arab States calls upon
the Council to respond positively to the provisions of
the draft resolution that the Arab Group has submitted.
In addition to its horrendousness, what is taking
place in Gaza should not lead us to forget that the
Palestinian territories have suffered from siege and
oppression for years. That is the fundamental tragedy
that the Palestinian people have experienced for
decades. That tragedy has also been subject to Israel’s
policy of establishing settlements and its ongoing
attempts to Judaize Jerusalem and eradicate its Islamic
character, to which His Majesty King Mohammed VI
has called for an end.
It is high time that the international community
assume its historic responsibilities towards the
Palestinian people and the other peoples of the region
in order to end repeated tragedies and contribute to the
establishment of an atmosphere conducive to the
resumption and acceleration of negotiations on the
right track with a view to reaching a just and
comprehensive solution to the problem of the Middle
East that ensures Israel’s withdrawal from all occupied
Arab territories and the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State. That requires stepping
up efforts to achieve national reconciliation and unity
among the Palestinians and the strengthening of their
legitimate institutions. The Palestinian people are one
people, destined to live in dignity in a land that is
united, independent and viable, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, side by side with the State of Israel in
mutual peace and security and in accordance with
international legitimacy, the principle of land for
peace, the Road Map and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Ahmad bin Abdulla
Al-Mahmoud, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of
the State of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Mahmoud (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting to address the atrocities being committed
in the occupied Palestinian Gaza Strip. I would also
like to take this opportunity to wish you every success
in your presidency of the Council in these difficult
circumstances. Through you, Sir, I would also like to
extend my thanks to the Secretary-General for his
repeated calls to stop the ongoing violence in Gaza. I
should also like to express my gratitude to the

09-20097

S/PV.6061

President of the General Assembly for his extensive
efforts and his fair-minded statement in that regard.
I will not cite the horrendous atrocities
committed since 27 December 2008 by the Israeli war
machine against the unarmed civilians of the afflicted
Palestinian territory, nor will I refer to the killing,
destruction, tragedy and violations of every human
right that the Security Council has heard of and
witnessed as a result of the recent Israeli aggression.
Schools, hospitals and places of worship have not been
spared the mass destruction resulting from that
aggression, which has taken place in blatant violation
of the rules of international humanitarian law.
The world has just seen how Israel assassinated
more than 40 civilians in cold blood, including women
and children, in a school of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East. I do not think there is a need to remind the
Council about what it has heard over the past few
months with regard to the serious consequences of the
Israeli siege imposed on the Gaza Strip and the grave
humanitarian situation that it has caused. As we
approached the new year celebrations, we were hopeful
that the world would enjoy a quiet season and that the
new year would bring new hopes for a better future.
But Israel’s position is different from the international
community’s.
I have come here with my brothers, the Arab
ministers, as part of the ministerial committee that the
Arab Council of Ministers decided to establish at its
extraordinary meeting last Wednesday and to send to
New York to urge the Security Council to end its footon an issue that poses a direct, clear and serious threat
to international peace and security and has also
resulted in a dire humanitarian situation. Arab States
and other peace-loving countries of the world were
unanimous in expressing their solidarity with the
Palestinian people in connection with their suffering as
a result of Israel’s brutal occupation and recent attack
on Gaza, and well as in standing by Palestinians in
their just struggle to achieve their legitimate and
inalienable rights, in particular their right to
independence, self-determination and statehood on
their own national soil, with Jerusalem as its capital.
We therefore demand that the Security Council
assume its responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations and not settle for making press
statements, but rather immediately adopt a resolution

09-20097

that compels Israel, the occupying Power, to stop its
land, sea and air military aggression on the Gaza Strip;
immediately withdraw its forces; lift the siege on Gaza;
open the crossings; end the policy of collective
punishment; and provide protection for the Palestinian
people, including the protection of health and
educational institutions that are safe havens, as attacks
on such safe havens are illegal.
The reluctance to adopt a resolution in this regard
gives a green light to Israel to continue its war crimes,
in flagrant violation of the relevant conventions, laws
and international norms. Such stalling is incongruent
with the mandate of this Council and proves that this
important organ is in need of reform.
The international community is not witnessing an
ordinary war but a new Israeli aggression, similar to
the summer of 2006 aggression on Lebanon, with the
most advanced and lethal weapons being used against
Palestinian people, in violation of international peace
and security. This tragedy strikes at the core of the
mandate of this Council, the credibility of which is
now being called into question. We have already
repeatedly urged the Council and the Quartet to work
sincerely towards the implementation of the Council’s
decisions on peace in the Middle East.
On the other hand, General Assembly resolution
60/1 on the outcome of the 2005 World Summit, and
specifically its provisions regarding human security,
the responsibility to protect and the culture of peace,
requires the United Nations to carry out its duty with
respect to protecting the Palestinian people from Israeli
aggression. Resolution 1674 (2006) on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict requires the United
Nations to come to the rescue of the Palestinians and to
criminalize the Israeli acts of aggression.
The State of Qatar is eager to do its duty as an
active member of the United Nations. His Highness the
Emir of the State of Qatar, in his speech on 4 January
2009, which has been issued as a document of the
United Nations, called upon the international
community to protect and give relief to the Palestinians
and emphasized that the killing of innocent civilians
and the Israeli military aggression will not bring
security neither to Israel nor to us as Arabs, but will
instead result in disastrous consequences. Did the
people who prepared for this war think of the anger of
generations of Arabs and Palestinians, which will only
grow as they witness such scenes? How can Israeli

33

S/PV.6061

military aggression contribute to the achievement of a
lasting and comprehensive peace in the region?
The division, by some, of Palestine into Hamas
and Fatah is unacceptable, since the occupation does
not distinguish between parties, but is allencompassing. Therefore, we should not accept any
Palestinian national differences as an excuse for Israel
to continue its occupation and aggression against a
defenceless people, or allow it to use such differences
as an excuse to divide the Palestinian people and
Palestinian land. We must not punish the Palestinian
people for having exercised their right to vote, in
accordance with the principles of democracy that we
all call for. At this time, we urge the Palestinians to
achieve unity and consensus in their plight.
The excuses proffered by Israel concerning
Palestinian rocket attacks cannot deceive wise people,
although some may think of them as the factor that
sparked the current crisis. It must be recalled that the
occupation of the Palestinian territory is the cause of
the rocket attacks. Consequently, the occupation must
end if calm is to be restored. Even if we acknowledge
that excluding Hamas is in Israel’s best security
interests, can we consider as self-defence an all-out
military aggression against a densely populated city in
which — as the aggressor is aware — the casualties
will be civilians?
Israel uses self-defence as a pretext under the
United Nations Charter, but the latter gives peoples the
right to self-determination and to an end to occupation.

34

Therefore, what Israel is committing is genocide and
ethnic cleansing carried out by an entity that claims to
be representing democracy and freedom.
In conclusion, we are facing an extremely
difficult humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory. While we thank all peace-loving
nations for standing with the Palestinian people in their
plight, we call on all donors to contribute urgently, to
provide more humanitarian assistance and to support
relief organizations operating in the Gaza Strip. Allow
me to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the efforts
of those institutions, especially the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, in carrying out their humanitarian duty in a
dangerous work environment.
The State of Qatar has been among the leading
supporters of the Palestinian people at the bilateral
level, through the decisions of the Council of the
League of Arab States and through the United Nations.
We have recently sent aid to the Palestinians by sea and
air. We strongly support their just cause, as we will not
allow the brotherly Palestinian people to be brought to
its knees.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the agreement reached by the Security Council in
its prior consultations, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to suspend this meeting until tomorrow at
11 a.m.
The meeting was suspended at 9 p.m.

09-20097
