A /67/PV.52

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Ofﬁcial Records

Sixty-seventh session

52

nd plenary meeting
Tuesday, 11 December 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Serbia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Charles
(Trinidad and Tobago), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 75 (continued)
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/67/79,
A/67/79/Corr.1, A/67/79/Add.1 and Add.2)
Report on the work of the Ad Hoc Working
Group of the Whole (A/67/87)
Draft resolution (A/67/L.21)
(b) Sustainable fisheries, including through the
1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating
to the Conservation and Management of
Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory
Fish Stocks, and related instruments
Report of the Secretary-General (A/67/315)
Draft resolution (A/67/L.22)
Mr. Salam (Egypt): At the outset, Egypt expresses
its appreciation to the Secretary-General and the
Secretariat’s Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law
of the Sea for preparing the reports related to the
status of oceans and seas (A/67/79, A/67/79/Corr.1,
A/69/79 Add.1 and Add.2) and to sustainable fisheries
(A/67/315).

12-64324 (E)

Despite the extensive efforts of the United Nations to
address the challenges regarding the state of the oceans
and seas, considerable challenges remain, as human
activities are taking a continuing toll on the viability
of marine ecosystems. Marine pollution is still a major
concern. The high number of offshore drilling incidents
and leakages indicates that the marine environment is
highly vulnerable to pollution resulting from accidents
linked to activities at sea.
Egypt emphasizes the need to further enhance
efforts and programmes seeking to tackle the threats
caused by higher sea temperatures, sea-level rise
caused by climate change and ocean acidification
to marine life, coastal and island communities and
national economies. At the core of those efforts lies
the need to build the capacity of States to implement
relevant international instruments, particularly through
channelling additional funding to support efforts to
mitigate and adapt to the adverse effects of climate
change.
We further emphasize the importance of work at
the international level to strengthen and develop the
field of marine scientific research, particularly in the
context of the International Seabed Authority, and the
study of the effects of mining activities on the marine
environment at sea bottom.
Additional progress is needed in resolving disputes
concerning maritime boundary delimitation, in
particular those with a potential to become sources of
tension and conflict. The United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) provides a sound

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

*1264324*

A/67/PV.52

basis for such situations, and Member States should
avail themselves to the fullest extent possible of the
international judicial bodies such as the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea and the International
Court of Justice.
Turning to maritime security, Egypt notes with great
relief the reduction in reported incidents of piracy and
armed robbery against ships off the coasts of Somalia
during the first six months of 2012, in comparison
with past years. The reduction in such attacks could
be partially attributed to a number of factors, such as
the application of best management practices by the
shipping industry and a continuing naval presence.
However, such international efforts have so far dealt
with only one part of the problem, as the focus is on
combating acts of piracy at sea instead of directing
greater attention to the fundamental underlying causes
on the mainland. Egypt has warned against a partial
approach and has always emphasized, particularly
through its participation in the Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia and its chairmanship
of the Working Group on Electronic Commerce, the
importance of adopting a comprehensive approach
that takes into account the root causes of the problem
and addresses its political, security, economic and
humanitarian dimensions in Somalia.
Moreover, we also express our continued concern
about the incidents of piracy and armed robbery against
ships in the Gulf of Guinea, off West Africa, and the
adverse effects that such incidents have on African
maritime trade. We call on the international community
to give due attention to that issue.
As for sustainable fisheries, Egypt emphasizes
the need for more efforts to protect endangered fish
species, fight illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing, and refrain from destructive fishing practices
on the seabed.
Egypt reaffirms that the States parties to the 1995
Fisheries Agreement should review its provisions to
take into consideration the reservations by non-parties,
especially developing countries, including those
provisions relating to boarding and searching fishing
vessels. That would enable the latter group of countries
to become parties and to enhance cooperation in order
to protect sustainable fisheries and to work for their
development.
As this year marks the thirtieth anniversary of the
opening for signature of UNCLOS, Egypt reiterates

2

its conviction as to the overarching significance of
the Convention in the strengthening of international
peace and security, international cooperation and the
sustainable development of the oceans and seas.
Mr. De Vega (Philippines): The Philippines
welcomes and is greatly encouraged by the importance
that the General Assembly continues to give to the
issue of oceans and the law of the sea. This meeting,
held immediately following our commemoration of the
thirtieth anniversary of the opening for signature of
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
highlights the importance of the Convention.
We note with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral on oceans and the law of the sea, contained in
documents A/67/79, A/67/79/Corr.1, A/67/79Add.1 and
Add.2, as well as the report on the work of the Ad Hoc
Working Group of the Whole, contained in document
A/67/87. Those documents present the various efforts
and the latest developments relating to oceans and the
law of the sea in a comprehensive and detailed manner.
This session’s draft resolution on oceans and the law
of the sea (A/67/L.21), which we will consider today, is
a testament to the continued interest and value placed
by Member States in the sustainable use of oceans and
their resources, anchored on the rule of law.
The United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea is heralded as the constitution of the oceans, in that
it establishes the legal framework governing all aspects
of ocean use and development. It establishes a legal order
that guarantees and safeguards not only the exercise of
those rights but, just as important, compliance with
obligations. In a world of competing interests and of
nations with varying degrees of political, economic
or military stature, that legal framework is not just
important but absolutely necessary. It gives nations an
equal voice and provides nations an equal legal footing.
As an archipelago and a maritime nation that
relies on the oceans for its continued development,
the Philippines attaches the utmost importance to
a just, orderly and meaningful legal regime for our
seas and oceans. We note the continuing development
of international law as it relates to ocean use and
jurisdiction, through the decisions of the International
Tribunal on the Law of the Sea. We await with keen
interest the decisions of the Commission on the Limits
of the Continental Shelf and the International Seabed
Authority. We note the recent relevant decisions of
the International Court of Justice. We likewise look

12-64324

A/67/PV.52

forward to next year’s Meeting of States Parties to the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, as it
holds promise for a meaningful discussion on law of the
sea issues involving States parties and observers alike.
The Secretary-General’s report highlights the
increasing cooperative activities, cross-cutting in all
regions and sectors from marine scientific research and
marine environmental protection to search-and-rescue
at sea and combating piracy and other maritime crimes.
That is clear evidence that States parties are conscious
of the governing principle expressed in the Convention
that the problems of ocean space are closely interrelated
and need to be considered as a whole.
Despite all efforts at cooperation, however,
problems still exist in many areas. Marine pollution
and destructive fishing methods continue to threaten
the fragile ocean environment. Piracy remains a threat
to the safety of navigation, and other maritime crimes
continue to threaten our security. All nations are
continually challenged by the oceans and even by the
application and development of international norms and
conventions governing its uses and the management of
its resources and environment.
The Philippines welcomes the fact that in this year’s
omnibus draft resolution on oceans and the law of the
sea (A/67/L.21), attention is once again drawn to the
impact of piracy on the safety and welfare of seafarers.
Indeed, piracy is a menace to the world. It disrupts
global trade and poses genuine security threats. It has a
direct impact on the lives of seafarers and their families.
The Philippines, with an estimated 350,000 sailors,
accounts for nearly a quarter of the world’s seafarers.
We know full well how each incident of piracy cuts
through the lives of every seafarer and his family. We
welcome the attention given to capacity-building with
regard to the safety and security of seafarers.
The Philippines also welcomes the developments
on the marine environment and marine resources
reflected in Section X of the draft resolution. It also
gives attention to the outcomes of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development in “The future
we want” (resolution 66/288, annex), particularly to
the concern that the health of the oceans and marine
biodiversity are negatively affected by marine pollution
from a number of marine and land-based resources.
International marine scientists have widely regarded
the Philippines’ waters as a centre of global marine
biodiversity. It is in everyone’s interests that such
diversity be protected from those who ignore their

responsibilities, to the detriment of our generation and
posterity.
As the Secretary-General points out in his report
(A/67/79), the importance of marine biodiversity,
including in areas beyond national jurisdiction, for
global food security and for healthy, functioning marine
ecosystems, economic prosperity and sustainable
livelihoods cannot be overstated. We welcome the first
meeting of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working
Group, convened in May in accordance with paragraph
168 of resolution 66/231, with a view to ensuring that the
legal framework for the conservation and sustainable
use of marine biodiversity in areas beyond national
jurisdiction effectively addresses these issues.
The Philippines notes that certain advances have
been made on key issues and concerns in today’s
draft resolution, and wishes to highlight the continued
importance of its Section V, on the peaceful settlement
of disputes. UNCLOS has never been more important
than today for developing countries such as our own,
when overlapping maritime claims in our part of the
world threaten us as never before. It provides a proper
and proven mechanism for peacefully resolving such
claims so as to ensure global and regional peace and
cooperation and stability in the just and sustainable
use of marine natural resources. We believe that the
rules-based approach in UNCLOS is the way forward
in addressing maritime disputes, including in our own
region.
The theme of our session this year is the adjustment
or settlement of international disputes by peaceful
means. This year we also commemorate the thirtieth
anniversary of the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful
Settlement of International Disputes. Against this
backdrop, we are afforded a singular opportunity to
renew our pledge and demonstrate our commitment to
abide by our obligations as responsible members of the
international community. It is on that demonstration of
commitment to the rule of law that the success of the
Convention rests. On that demonstration of commitment
to the rule of law rests the success of all our efforts to
secure for ourselves and posterity the benefits derived
from the responsible use of our world’s oceans.
Before concluding, I would like to express our
appreciation for the statement made in the 51st meeting
by the Permanent Representative of Palau on behalf of
the Pacific Islands Forum, which mentioned the effects
of climate change and related issues, such as sea-level
rise. We saw such effects in Typhoon Bopha, which

12-643243

A/67/PV.52

struck my country recently, causing great loss of life
and property. Indeed, ocean experts and experts on the
law of the sea should definitely consider this issue as
something that needs to be addressed.
As a country that has a keen interest in the
oceans and their resources, the Philippines once again
expresses its commitment to being a constructive and
active partner in this draft resolution, fully aware of the
promise it holds for the maintenance of legal order on
the oceans and for our responsibility and duty to ensure
that we comply with it.
Ms. Prince (United States of America): My
delegation has the honour to co-sponsor the draft
resolutions on oceans and the law of the sea (A/67/L.21)
and on sustainable fisheries (A/67/L.22).
As the host country, we were pleased to participate
in yesterday’s commemoration of the thirtieth
anniversary of the opening for signature of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, and we
are pleased to have the floor today to discuss related
matters: the annual draft resolutions on oceans and the
law of the sea and on sustainable fisheries.
As the world community recognized in Rio this
past summer, oceans, seas and coastal areas form an
integrated and essential component of the Earth’s
ecosystem and are critical to sustaining it. In fact,
healthy oceans and coasts, and their resources, are
necessary for global prosperity. International law, as
reflected in the Convention on the Law of the Sea,
provides the legal framework for the conservation and
sustainable use of the oceans and their resources. The
annual General Assembly resolutions on oceans and
fisheries that we are debating today serve as important
opportunities for the global community to identify key
marine-related issues and develop constructive ways
forward to address them.
We would like to highlight two aspects of this
year’s draft resolution on oceans.
First, we are very pleased that the draft resolution
reflects the many important oceans commitments
in the outcome document of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development, “The future
we want” (resolution 66/288, annex). We believe those
commitments demonstrate the importance of the oceans
and their resources for sustainable development.
In particular, we look forward to further work on
initiatives to address ocean acidification, including

4

the International Atomic Energy Agency’s new Ocean
Acidification International Coordination Centre,
in Monaco. We believe it is critical to increasing
international collaboration on ocean acidification
research, monitoring and observation, particularly with
regard to the effects of acidification on shell-forming
organisms, marine biodiversity and food security. That
new Coordination Centre will serve as an important
means to develop a more comprehensive understanding
of the global effects of ocean acidification. Also in
that regard, we were very pleased by the selection of
the topic of the impacts of ocean acidification on the
marine environment for next year’s United Nations
Open-ended Informal Consultative Process on Oceans
and the Law of the Sea. We look forward to fruitful
exchanges on this important matter in that forum.
The second important aspect of this year’s ocean
resolution that we wish to highlight relates to progress
towards the highly anticipated publication of the
first global integrated marine assessment, or the
world ocean assessment, under the Regular Process
for Global Reporting and Assessment of the State of
the Marine Environment, including Socio-economic
Aspects. The Regular Process was established at the
2002 World Summit on Sustainable Development in
Johannesburg. It is an initiative we have all endorsed,
through the General Assembly, as a means to improve
our understanding of the oceans and the efficacy of
the decisions we make to conserve and manage its
resources. We were pleased to host, last month, a very
successful world oceans assessment workshop for the
wider Caribbean.
We recognize and appreciate the hard work and
dedication of the Group of Experts of the Regular
Process. We look forward to working with all of our
partners to establish a robust pool of experts from
around the globe to write and review that groundbreaking report on the state of the oceans by 2014.
We would also like to highlight two key aspects
in this year’s draft resolution on sustainable fisheries
(A/67/L.22).
First, we are pleased that it reflects the many
important commitments with regard to fisheries,
conservation and management in the outcome document
of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, “The future we want” (resolution 66/288,
annex). We believe those commitments demonstrate
the importance of sustainable fisheries resources
for small-scale fisherfolk and women fish workers,
12-64324

A/67/PV.52

indigenous peoples, developing countries and small
island developing States. In addition, they illustrate
the importance for the international community of
working collaboratively to eliminate illegal, unreported
and unregulated fishing, to ensure transparency and
accountability in fisheries management by regional
fisheries management organizations, and to enhance
protection of vulnerable marine ecosystems from
significant adverse impacts.
For several years, the sustainable fisheries
resolutions have urged States to ensure the conservation
and management of sharks and their long-term
sustainable use. Therefore, the second important aspect
of the draft resolution that we wish to highlight is that it
notes with satisfaction the adoption of the Conservation
Plan for the Memorandum of Understanding on
the Conservation of Migratory Sharks, under the
Convention on Migratory Species of Wild Animals.
The United States places significant importance on that
development and very much welcomes the recognition
by the General Assembly of the important action taken
by the signatories to that agreement.
The United States would like to thank Director
Sergey Tarasenko and the staff of the Division for
Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea for their expertise
and support on both resolutions. We would also
like to thank Ambassador Eden Charles of Trinidad
and Tobago for his coordination of the oceans draft
resolution and Ms. Alice Revell of New Zealand for her
coordination of the fisheries draft resolution. Both did
an outstanding job.
Finally, I would like to conclude by expressing
appreciation for delegations’ hard work and cooperation
in crafting both resolutions. It is our hope that that spirit
of cooperation will characterize our efforts to address
the numerous and complex issues that lie ahead in the
new year.
Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam): Viet Nam joins
other delegations in commending the outstanding
developments in the management and utilization of the
oceans and seas in the framework of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) in various
parts of the world. In full acknowledgement of the
critical role of the oceans and seas in providing global
food security and sustaining economic prosperity and
the well-being of many nations in the world, Viet Nam
supports the continued due attention of the General
Assembly to the promotion of the sustainable use and
development of the oceans and seas and their resources.

We would like to thank the Secretary-General for
the comprehensive reports contained in documents
A/67/79 and A/67/79/Add.1, which provide the Assembly
with an excellent review of the developments related to
ocean affairs and the law of the sea in the past year for
its discussions on the agenda item.
My delegation appreciates the outcome of the
hard work done in the past year by the mechanisms
established by the General Assembly in connection with
this item. We encourage the Assembly to consider and
endorse the recommendations and outcomes of the fifth
meeting of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working
Group to study issues relating to the conservation and
sustainable use of marine biological diversity beyond
areas of national jurisdiction, the thirteenth meeting of
the United Nations Open-ended Informal Consultative
Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea, and the
third meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the
Whole on the Regular Process for Global Reporting and
Assessment of the State of the Marine Environment,
including Socioeconomic Aspects. We also note with
appreciation the achievements of the bodies established
by UNCLOS, including the International Seabed
Authority, the International Tribunal for the Law
of the Sea and the Commission on the Limits of the
Continental Shelf.
We gather here today to celebrate the thirtieth
anniversary of the opening for signature of UNCLOS,
which was undoubtedly an outstanding outcome of the
progressive codification of international law of the sea.
UNCLOS embodies the aspiration of the international
community for a just international legal order in the
oceans and has received almost universal acceptance.
The constitution for the oceans, as it has been aptly
termed, sets out a comprehensive legal framework
within which all activities in the oceans and seas must
be carried out. It constitutes the principal basis for
the maintenance of peace and stability, the promotion
of maritime economic development and the rational
exploitation and conservation of marine natural
resources and the environment in all maritime areas
under or beyond national jurisdiction.
In addition, UNCLOS sets up a new mechanism
of dispute settlement, which offers the States parties
additional important means of peaceful solution to their
disputes in relation to the interpretation and application
of the Convention.
UNCLOS provides a fine balance of rights and
duties of States parties. It does not allow reservations

12-643245

A/67/PV.52

to be made to any provision. States parties to the
Convention are therefore obliged to implement it fully,
in good faith and in a responsible manner. They are to
respect the legitimate rights to which coastal States
parties are entitled in their territorial seas, contiguous
zone, exclusive economic zone and continental shelf.
They are to cooperate in the development of marine
scientific research, the optimum exploitation of living
resources and conservation of the marine environment,
and to manage the international seabed in the interest
of mankind.
Viet Nam actively and constructively participated
in the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of
the Sea in Montego Bay, Jamaica. Viet Nam was among
the 100 States to sign the Convention on 10 December
1982, immediately after its adoption. Since its
ratification of UNCLOS in 1994, Viet Nam has made
great efforts to implement the Convention, as shown in
the report on Viet Nam’s implementation of UNCLOS
submitted to the Secretary-General for circulation as
an official document of the sixty-seventh session of the
General Assembly under agenda item 75 (a), “Oceans
and the law of the sea”.
Furthermore, in line with the provisions of
UNCLOS and related State practices, Viet Nam adopted
the Law of the Sea of Viet Nam in June. The Law is a
significant legislative effort to harmonize the provisions
of UNCLOS into our national law, contributing to the
improvement of the national legal framework relating
to the sea and the islands of Viet Nam. For the first
time, we have a law of the highest legal effect under
the Constitution that contains a comprehensive legal
regime for Viet Nam’s maritime zones and islands. The
Law of the Sea of Viet Nam provides the country and
foreign entities and individuals operating in the marine
areas under Viet Nam’s jurisdiction a fundamental legal
basis for the use, management and protection of marine
areas and resources, including cooperative activities
with other countries on marine economic development.
As a country with 3,260 kilometres of coastline
facing the South China Sea, known as the Eastern Sea in
Vietnamese, Viet Nam’s interest in the sea is significant.
We care very dearly about the maintenance of peace
and stability, including maritime security, as well as the
promotion of prosperity and friendly cooperation in the
South China Sea in accordance with international law,
in particular UNCLOS. In that connection, Viet Nam
calls on all signatory States to fully implement, and
other States to support the implementation of, the 2002

6

Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China
Sea adopted by the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) and China and the 2012 statement of
ASEAN Foreign Ministers on its Six-Point Principles
on the South China Sea. Viet Nam stands ready to work
towards the early conclusion of a code of conduct in
the South China Sea, with a view to further promoting
peace, stability and cooperation in the region.
Ms. Picco (Monaco) (spoke in French): “The
future we want” (resolution 66/288, annex), the outcome
document adopted by the United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development (Rio+20 Conference) in
June, pays particular attention to issues related to the
oceans, their resources and the threats facing them. In
doing so, that important document highlights the vital
political aspect of the General Assembly’s role in its
annual deliberations on oceans and the law of the sea.
The statements made at the commemorative meetings
held in this Hall on the thirtieth anniversary of the
adoption of the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea recall the commitment of States to that true
constitution of the oceans.
Monaco celebrated that event by hosting
the colloquium “The Law of the Sea 30, Years
After Montego Bay: Economic Opportunities and
Environmental Challenges” last October. This year,
various innovative initiatives were also submitted and
implemented. The World Bank launched the Global
Partnership for Oceans and submitted the Declaration
for Healthy and Productive Oceans to Help Reduce
Poverty to the Rio+20 Conference. The international
exposition in Yeosu, Republic of Korea, under the
theme of “The Living Ocean and Coast”, provided the
framework for the third edition of the Monaco Blue
Initiative on the theme of “Marine Protected Areas: a
win-win for biodiversity and economic development”.
Such areas are useful tools in combating overfishing
and reconstituting fish stocks.
In a protected and regulated environment,
sustainable tourism, aquaculture and development
activities can be undertaken successfully without
harming the environment. The Yeosu exposition also
saw the launching of the Secretary-General’s “Oceans
Compact — Healthy Oceans for Prosperity” initiative.
Under the leadership of His Serene Highness Prince
Albert II, the Principality of Monaco is continuing its
long-standing commitment and redoubling its efforts
to promote awareness of the need to protect oceans
on account of their vital role in ensuring sustainable
12-64324

A/67/PV.52

development. The strategic importance of the
contribution of oceans in the areas of food security,
tourism, the protection of marine biodiversity and
energy compels us to implement the parameters of a blue
economy. It also requires that, together, we appreciate
the social, economic and environmental value of the
oceans and organize our cooperation in line with the
realities that we all face.
To that end and in the post-2015 context, Monaco
will support the defining of a sustainable development
goal on the oceans, which should unify our action.
Such cooperation should be established with all actors,
including the private sector, and should be based on the
knowledge provided by the scientific community.
We can only note that, every year, there is an
increasing need to mitigate the effects of climate
change, in particular ocean acidification. The issue of
ocean acidification, which has appeared in the General
Assembly resolution since its sixty-first session,
receives increased attention this year. The Government
of Monaco welcomes the establishment of the Ocean
Acidification International Coordination Centre within
the Environmental Laboratories of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in Monaco. The
setting up of the Centre was declared by the American
authorities and the IAEA on the margins of the Rio+20
Conference.
That cooperation platform will make it possible to
better understand acidification, to deepen research, to
follow developments in various regions of the world
that are not affected in the same way and to define
solutions for the most vulnerable organisms, including
crustaceans and corals.
The second International Workshop on the
acidification of oceans, held in Monaco from 11 to
13 November, was devoted to the socioeconomic impact
of ocean acidification on fishing and aquaculture. Fiftyfive experts from 19 countries and representatives of
international organizations met at the invitation of the
IAEA and of the Scientific Centre of Monaco, which
has been working on ocean acidification for several
years.
We also welcome the fact that the Open-Ended
Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law
of the Sea has been extended for a new period of two
years and that its fourteenth meeting in June 2013 will
focus on the effects of ocean acidification on the marine
environment.

The Principality of Monaco supports the urgency
stated in Rio of taking a decision before the end of the
sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly on drawing
up an international instrument on the conservation and
sustainable exploitation of marine biodiversity in areas
beyond national jurisdiction in the context of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
I would like to warmly thank the representatives of
Trinidad and Tobago and New Zealand, who efficiently
conducted the consultations on the two draft resolutions
that Monaco sponsors (A/67/L.21 and A/67/L.22). Our
thanks also go to the Division for Ocean Affairs and
the Law of the Sea, the specialized institutions of the
United Nations and the other bodies working in the area
of oceans and the law of the sea, whose work provide
the basis for our annual debates.
Mr. Yamazaki (Japan): Let me first join other
representatives in thanking the coordinators of the
two draft resolutions (A/67/L.21 and A/67/L.22),
Ambassador Eden Charles, Deputy Permanent
Representative of Trinidad and Tobago, and Ms. Alice
Revell, Legal Adviser of the Permanent Mission of
New Zealand, for their tremendous work. I also wish to
thank all Member States that have worked together in a
spirit of cooperation during the informal consultations
on the draft resolutions. My appreciation also goes to
the United Nations Secretariat for its assistance.
With regard to agenda item 75 (a), entitled “Oceans
and the law of the sea”, Japan would like to point out
that it is a maritime State surrounded by water and
dependent on maritime transport for nearly all imports
of energy resources, including oil and minerals. The
adoption of draft resolution A/67/L.21, which deals
with crucial issues for the maintenance of peace and
security in the world, such as the peaceful settlement
of disputes, the freedom of navigation, safety at sea
and compliance with international laws, including
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS), is extremely important to maritime States,
such as Japan, and to the international community as
a whole. In that regard, Japan is pleased to co-sponsor
that draft resolution, which is entitled “Oceans and
the law of the sea”. Japan would also like to take this
opportunity to welcome the accession of Ecuador and
Swaziland to UNCLOS.
With respect to the International Tribunal for the
Law of the Sea, Japan highly appreciates the important
role played by the Tribunal in terms of the peaceful
settlement of disputes, as well as the maintenance

12-643247

A/67/PV.52

and development of the rule of the law at sea. Japan
welcomes the fact that cases have been continually
submitted to the Tribunal since its establishment.
Japan also welcomes the Tribunal’s first maritime
delimitation judgement, which was delivered in March
of this year, following the first advisory opinion of the
Seabed Disputes Chamber of the Tribunal, issued in
February 2011, pursuant to a request by the Council of
the International Seabed Authority. Japan is pleased to
see that the Tribunal’s work covers various fields. Japan
is committed to continuing its contribution to and full
support for the valuable work of the Tribunal, under the
leadership of President Yanai.
With regard to the International Seabed Authority,
Japan welcomes the adoption in July of the Regulations
on Prospecting and Exploration for Cobalt-rich
Ferromanganese Crusts in the Area, following the
adoption of the Regulations on Prospecting and
Exploration for Polymetallic Nodules in the Area
in 2000 and the Regulations for Prospecting and
Exploration for Polymetallic Sulphides in the Area in
2010.
In view of the importance of ensuring a wellbalanced
approach
between
exploration
and
environmental protection in the Area, Japan highly
values the workshops on such issues organized by the
Authority. Japan has been supporting the activities
undertaken by the Authority in various ways, including
through the Japanese contractor for the exploration of
polymetallic nodules and other relevant organizations.
I would like to affirm Japan’s intention to continue its
support to the Authority.
With regard to the Commission on the Limits of the
Continental Shelf, I wish to pay tribute to its consistent
work on a total of 61 submissions, which has led to
the adoption of 18 recommendations, including on the
submission of Japan. In the light of the considerable
number of submissions, Japan is confident that the
several measures adopted by the Commission, including
on the extended duration of the Commission’s sessions
in 2013, on the basis of decisions taken through last
year’s resolution under this agenda item (resolution
66/231), will help solve the Commission’s workload
issue.
Following its pledge at the twenty-second Meeting
of States Parties to UNCLOS, held in June, Japan made
an additional disbursement of approximately $352,000
to the trust fund at the end of November for the purpose
of defraying the costs of participation in its meetings
8

by members of the Commission from developing
States. Japan firmly believes that through voluntary
contributions to the trust funds by State parties and
the steady implementation of the measures decided last
year to solve the issue of the heavy workload of the
Commission, the smooth and expeditious consideration
of submissions by the Commission, to which members
were newly elected in June, will be possible.
Regarding the maritime safety and security issue,
piracy off the coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden,
which is now spreading to areas off the East Africa
coast and the Indian Ocean, continues to pose a serious
threat to maritime security. Japan is of the view that
a multilayered approach that includes assistance to
maritime enforcement capacity-building in Somalia
and its neighbouring countries and other medium- to
long-term efforts to strengthen stability in Somalia, in
addition to operations by naval vessels, must be pursued
to suppress piracy.
Japan has currently deployed escort ships and patrol
aircraft to the region, and works together with other
countries to deal with piracy. In addition, Japan has so far
disbursed $14.6 million and $3.5 million, respectively,
to the International Maritime Organization Djibouti
Code of Conduct Trust Fund, which is a multi-donor
trust fund that Japan initiated, and to the Trust Fund to
Support Initiatives of States Countering Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia. Japan also continues to play a leading
role within the framework of the Regional Cooperation
Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery
against Ships in Asia.
With regard to agenda item 75 (b), entitled
“Sustainable fisheries”, Japan would like to state that, as
a responsible fishing State and a State party to UNCLOS
and the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of
the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to
the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, Japan is
committed to addressing the promotion of sustainable
use through the conservation and management
of marine living resources and the appropriate
conservation of the marine ecosystem, in cooperation
with the parties concerned, through bilateral fisheries
agreements, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations and regional fisheries management
organizations.
Japan welcomes recent developments in the
management of high-seas bottom fishing, including the
12-64324

A/67/PV.52

conclusion of arrangements establishing new regional
fisheries management organizations, which reflects
earlier resolutions on sustainable fisheries, especially
those adopted in 2006 and 2009. Japan will further
promote the management of high-seas bottom fishing
by mobilizing support for the earliest entry into force
of those arrangements in cooperation with other parties
and related organizations.
Before concluding, Japan wishes to express its
hope that the two draft resolutions before us, which
are the result of intensive negotiations among Member
States in a spirit of cooperation during the informal
consultations, will be duly adopted at this session of
the General Assembly.
Mr. Panin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We speak with special feeling in today’s meeting on the
issue of the international law of the sea, on the occasion
of the thirtieth anniversary of the opening for signature
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
in 1982. We echo words spoken yesterday and today
on the historic significance of the Convention and its
role in ensuring effective international cooperation in
the use of the world’s oceans. We pay tribute to those
who were present at the birth of the Convention and
contributed to its drafting.
Given the number of parties to the Convention
from all regions of the world, it can be said without
doubt that this international treaty, encompassing all
aspects of marine activity, has become a genuinely
global instrument. It is important that we vigilantly
maintain the integrity of the legal regime established
by the Convention and the multilateral, conscientious
implementation of its provisions, in the interest of stable
and predictable relations among States in maritime and
marine matters.
Of course, the world is changing. It is developing,
and international law is also developing. Recently, we
have heard ideas about expanding some provisions of
the Convention. In some cases, those ideas are based on
situations that actually exist, and we must not back away
from making comprehensive, in-depth studies of such
proposals. At the same time, however, we must refrain
from taking steps that would change the Convention’s
time-tested norms.
We must also bear in mind that the Convention
was adopted as a package decision and a multifaceted
document that reflects a very delicate balance of
interests. The Convention was intentionally made

flexible to ensure that it could be successfully
implemented in practice over an extended period of
time. Today, we can say with pride that the principles
on which that universal international document is based
have proved their worth. The Convention is a living and
contemporary instrument of great importance to the
international community.
The significance of the world’s oceans for
humankind continues to increase. It is highly
important today to ensure the sustainability of marine
activity, maritime safety, the management of marine
resources, and a healthy marine environment for future
generations. We stress that States themselves should
play the main role in addressing problems. The scale
and complexity of the problems we face in this sphere
require us to focus our efforts on developing a unifying
agenda. In that context, we note the understanding on
marine issues that was achieved during the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development in Rio
de Janeiro in June.
The Russian Federation calls for the conservation
and sustainable use of marine resources, in accordance
with the Convention. At the same time, in the absence
of reliable science and a solid legal basis we cannot
support initiatives that may lead to the arbitrary
limitation of marine activities.
We welcome the progress achieved in the Ad Hoc
Open-ended Informal Working Group to study issues
relating to the conservation and sustainable use of
marine biological diversity beyond areas of national
jurisdiction. We suggest that the Group should be
the primary forum for reviewing issues of biological
ocean resources. We welcome the General Assembly’s
decision to hold two thematic workshops in 2013 to
work towards a better understanding of problems in
that sphere.
The successful functioning of the bodies set up
pursuant to the Convention inspires hope. States must
take further measures to create favourable conditions
for their work. In that regard, particular attention
should be given to the Commission on the Limits of the
Continental Shelf, which has a considerable workload.
In our view, the Commission is fulfilling its functions
very well, and we commend the measures aimed at
speeding up the processing of State communications
without any loss in the quality of the reviews.
We note the high quality of the work of the Division
for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, under

12-643249

A/67/PV.52

Director Sergey Tarasenko. We believe that, given the
increased workload of the Division and other relevant
entities, States should offer additional support. We
welcome the increasing activity of the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, which demonstrates
the trust States place in the Tribunal as an effective
instrument of international justice. We highly commend
its contribution to developing jurisprudence on the law
of the sea and the positive trend in its work. We hope
that will continue in the future.
The Russian Federation pays particular attention to
measures to conserve and manage fish resources. We
welcome the increase in measures to combat illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing. We are pleased to
note the consistent steps being taken to bolster controls
by flag States, and the increasingly effective measures
implemented by port States. The Russian Federation
will continue to actively participate in measures to
protect vulnerable marine ecosystems, both on its own
and within the framework of relevant regional fisheries
management organizations.
In conclusion, we thank Ambassador Eden Charles
and Ms. Alice Revell, coordinators of the informal
consultations on draft resolution A/67/L.21 on oceans
and the law of the sea and draft resolution A/67/L.22 on
sustainable fisheries, for their work to create consensus.
Mrs. Daniel (Nauru): At the outset, let me align
my delegation with the statements delivered by
the representative of Palau on behalf of the Pacific
Island Forum and by the representative of Samoa on
behalf of the Pacific small island developing States
(see A/67/PV.51).
The topic of this meeting is an important one to
Nauru. Marine and coastal resources are critical to
our economy, our food security and our culture. The
sustainable use of our marine resources is one of our
primary tools for eradicating poverty, and we hope to
ensure healthy oceans and access to their resources not
only for ourselves but for future generations as well.
Unfortunately, there are many challenges to that hope.
Marine, ocean, coastal and fisheries resources
are the foundations of the economies of Pacific small
island developing States (SIDS) and represent a critical
pathway to future growth. However, current benefits to
the Pacific from the utilization of those resources are
inequitable, as is the conservation burden. That must
change.

10

The capacity of developing States, including
the least developed among them, and of small island
developing States to participate in straddling and highly
migratory fisheries has to be built or enhanced, and
we must take the measures necessary for developing
States participating in regional fisheries management
organizations to enjoy a greater and fairer share of
fishing opportunities. To that end, we look forward
to the identification and mainstreaming by 2014 of
strategies that will assist our people to realize the
benefits of sustainable fisheries, including through
improved market access. We remind all of the need to
ensure access to fisheries and markets for countries
like Nauru, as agreed to in the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks, and reiterated in draft resolution A/67/L.22,
on sustainable fisheries, which we have come here to
adopt.
The 2014 timeline for that work will be especially
important, given the upcoming International Conference
on SIDS to be held that year in the Pacific. As noted in
draft resolution A/67/L.21, the omnibus text on oceans
and the law of the sea, the Conference will consider,
among other issues, the challenges SIDS face in the
conservation and sustainable use of marine resources
and in the preservation of the marine environment. We
thank our neighbour Samoa for hosting that historic
meeting, and we look forward to working with others
to ensure its success.
We are deeply concerned by the numerous
pressures being put on the oceans. One critical example
is overfishing. Scientists have repeatedly stated that
overfishing is one of the major threats to ocean health.
Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing further
exacerbates the threat, while destructive fishing
practices such as bottom trawling cause enormous
damage to marine ecosystems.
The issues are not new, but innovative approaches,
renewed commitment and urgent implementation of
strategies to combat unsustainable and destructive
fishing must be at the forefront of building a resilient
ocean, thereby safeguarding food security and a
sustainable future for countries like Nauru. We are
therefore pleased that the international community has
committed to maintaining or restoring stocks to levels
that can produce maximum sustainable yield by the

12-64324

A/67/PV.52

2015 deadline, as agreed to under the Johannesburg
Plan of Implementation. We hope that those will not be
empty words.
We in Nauru are proud that the biomass of all the
highly migratory and straddling fish stocks assessed by
the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission
(WCPFC) are above the levels capable of producing
maximum sustainable yield, as qualified by relevant
environmental and other factors, and that none of those
tropical regional fish stocks require rebuilding, thanks
largely to effective cooperation among coastal States of
the region.
We do, however, have concerns that the biomass
of bigeye tuna might be reduced below maximum
sustainable yield by 2015 if high levels of fishing
mortality continue on the tropical Pacific high seas. We
hope that the collective membership of the WCPFC will
follow the lead of the parties to the Nauru Agreement in
imposing compulsory limits on the vessels under their
jurisdiction, particularly longliners. The nations that
are parties to the Nauru Agreement will be applying an
overall effort to limit longline fishing in their combined
exclusive economic zones — an area of nearly 14 million
square kilometres — from 1 January 2013.
Another issue of deep concern is ocean acidification.
The combined impacts of climate change — namely,
sea-level rise, increased sea-surface temperature and
intensified storm activity — and the adverse effects
of ocean acidification caused by increased dissolved
carbon dioxide heighten the threat to ocean health.
Coral reef ecosystems are particularly susceptible to
climate change and ocean acidification and may be the
first marine ecosystems to collapse without urgent,
increased mitigation action.
Urgent and deep reductions in greenhouse-gas
emissions are a global imperative. In addition, given
existing levels of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and
oceans, building the resilience of vulnerable marine
ecosystems to the impacts of climate change and
ocean acidification is essential to enabling sustainable
development and eradicating poverty. We look forward
to the increased focus on that issue at the upcoming
meeting of the Informal Consultative Process on
Oceans and the Law of the Sea.
We would also like to highlight the new text in this
year’s draft resolution on sustainable fisheries on the
need to quantify and control the use of large-scale fish
aggregating devices, which are man-made structures

that provide shelter for fish in the open ocean. Setting
purse-seine nets around these devices often results in
catches of juvenile bigeye tuna that have not yet had
a chance to breed, contributing to overfishing of the
species. In the context of its national plan of action,
Nauru is proud to state that we were among the first to
institute controls on industrial fish-aggregating devices.
We are pleased to see that the international community
now also recognizes the need to quantify and control
the use of these devices, and we look forward to the
implementation of such action.
One of our biggest problems at the moment is not
with highly migratory and straddling stocks — which
we feel are coming under control in the tropical
western Pacific — but with artisanal reef fisheries. The
information needs of those local fisheries are of an order
of magnitude more complex than those of tuna fisheries,
and yet in our region the development resources devoted
to them by the international community are, in fact, of
an order of magnitude less.
Those are national issues and, of course, require
national action, but we would ask that international
initiatives and regional agencies not lose sight of the
fisheries that are so important to our people at the
local level and that they not concentrate their efforts
exclusively upon the straddling and highly migratory
fisheries, with respect to which they can get the most
recognition or obtain the easiest wins.
I am not talking about increased basic research on
reef ecosystems; we have enough species lists to last us
a lifetime. What we need is more attention to fishing
itself — building systems that work at the local level
by talking to fishers, compiling hard information on
their activities and needs, and helping them to work out
socially applicable solutions to any overfishing that is
identified. We would urge that those considerations be
taken under advisement in the work of our partners and
of the United Nations system.
In the outcome document of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development, “The
Future We Want” (resolution 66/288, annex), leaders
committed themselves to protecting and restoring
the health, productivity and resilience of oceans and
marine ecosystems, enabling their conservation and
sustainable use for present and future generations. We
believe that we will have moved in the correct direction
with the adoption of the draft resolutions here today. We
look forward to further advancing that work through

12-6432411

A/67/PV.52

the eventual adoption of a sustainable development goal
on oceans.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Oceans and seas cover 71 per cent of the Earth’s
surface and are closely linked to the survival and
development of humankind. The maritime order is a
significant component of the international order. As
an important legal document governing contemporary
international maritime order, the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), with
due regard for the sovereignty of all States, establishes
norms on fundamental maritime issues, including the
legal status of various parts of the ocean, the rights
and obligations of States, the utilization of maritime
resources, environmental protection of the oceans and
seas, maritime demarcation and dispute settlement.
In a stroke of creative genius, it has designated
international seabed areas beyond national jurisdictions
as the common heritage of humankind and established
institutions, such as the International Seabed Authority,
the Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf
(CLCS) and the International Tribunal for the Law of the
Sea (ITLOS), to effectively manage the exploitation of
international seabed resources, the delimitation of the
outer limits of the continental shelf, and the settlement
of maritime disputes. The Convention affirms that
matters not regulated by it continue to be governed by
the rules and principles of basic international law, thus
ensuring its inclusiveness and openness.
To date, the Convention has earned worldwide
recognition and has been widely supported and upheld
by the international community. On the occasion of
the commemoration of the thirtieth anniversary of the
opening for signature of the Convention, I wish to pay
the highest tribute to those who contributed to the birth
of the Convention, particularly the late Ambassador
Arvid Pardo of Malta and the late Ambassador Hamilton
Shirley Amerasinghe, of Sri Lanka.
I wish to take the opportunity to elaborate on China’s
position and views on various aspects of the oceans and
the law of the sea. First, China highly commends the
CLCS for its contribution to the balanced handling of
the legitimate rights and interests of coastal States and
the overall interests of the international community.
We support the Commission’s ongoing fulfilment of its
mandate in accordance with the Convention and its own
rules of procedure, in order to maintain the quality and
professionalism of its consideration of submissions. We
call on the international community to continue to assist
12

the Commission in finding appropriate solutions to the
problems related to its workload, and we congratulate
its members on their election.
Secondly, the Chinese delegation congratulates the
International Seabed Authority on its achievements
over the past year, and Mr. Nii Allotey Odunton on
his re-election as Secretary-General of the Authority.
The Chinese Government has continuously and firmly
supported the work of the Authority and the effective
and full participation of developing countries in
international seabed affairs.
In July, China made a further donation of $20,000
to the Authority’s voluntary trust fund to facilitate the
participation of developing countries in meetings of
the Legal and Technical Commission and the Finance
Committee. Last month, a Chinese research institute
and the Authority jointly convened an international
workshop in Beijing on the implementation of article 8
of the Convention. The Authority has begun formulating
regulations on the exploitation of resources in the
Area. China is of the view that such formulating work
should be progressive, aligned with technological and
industrial advances, and reflect an appropriate balance
between resource utilization and environmental
protection, and between exploitation interests and those
of the international community as a whole.
Thirdly, China notes the increasing activities of
the ITLOS in terms of both its caseload and number
of decisions, the increasing topical coverage of cases,
and the Tribunal’s growing influence, which indicate
that the judicial body has entered a new phase of
comprehensive implemention of its mandate under
the Convention. The Tribunal is also playing an active
part in assisting the capacity-building of developing
countries, which China greatly appreciates. China
values and supports the important role of the Tribunal
in the peaceful settlement of maritime disputes, and the
maintenance of the international maritime order and
in raising awareness on issues concerning the law of
the oceans and seas. We will continue to support the
efforts of the Tribunal to enhance the capacity-building
of developing countries.
Fourthly, the Chinese side supports the adoption by
the General Assembly of the concrete recommendations
of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group to
study issues related to the conservation and sustainable
use of marine biological diversity beyond areas of
national jurisdiction. China is of the view that since
the high seas and international seabed Area involve
12-64324

A/67/PV.52

the interests of the entire international community, the
proper handling of marine biodiversity of those areas is
crucial to the maintenance of an equitable and rational
international maritime order. Relevant work should
therefore proceed incrementally and fully accommodate
the legitimate needs of all countries, especially
developing countries, for marine bioresources.
In addition, China notes with satisfaction the
establishment of the institutional framework of the
Regular Process for Global Reporting and Assessment
of the State of the Marine Environment, including
Socioeconomic Aspects, as well as the positive progress
on various aspects of the Regular Process. Under United
Nations auspices, in February China hosted a workshop
in Sanya on the eastern and south-eastern Asia seas,
thereby contributing to regional capacity-building in
marine environmental assessment. China considers the
smooth progress of the Regular Process important and
looks forward to its anticipated outcomes. We support
enhancing the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law
of the Sea as the secretariat of the Regular Process.
Fifthly, China continues to attach high importance
to the issue of greenhouse-gas emissions from ships,
and has taken note of the relevant work carried out
by the International Maritime Organization. China
believes that the key to addressing that question is
to uphold the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities established by the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change. At present,
work on that issue should focus on facilitating the
technological advancement of developing countries
through technology transfer and capacity-building with
a view to improving the energy efficiency of ships.
Sixthly, as a responsible fishing nation, China takes an
active part in the work of various international fisheries
organizations and is committed to strengthening the
conservation and management of fisheries resources.
China will continue to work with the countries
concerned to promote the development and refinement
of the international fisheries management regime and
the regulation of fishing activities in order to achieve
the sustainable use of marine bioresources, conserve
the marine ecological balance, and ensure the sharing
of fisheries benefits by all countries.
China advocates enhanced international cooperation
and coordination in line with the spirit of the Convention
in order to safeguard the peace, security and openness
of the oceans and to promote the common development
of all countries. We advocate the establishment and

maintenance of a harmonious maritime order under
which the international community must emphasize
both the proper protection of the ocean and its rational
use; strike a balance between the interests of coastal
States and the overall interests of the international
community; properly accommodate the legitimate rights
and freedoms of all countries, especially developing
countries, landlocked countries and geographically
disadvantaged countries, with respect to the use of the
ocean; and promote the peaceful settlement of maritime
disputes in accordance with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and of international
law, including the UNCLOS.
China has consistently pursued an independent
foreign policy of peace and good-neighbourliness
by building friendships and partnerships with
neighbouring countries.
As to international insular and maritime disputes,
China maintains its position that sovereign States
directly concerned should seek a peaceful settlement
through friendly consultation and negotiation based
on international law, including the Convention. China
believes that establishing and maintaining a harmonious
maritime order will enable all countries to benefit from
the opportunities offered by the ocean, seek common
responses to the challenges of the ocean, and further
the common development of marine areas. In that
context, such order is in the interest of the international
community as a whole.
Finally, I thank Ambassador Eden Charles of
Trinidad and Tobago and Ms. Alice Revell of New
Zealand for their contributions as facilitators of draft
resolutions A/67/L.21 and A/67/L.22.
Mr. Shapoval (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his extensive
and helpful report on the subject of oceans and the law
of the sea (A/67/79). Aligning itself with the statement
of the European Union, my delegation would like to
take the floor in its national capacity.
These days, we are celebrating the thirtieth
anniversary of the opening for signature of the 1982
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS). I am proud that my delegation is among
those that have put their signatures to that historic
document, which has indeed become a constitution
for the oceans. An affirmative answer will respond
to the question raised by Ambassador Tommy Koh
of Singapore 30 years ago: yes, the Convention has

12-6432413

A/67/PV.52

stood the test of time. Moreover, that monumental
achievement of the international community is about
to achieve universality, with 164 States parties as of
today. I would like to reiterate my country’s strongest
commitment to the Convention as a comprehensive
legal framework covering all aspects of the activities
related to oceans and seas.
I now turn to the draft resolutions before us
today. Ukraine is grateful to all delegations for their
cooperation during the consultations. We appreciate
the fact that this year’s omnibus draft resolution on
oceans and the law of the sea (A/67/L.21) highlights the
importance of keeping up efforts aimed at providing
safety and security in international maritime shipping.
One of the major challenges in this field is piracy
and armed robbery at sea. Although considerable gains
have been made thus far in combating this threat, a
lot of work is still ahead of us. Noting that the current
declining trend in the number of attacks is reversible
and predominantly dependent on the international
naval patrol, my country has decided to make its own
contribution in this regard. The decision has been
taken by the Government of Ukraine to send the frigate
Hetman Sahaidachny, a flagship of the Ukrainian Naval
Forces, to the waters off the Horn of Africa as a part of
NATO Operation Ocean Shield. The frigate, equipped
with a deck helicopter, is currently undergoing final
preparations to head for the waters off the Somali coast.
The fight again piracy cannot be successful without
the fight against impunity for its perpetrators and
organizers. In this respect, Ukraine welcomes the fact
that this year’s draft resolution once again encourages
Member States to make efforts to bring pirates and
their sponsors to justice. Current statistics in this
respect are very encouraging; 1,186 individuals are
being prosecuted or awaiting prosecution in 21 States.
Building on this initial success will not be possible
without a sufficient legal basis for the apprehension and
prosecution of those who are alleged to have committed
those crimes. International law, as reflected in the
Convention, enables us to apprehend and prosecute
pirates. The key role in this process is played by our
national legislation.
In this regard, my delegation is very pleased
that, upon its proposal, the omnibus draft resolution
calls upon States to actively cooperate with a view to
developing their national anti-piracy legislation. Our
national legal tools have to correspond to the current
challenges and threats to maritime safety and security,
14

of which piracy is the most pressing. Ukraine stands
ready to further actively engage in this subject matter
within the framework of the United Nations and other
competent entities, and welcomes Member States’
initiatives and suggestions in this regard.
As one of the major States of seafarers’ origin,
Ukraine notes with appreciation that the comprehensive
annual resolution on the law of the sea has continuously
encouraged Member States, the International Maritime
Organization, the International Labour Organization
and other actors to develop measures aimed at
protecting the welfare of seafarers who are victims
of pirates, including measures for their post-incident
treatment and reintegration into society. We highly
appreciate the work carried out in this field, including
the development of guidance to address care for
seafarers who have suffered from attacks and capture
by pirates. We urge flag States and ship owners to do
their utmost in ensuring the security of crew members.
Our highest appreciation goes to the Division for
Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea for providing us
excellent conference services and support throughout
the year. We are also profoundly grateful to the
coordinators of both draft resolutions for their valuable
stewardship during the negotiations.
Mr. Neo (Singapore): My delegation is privileged
to address the General Assembly under agenda item 75,
“Oceans and the law of the sea”. We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive reports on oceans and
the law of the sea (A/67/79) and on sustainable fisheries
(A/67/315). We also thank the coordinators of draft
resolutions A/67/L.21 and A/67/L.22, Ambassador
Eden Charles of Trinidad and Tobago and Ms. Alice
Revell of New Zealand, for their able stewardship of the
consultations. We also express our appreciation to the
staff of the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of
the Sea for their support on these drafts.
Yesterday, the General Assembly commemorated
the thirtieth anniversary of the signing of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).
Singapore is grateful that our own Ambassador Tommy
Koh was given the honour of presiding over the Third
United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea,
which gave birth to that constitution of the oceans,
which has stood for three decades.
In many ways, UNCLOS created a new global
order. It struck a balance between increasing the
jurisdictional claims of coastal States over adjacent

12-64324

A/67/PV.52

sea areas and preserving the important rights of the
international community in areas claimed by coastal
States, including the freedom of navigation. UNCLOS
also entrenched the concept of the common heritage
of humankind in international law, which safeguarded
the collective rights of nations over parts of the oceans
that were beyond claims that coastal States could
legitimately make. Just as importantly, UNCLOS
established a comprehensive set of dispute-settlement
mechanisms that enabled States to resolve their
differences peacefully through bilateral negotiations,
arbitration or third-party adjudication. That has
helped to maintain peace, order and discipline in the
governance of our oceans.
My delegation welcomes the two new ratifications
of the Convention during the period under review,
bringing the total number of parties to 164. For the
most part, the Convention already reflects customary
international law. However, we encourage the
minority of non-party member States to give serious
consideration to accession so that the Convention will
achieve universal membership.
Singapore is committed to the full and complete
implementation of the law of the sea. We are a small
island nation strategically located at the junction of the
Straits of Malacca and Singapore and the South China
Sea, the gateway between the Indian and Pacific Oceans.
We are also one of the three littoral States bordering the
Straits of Malacca and Singapore. As our total trade
is three times our gross domestic product, freedom of
navigation is of critical importance to Singapore.
Today, 90 per cent of global trade is carried by sea.
About half of that passes through the Straits of Malacca
and Singapore. It is therefore in the interest of all States
to continue to preserve the freedom of navigation and
passage rights through these and other waters, and
even more so in these uncertain economic times, as the
freedom of navigation has a direct and tangible impact
on global trade.
New possibilities and challenges have emerged
since the adoption of UNCLOS 30 years ago. New
technologies have made possible the exploration and
exploitation of resources in areas beyond national
jurisdiction. At the same time, increasing coastal
populations have put pressure on coastal and marine
ecosystems. Some of these challenges may prompt fresh
debate over the sufficiency or proper application of
UNCLOS. The international community has to respond
to these challenges in a way that maintains not only

the balance of uses in the oceans and seas, but also the
peaceful order that we have enjoyed therein. We must
resist the temptation to put undue emphasis on certain
aspects of the Convention that may be of keen national
interest at a particular point of time, and risk reading
into the Convention interpretations that the drafters
never intended.
We must therefore remind ourselves that UNCLOS
was drafted as a package, and no selectivity should be
exercised in its application. It is critical to maintain the
indivisibility of the Convention, which is the sole and
overarching legal framework for the oceans and seas.
Some of the new challenges we face are explicitly dealt
with in the Convention’s text; others are not. But it is
my delegation’s firm view that the Convention contains
both the core set of principles that should be applied
and the necessary scope for us to successfully address
all emerging issues relating to the oceans and seas.
The international community reached an important
and significant milestone on sustainable development
in June this year in Rio de Janeiro. Our leaders agreed
to the outcome document of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development (resolution
66/288, annex), which built on the Rio Declaration on
Environment and Development and on Agenda 21. Our
leaders committed to addressing, on an urgent basis,
the issue of the conservation and sustainable use of
marine biological diversity beyond areas of national
jurisdiction, including by taking a decision on the
development of an international instrument under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Our leaders also urged all parties to UNCLOS
to fully implement their obligations under the
Convention, recognizing that we should be careful not
to undermine freedom of navigation and other equally
important interests. It bears repeating that the careful
compromises embodied in UNCLOS have served us
well. As the international community charts the future
of our oceans, it is imperative that we do so without
undermining the integrity of the Convention.
Mrs. Mørch Smith (Norway): The United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) sets
forth the legal order for the world’s seas and oceans. It
provides a solid foundation for the peaceful, responsible
and predictable management of the oceans. The peaceful
and sustainable use of the oceans and sound fisheries
management remain key priorities for Norway.

12-6432415

A/67/PV.52

Another Norwegian priority is global food
security. Oceans are critical to global food security,
and sustainable and responsible marine management
is of vital importance if the oceans are to continue to
be a source of human food. Norway supports measures
to strengthen sustainable fisheries management and
actions to protect vulnerable marine ecosystems from
destructive fishing practices. The regional fisheries
management organizations play a key role in that
context.
We welcome the adoption of the outcome document
of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development (resolution 66/288, annex) earlier this
year, which stressed the crucial role of healthy marine
ecosystems, sustainable fisheries and sustainable
aquaculture for food security and nutrition and in
providing for the livelihoods of millions of people. The
General Assembly emphasizes those important issues
in this year’s draft resolution on sustainable fisheries
(A/67/L.22) and encourages the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations to give due priority
to those issues in its future work.
Over the past few years, we have become concerned
about the connections between international organized
crime and fisheries crime. We support the ongoing
work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and INTERPOL, and welcome the fact that there is
greater awareness of those links in General Assembly
discussions.
It is essential to protect biological diversity in order
to maintain the living networks and systems that are
the basis of our existence. There is an urgent need to
implement effective measures to combat threats to
marine biodiversity. It is important to underline that
this also applies to areas under national jurisdiction and
that every coastal State is responsible for implementing
effective measures.
We welcome the work of the Ad Hoc Open-ended
Informal Working Group to study issues relating to the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction. We
support and remain committed to the decision taken in
Rio earlier this year to address on an urgent basis the
issue of the conservation and sustainable use of marine
biodiversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction. It
is important that all negative impacts on biodiversity
be examined. Furthermore, possible gaps in the legal
framework and in the implementation of existing

16

instruments should be identified, and a decision should
be taken on the possible development of an international
instrument under the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea. We welcome the opportunity to address
those issues further at the inter-sessional workshops in
May 2013 and at the meeting of the Ad Hoc Open-ended
Informal Working Group in August 2013.
Norway firmly believes that regional organizations
play a crucial part in protecting marine biodiversity in
areas beyond national jurisdiction. Impacts on marine
biodiversity may differ from region to region; different
challenges require different solutions. Priority should
be given to improving the effectiveness of regional
management bodies.
Norway is concerned about the impact on the marine
environment of increased concentrations of greenhouse
gases in the atmosphere. We know that elevated levels
of anthropogenic carbon dioxide in the atmosphere are
rapidly changing ocean chemistry, leading to ocean
acidification. This may have dramatic consequences
for the marine environment and ecosystems. There
is a need for a fuller understanding of the effects of
ocean acidification on marine organisms. The outcome
document of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development calls for support for initiatives
that address that issue. Norway therefore supports the
proposal for the United Nations Open-ended Informal
Consultative Process to focus on ocean acidification
during discussions at its fourteenth meeting.
Mr. Sharma (India): At the outset, I wish to take
this opportunity to thank the President for convening
this meeting to consider agenda item 75, “Oceans and
the law of the sea”, which holds great significance for
the international community as a whole.
This year, the subject of oceans occupies a special
place as the United Nations commemorates the
thirtieth anniversary of the opening for signature of the
Convention on the Law of the Sea. I congratulate the
international community on this occasion.
Oceans play a vital role in supporting life on
Earth. The outcome document of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development held in Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil, in June, entitled “The future we want”
(resolution 66/288, annex), recognized oceans and seas
as integrated and essential components of the Earth’s
ecosystem that are critical to sustaining it. That will be
possible, however, only through the proper management
and use of ocean resources and the preservation and

12-64324

A/67/PV.52

protection of the marine environment. The oceans
are facing a number of challenges that include illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing, the deterioration
of the marine environment, biodiversity loss, climate
change, and problems related to maritime safety and
security, including acts of piracy.
We would like to express our serious concern over
piracy and armed robbery at sea, particularly off the
coast of Somalia. Piracy is a grave threat to freedom of
the seas, maritime trade and the security of maritime
shipping. It endangers the lives of seafarers, affects
national security and territorial integrity, and hampers
the economic development of nations. India is actively
cooperating with international efforts to combat
piracy and armed robbery at sea. We support the joint
and concerted efforts of the international community
to tackle that menace. In that regard, we express our
deep appreciation to the Contact Group on Piracy off
the Coast of Somalia which, since its establishment
in January 2009, has served as an excellent forum for
international cooperation and coordination in the fight
against piracy off the coast of Somalia.
The 1982 United Nations Law of the Sea Convention
is the key international instrument governing ocean
affairs. It sets out the legal framework for activities
in oceans and seas and is of strategic importance as
the basis for national, regional and global action in the
marine sector. With 164 parties, the Convention enjoys
near-universal acceptance. Swaziland and Ecuador
became the latest States to accede after joining the
Convention on 24 September.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(A/67/79) and its two addenda on issues concerning
oceans and the law of the sea. We also welcome the
report (A/67/120) of the co-Chairs of the thirteenth
meeting of the United Nations Open-ended Informal
Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea,
during which deliberations were held on the topic of
marine renewable energies.
The oceans have significant potential for
contributing to meeting energy needs, improving
economic well-being and reducing greenhouse-gas
emissions. However, while marine renewable energies
offer opportunities, they also pose environmental
and economic challenges, especially to developing
countries, including in the areas of the conduct of
scientific research and acquisition of technological
knowledge, which can be successful only with effective
international cooperation and coordination.

We welcome the report on the work of the Ad Hoc
Working Group of the Whole on the Regular Process
for Global Reporting and Assessment of the State of
the Marine Environment, including Socioeconomic
Aspects (A/67/87). We commend the Working Group’s
efforts towards producing the first global integrated
assessment of the state of the marine environment and
look forward to its completion by 2014. We also welcome
the report of the work of the Ad Hoc Open-ended
Informal Working Group to study issues relating to the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction and
co-Chairs’ summary of discussions (A/67/95, annex).
The meetings have revealed a number of gaps in the
regulation, implementation, governance, coordination
and information-sharing in the current regime for the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biodiversity
in areas beyond national jurisdiction. We are confident
that the Informal Working Group’s efforts will help to
find ways and means for filling those gaps, including
through developing a legal framework.
The effective and unhindered functioning
of
the
institutions
established
under
the
Convention — the International Seabed Authority, the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea and the
Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf — is
key to achieving the goal of the fair and equitable use
of oceans and their resources, including through the
effective implementation of the provisions of the
Convention. We note with satisfaction the progress
made by those institutions in their respective areas,
and support all efforts towards ensuring their smooth
functioning. While we are fully aware of, and concerned
about, the heavy workload of the Commission on the
Limits of the Continental Shelf due to the great number
of claims submitted, we are hopeful that increasing the
nunmber of the Commission’s work weeks will help it
to manage.
In addition to the initiatives and processes that
exist under the Convention on the Law of the Sea
for the implementation of its provisions, and the
studies being undertaken in various working groups
mandated by the General Assembly, this year we have
also noted the launch of the Secretary-General’s new
“Oceans Compact — Healthy Oceans for Prosperity”.
It is important that the initiative’s requirements and
objectives be established through open and regular
consultation with Member States. We would also like

12-6432417

A/67/PV.52

to stress that any duplication of the work of ongoing
initiatives and processes should be avoided.
I would like to thank Ambassador Eden Charles,
the Deputy Permanent Representative of Trinidad and
Tobago, who has very ably coordinated this year’s
consultations for the draft omnibus resolution on
oceans and the law of the sea (A/67/L.21). It addresses
a wide range of issues, including those concerning
the implementation of the Convention and related
agreements, capacity-building, maritime safety
and security, marine scientific research, the marine
environment and marine resources.
We would also like to thank Ms. Alice Revell
of New Zealand for successfully coordinating the
consultations on the draft resolution on sustainable
fisheries (A/67/L.22). The fishery sector occupies an
important place in the socioeconomic development
of a great number of countries, including India. We
support the international community’s concerted
efforts towards achieving sustainable fisheries by, inter
alia, adopting measures to prevent and combat illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing by effectively
implementing the 1995 Fish Stocks Agreement and
the relevant instruments at the regional level, and by
preventing overfishing. We consider the role of the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
to be crucial in conserving fishery resources and the
management and development of fisheries.
Our thanks also go to the whole staff of the Division
for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, particularly
its Director, Mr. Tarasenko, for all its arrangements for
the meetings and its constructive cooperation.
India, given its geography as a country, with a vast
coastline and numerous islands, has a traditional and
abiding interest in maritime and ocean affairs. It is a
party to the Convention, the Implementing Agreement,
and the Fish Stocks Agreement. We take a keen interest
in all matters pertaining to ocean affairs and believe
it is in the interests of the international community
as a whole to continue to cooperate fully in the
efforts towards ensuring the proper management and
sustainable use of the oceans and seas.
Mrs. Chigiyal (Micronesia): The Federated States
of Micronesia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Samoa on behalf of the Pacific
small island developing States (SIDS), as well as the
statement delivered by the representative of Palau on
behalf of the Pacific Island Forum countries.

18

At the outset, my delegation would like to express its
sincere gratitude to the Division of Oceans and the Law
of the Sea for its important work and unwavering support
in facilitating the work of the informal negotiations.
We are also grateful for the Secretary-General’s
comprehensive annual reports on oceans and the law
of the sea (A/67/79, A/67/79/Corr.1, A/67/79/Add.1 and
A/67/79/Add.2). We give special thanks to the two
coordinators, Ambassador Eden Charles of Trinidad
and Tobago and Ms. Alice Revell of New Zealand, for
conducting the informal consultations on the two draft
resolutions before us (A/67/L.21 and A/67/L.22). My
delegation is a proud sponsor of them.
This year marks the thirtieth anniversary of the
opening for signature of the Convention on the Law
of the Sea (UNCLOS). It remains as valid today as it
was 30 years ago. Indeed, we have much to celebrate
in having achieved substantial progress in the areas
of oceans and the law of the sea. We can rightly use
this occasion to honour those individuals and parties
who had the wisdom and foresight to get nations to
commit to what is now known as the “constitution for
the oceans”.
Micronesia is part of a blue continent. The oceans
bring us together and sustain us, and their resources
enrich us. They are part of our homeland, and our
people’s livelihood, culture and way of living depend
on a blue economy.
Of increasing and serious concern is the health of
the oceans. Pollution and the transboundary movement
of hazardous waste negatively impact our oceans. The
adverse impacts of climate change, including rising water
temperature, influence the movement of our fish stocks
from our waters, and ocean acidification is eroding our
coral reefs. Destructive fishing methods — including
overfishing and illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing — require States to cooperate in taking greater
enforcement measures.
We must therefore treat our oceans accordingly
and defend them just as strongly. In that regard,
my delegation urges all Member States to fulfil the
commitments they made in June in Rio. The United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
(Rio+20) affirmed the important role the Convention
on the Law of the Sea plays in achieving sustainable
development. We welcome the new elements in this
year’s draft resolutions, which ensure the conservation
and sustainable use of the oceans and their resources.

12-64324

A/67/PV.52

My delegation joins many others in repeating
the call made at Rio+20 to address issues relating
to biological diversity in areas beyond national
jurisdiction, which need to be addressed through an
implementing agreement under UNCLOS as soon as
possible. We are convinced that this will provide legal
certainty in the conservation and sustainable use of
marine biodiversity in the high seas, thereby earning
legitimacy and credibility.
Given the vulnerability and limited capacity
of Micronesia as a small island developing State,
we particularly welcome the references in the draft
resolutions stressing the need to identify and mainstream
strategies by 2014 that assist SIDS in developing their
capacity to conserve, sustainably manage and realize
the benefits of sustainable fisheries. The invitation
to States and international financial institutions to
develop special financial mechanisms or instruments
to assist SIDS in developing their national capacity to
exploit fisheries resources must also be recognized and
commended.
In our part of the Pacific, we have taken the lead
in preserving healthy fish stocks and protecting our
environment. We have created innovative tools to
keep our stocks at a level producing at least maximum
sustainable yield based on the best available science.
We encourage our partners to join us in that endeavour.
The parties to the Nauru Agreement are taking that
responsible approach, and we encourage other regions
of the world to follow suit.
In 2014, the Third International Conference on
SIDS will be held in our Pacific island neighbour, the
Independent State of Samoa. Micronesia looks forward
to discussions on how to further address the challenges
faced by small island developing States, including in
the area of conservation and sustainable use of ocean
resources.
In conclusion, I want to emphasize that we are
all responsible for the future health of our oceans.
Engaging actively in the sustainable use, management
and conservation of the world’s oceans is not just a
practical, but also a moral obligation that we all need
to fulfil.
Mr. Shihab (Maldives): I am delighted to be
making this statement today on behalf of the delegation
of Maldives under agenda item 75, “Oceans and the law
of the sea”. At the outset, I would like to express our
appreciation to the Division for Ocean Affairs and the

Law of the Sea for its continued support and dedicated
work on oceans issues.
The Maldives would first like to begin by taking
note of this year’s debate on this agenda item, which
coincides with the thirtieth anniversary of the opening
for signature of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and the twentieth anniversary
of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development. These two anniversaries remind us of the
importance of emphasizing the linkage between those
two fields, as well as the need to stress the importance
of conservation and the sustainable use of the oceans.
The Maldives, like many other small island
developing States, is a coastal State whose economy
depends on its marine resources. Given that tourism and
fisheries remain our two biggest industries, preserving
our oceans constitutes the basis for our country’s
economic, social and environmental development. We
are pleased that the section on the oceans and seas of
the outcome document (resolution 66/288, annex) of the
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
(Rio+20) took note of the importance of oceans and the
legal framework provided by UNCLOS. The provisions
on sustainable tourism and the protection of coral reefs
are particularly welcome, as the Maldives continues
to fight the effects of anthropogenic climate change,
which include sea-level rise, coastal erosion, ocean
acidification and coral bleaching. We remain deeply
concerned about overfishing; illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing; discards, by-catch and perverse
Government subsidies; ineffective fisheries governance;
overcapacity and biodiversity loss.
The Maldives welcomes the Secretary-General’s
ocean initiative, launched on 12 August in the
Republic of Korea, to deliver oceans-related mandates
consistent with Rio’s outcome document in a more
coherent and effective manner. We hope that this
initiative will create a platform for all stakeholders at
the national and international levels to collaborate and
accelerate progress in the achievement of our common
goals. Preserving the oceans through protection and
sustainable use is vital to the well-being of our future
generations.
The Maldives is deeply concerned that current
international efforts are not enough to meet the target
of restoring fish stocks to their maximum sustainable
yields by 2015, including the reversal of biodiversity
loss in the oceans and the elimination of destructive
fishing practices decided in the World Summit on

12-6432419

A/67/PV.52

Sustainable Development. The world has missed the
2010 target to achieve a significant reduction of the
current rate of biodiversity loss at the global, regional
and national levels. Current trends show that the loss of
species will continue throughout this century, with an
increasing risk of dramatic shifts in ecosystems. The
Maldives therefore calls upon all Member States to
renew their political commitment to finding an urgent
solution to biodiversity loss.
In that regard, Maldives declared Baa Atoll a
UNESCO biosphere reserve on 28 June 2011. The
designation of Baa Atoll as a biosphere reserve signals
the commitment of the people to managing it sustainably
by achieving the three functions of the biosphere
reserve: conservation, sustainable development and
learning. In addition, President Waheed announced at
Rio+20 that we will make the whole of the Maldives a
biosphere reserve by 2017. The initial work needed to
achieve that ambitious goal is ongoing.
The Maldives believes that there is a need for
further commitment on the part of States to enforcing
regional agreements on the management of ocean
resources. This could provide capacity to regional
fisheries management organizations and make them
better equipped to ensure the sustainable management
of our oceans. Given the strategies contained in the
Oceans Compact, we are keen to see results that display
an increase in the sustainable management of ocean
resources and a general improvement in the health of
our oceans.
We take note of the Secretary-General’s report,
contained in document A/67/79, focusing on the
importance of marine renewable energy. The report
stresses the fact that small island developing States
(SIDS) are well placed to benefit from ocean thermal
energy conversion and focuses on the fact that there
has been a requirement for the development of marine
renewable energy since the United Nations Conference
on Environment and Development, held in Rio in 1992.
The call for the development of renewable energy
alternatives is, indeed, a viable option to escape climate
change and rising oil prices and answers increasing
energy demands. Unfortunately, SIDS like the Maldives
do not have sufficient resources to ensure a complete
transition to a green economy and therefore remain
in dire need of outside investment to develop those
renewable energy options, which could sustain the
greening of our economy. For this reason, we reiterate

20

our urgent call for assistance in the development of
marine renewable energy.
In conclusion, the protection and sustainable use of
marine resources for SIDS like the Maldives represent
a key part of our sustainable development. It is by now
a well-recognized fact that oceans play a part in the
economy of every State across the globe. It is therefore
inexcusable for any State to ignore its duty to ensure
the protection of these resources and their sustainable
use for the benefit of our future generations.
Ms. Flores (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): We are
extremely pleased to participate in this important debate
devoted to oceans and the law of the sea, especially
as we consider the adoption of two important draft
resolutions on the subject (A/67/L.21 and A/67/L.22).
My delegation also wishes to express its satisfaction
with regard to the ceremony that took place yesterday to
commemorate the thirtieth anniversary of the opening
for signature of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea, of which we are a party. We underscore
importance of the Agreement for the Implementation
of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to
the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, which since
1995 has maintained the regime for their conservation
and sustainable development.
Honduras confirms its support for the draft
resolutions to be adopted today. In that regard, and
wishing to contribute to the conservation of our species,
we recall that in 2011 we declared our national waters
to be a sanctuary for the protection of the shark species.
With regard to the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea, with its 164 States parties and a
constantly developing normative system, we highlight
that its provisions are implemented with the assistance
of several organs, including the International Seabed
Authority, which allows States parties to organize and
control activities related to the mineral resources of
the international seabed; the International Tribunal
for the Law of the Sea in Hamburg, which resolves
disputes over the interpretation or implementation of
the Convention; and the Commission on the Limits of
the Continental Shelf, which contributes to establishing
the outer limits of the continental shelf where that part
of the submerged land of the territory of a coastal State
extends to 200 nautical miles from its coastline. The
Convention, known as the constitution of the oceans,

12-64324

A/67/PV.52

establishes the seabed and the ocean floor as the
common heritage of mankind.
In thanking the Secretary-General for his reports
on these issues (A/67/79 and A/67/315), I wish to
recall his important message during the first official
celebration of World Oceans Day, on 8 June 2009. “Our
oceans, our responsibility” emphasizes our individual
and collective duty to protect the marine environment
and carefully manage its resources. Safe, healthy and
productive seas and oceans are integral to human wellbeing, economic security and sustainable development.
In that connection, the world’s peace and security
among nations and, of course, among coastal States
are vital to the social and economic development of our
peoples. Everything that contributes to the development
and promotion of trust among neighbouring countries
and peoples undoubtedly contributes to maintaining
the peace that we so desire. For us, as founding States
Members of the United Nations, the full implementation
of the international legal norms on oceans is reflected
in the judgments of the International Court of Justice.
We peace-loving States turn unreservedly to those
international courts to resolve our differences.
Respectful of their binding decisions, we accept them
without hesitation.
I am pleased to inform the Assembly that at the
Managua summit on 4 December, following a regional
presidential meeting among the three States that have
a shared interest in the Gulf of Fonseca — Honduras,
El Salvador and Nicaragua — we agreed to establish
a trilateral commission for the purpose of maintaining
the Gulf of Fonseca as a zone of peace, sustainable
development and security. The commission will be
tasked with the following functions: reviewing the
status of implementation of the 1992 Judgment of
the International Court of Justice in the case of El
Salvador v. Honduras; updating and implementation of
the protocol on the role of naval forces in the Gulf of
Fonseca, in order to guarantee peace and tranquillity
in that zone; and accelerating the execution of the
integral development strategy for the Gulf of Fonseca,
presenting a portfolio of projects in the areas of
sustainable economic development, environment and
security, with the aim of mobilizing the resources
necessary for their implementation. The Ministries of
Foreign Affairs of the respective countries shall preside
over the trinational commission and shall jointly agree
on the composition of its working groups and present a
preliminary report to the Presidents within 90 days. The
three States declared that the international community

shall be informed that all matters relating to the
Gulf of Fonseca shall be addressed by the trinational
commission. The declaration was signed by the heads
of State of Honduras, El Salvador and Nicaragua.
One of the major challenges we face in the twentyfirst century is protecting the oceans, which are a source
of life. Climate change, pollution, destructive fishing
practices, ocean acidification and the extraction of
marine species, which cause biodiversity loss and hurt
the ecosystem, all affect the survival and the well-being
of our planet. A world that wishes to live in harmony
must pool its efforts and coordinate its political will
in order to guarantee that its resources will be used
in the framework of sustainable and balanced ocean
development that, in meeting present and future needs,
husbands the wealth of the sea as a legacy of future
generations.
The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 51/6 of 24 October 1996, I now call on
the Secretary-General of the International Seabed
Authority.
Mr. Odunton (International Seabed Authority):
Allow me first of all to congratulate Mr. Vuk Jeremić
on his election to the presidency of the sixty-seventh
session of the General Assembly. I have every
confidence in his ability to guide the Assembly to its
successful conclusion.
I wish to refer to the two draft resolutions before
the General Assembly (A/66/L.21 and A/66/L.22) and
express my appreciation to Member States for their
references to the work of the International Seabed
Authority contained in draft resolution A/67/L.21,
especially under part VI, which is entitled “The Area”.
I also express appreciation for the very comprehensive
report of the Secretary-General (A/67/79), which as
always provides detailed background material for our
consideration. I wish to commend the Division for
Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea for its continued
outstanding efforts in the preparation of this report
over the years.
Draft resolution A/67/L.21 welcomes two major
achievements of the Authority during 2012. The first
is the adoption by the Council at the eighteenth session
of the Authority of the regulations for prospecting
and exploration for cobalt-rich ferromanganese crusts
in the Area. I am pleased to say that after many years
of debate and negotiation, those regulations were
adopted by consensus. The adoption of the regulations

12-6432421

A/67/PV.52

completes the Authority’s regulatory code governing
prospecting and exploration for the three main types
of mineral resources found in the Area. I believe that it
is a significant achievement. Since the adoption of the
regulations, two applications for exploration for cobaltrich ferromanganese crusts have already been filed.
They will be considered by the Legal and Technical
Commission at its meeting in February 2013 and
subsequently by the Council at its nineteenth session
in July 2013.
The second major achievement, also referred to in
paragraph 48 of the draft resolution, was the decision by
the Council of the Authority to recognize the designation
of nine representative areas in the nodule-bearing
province of the Pacific Ocean, covering 1.6 million
square miles as areas of particular environmental
interest where no activity should take place.
The draft resolution also refers to the rapid
increase in exploration activity that has taken place
in the past two years. In 2012, five new applications
for exploration contracts were approved by the
Council of the Authority, bringing the total number
of active exploration contracts in the Area to 17. The
applications approved in 2012 included applications by
State and private-sector enterprises sponsored by the
following States parties: Belgium, France, Kiribati, the
Republic of Korea and the United Kingdom. I wish to
congratulate those States and their sponsored entities
on their decision to join the growing group of States
with active exploration interests in the seabed beyond
national jurisdiction and to foster the development of
the common heritage of humankind.
As envisaged by the framers of the Convention,
contractors with the Authority include States parties,
State enterprises sponsored by States parties and
private-sector interests sponsored by States parties.
Sponsoring States include not only the developed
industrialized States but also developing States,
taking advantage of the provisions of Part XI that
were designed to allow them equal access to seabed
resources. This is an important achievement that
demonstrates that the system set out in the Convention
and in 1994 Implementation Agreement work.
In 2011, the Authority approved the first-ever
contracts for exploration for polymetallic sulfides
in the Area. Contracts were awarded to entities
sponsored by the People’s Republic of China and the
Russian Federation. I wish to inform the Assembly
that, in Moscow on 30 October, I had the honour to
22

sign a 15-year exploration contract for polymetallic
sulfides exploration in the Area with the Ministry
of Natural Resources and the Environment of the
Russian Federation. I wish to take this opportunity
to congratulate the Government and the people of the
Russian Federation on that important achievement.
With the increased pace of activity in the Area,
much work lies ahead for the Authority in order for
it to succeed in its task of managing the resources of
the Area for the benefit of humankind as a whole. That
includes the task of developing fair and reasonable
financial terms for the future exploitation of minerals.
It is thus more important than ever that all States
parties attend the annual meetings of the Assembly and
Council and participate fully in all aspects of the work
of the Authority. I therefore look forward to the widest
possible participation by all members in the nineteenth
session of the Authority in July 2013.
The Acting President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 54/195, of 17 December 1999, I
now call on the observer for the International Union for
Conservation of Nature.
Mr. Cohen (International Union for the
Conservation of Nature): The International Union for
Conservation of Nature (IUCN) welcomes the draft
resolutions put forward for the General Assembly’s
consideration this year (A/67/L.21 and A/67/L.22).
We were encouraged that Heads of State and
Government and high-level representatives, meeting
in Rio de Janeiro from 20 to 22 June, with the full
participation of civil society, renewed a global
commitment to sustainable development and to
ensuring the promotion of an economically, socially
and environmentally sustainable future for the planet
and for present and future generations. The outcome
document, entitled “The future we want”, adopted
by the heads of State and Government and high-level
representatives in Rio and subsequently endorsed
by the General Assembly through resolution 66/288,
includes many important paragraphs with respect to
the world’s oceans. It notes that oceans and coastal
areas form an integrated and essential component of
the Earth’s ecosystem. Also noted is the need to ensure
the conservation and sustainable use of the oceans and
seas and of their resources for sustainable development,
including through their contributions to poverty
eradication, sustained economic growth, food security
and creation of sustainable livelihoods and decent work,
while at the same time protecting biodiversity and the
12-64324

A/67/PV.52

marine environment and addressing the impacts of
climate change.
Leaders committed to protecting and restoring
the health, productivity and resilience of oceans and
marine ecosystems, maintaining their biodiversity,
enabling their conservation and sustainable use for
present and future generations, and effectively applying
an ecosystem approach and a precautionary approach in
the management of oceans. The importance of capacitybuilding to ensure that developing countries are able to
benefit from the conservation and sustainable use of the
oceans was recognized.
IUCN members met this year at the World
Conservation Congress in Jeju, Republic of Korea,
from 6 to 15 September and adopted resolutions and
recommendations to guide the governance of the Union
for the next four years. Under the Jeju declaration,
entitled “Nature+: Towards a New Era of Conservation,
Sustainability and Nature-based Solutions”, it was
noted that the conservation of biological diversity is
vitally important to human life. Nature is a major part
of the solution to some of our most pressing challenges
in climate change, food security, economic and social
development and sustainable energy. Nature-based
solutions build upon the proven contribution of wellmanaged and diverse ecosystems to enhance human
resilience and to provide additional development
opportunities for all. At Jeju, our members adopted
a number of resolutions with respect to oceans,
their conservation, management and equitable and
sustainable use.
In “The future we want”, the importance of the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biodiversity
beyond areas of national jurisdiction was explicitly
recognized. Leaders and Governments committed to
building on work done under the auspices of the Ad
Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group to study
issues relating to the conservation and sustainable use
of marine biological diversity beyond areas of national
jurisdiction, and to addressing the issue on an urgent
basis before the end of the sixty-ninth session of the
General Assembly, including by taking a decision on
the development of an international instrument under
the Convention.
In Jeju, our Members called on States to
address ocean governance gaps in the protection
and conservation of biodiversity in areas beyond
national jurisdiction through the negotiation of a new
implementing agreement for the protection of high-

seas biodiversity. Such an agreement could identify,
designate and effectively manage a global network
of fully comprehensive, adequate and representative
high-seas marine protected areas, including reserves
and other effective spatial management areas. It could
require comprehensive prior environmental impact
assessments and strategic environmental assessments,
together with ongoing monitoring of the marine
environment. It could ensure the provision of, access
to and dissemination of information and transparency
in decision-making processes. It could consider the
question of the sharing of benefits derived from marine
genetic resources in areas beyond national jurisdiction
and require application of the precautionary approach,
as set out in principle 15 of the Rio Declaration on
Environment and Development, and the ecosystem
approach in decision-making and management. It could
call for the effective monitoring, control, surveillance
and compliance and enforcement measures that ought to
be implemented to support the long-term conservation
and sustainable use of high seas biodiversity.
In “The future we want”, it is noted with concern
that the health of oceans and marine biodiversity are
negatively affected by marine pollution, including
marine debris, especially plastics, and by persistent
organic pollutants, heavy metals and nitrogen-based
compounds, from a number of marine and land-based
sources. Leaders committed to taking action to achieve
significant reductions in marine debris in order to
prevent harm to the coastal and marine environment
by 2025.
My delegation hopes that significant reductions can
be achieved much earlier in order to protect the marine
environment and its biodiversity. In that regard, I note
that the Global Partnership for Oceans, established by
the World Bank and in which IUCN is a partner, will
be working to reduce pollution to levels not detrimental
to ecosystem function and biodiversity, and will be
supporting the implementation of the global programme
of action to reduce pollution, particularly from marine
litter, waste water and excess nutrients.
In “The future we want”, concern is expressed
about the impacts of ocean acidification and climate
change on marine and coastal ecosystems and
resources. The document reiterates the need to work
collectively to prevent further ocean acidification, to
enhance the resilience of marine ecosystems and of
communities whose livelihoods depend on them, and
to support marine scientific research, monitoring and

12-6432423

A/67/PV.52

observation of ocean acidification and its effects on
particularly vulnerable ecosystems. In that regard, my
delegation stresses the importance of protecting coral
reefs and natural blue carbon sinks, such as mangroves,
sea grasses and salt marshes, through the careful
application to coastal and marine areas of ecosystembased management, the creation of resilient networks
of marine protected areas and effective marine spatial
planning. We welcome discussion during the United
Nations Open-ended Informal Consultative Process
next year of the impact of ocean acidification on the
marine environment, including socioeconomic impacts.
“The future we want” also addresses various
important fisheries issues. My delegation urges
immediate action to meet the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation target to maintain or restore fish
stocks to levels that can produce maximum sustainable
yield by 2015. To do so — or even to approach the
target — will require immediate action, including
by reducing or suspending fishing catch and fishing
effort to an extent commensurate with the status of
the relevant fish stocks. We note the need to carefully
manage by-catch, discards and other adverse ecosystem
impacts from fisheries, including through the effective
use of impact assessments. We note the need to protect
vulnerable marine ecosystems from significant adverse
impacts. All fishing should be subject to the collection
and sharing of data, to allow for proper assessment of
the effects of fishing effort on the marine environment
and for the provision of scientific advice for future
activities. States should eliminate subsidies that
contribute to overcapacity and overfishing, as those
activities are not sustainable.
In “The future we want”, leaders recognize the
need for transparency and accountability in fisheries
management by regional fisheries management
organizations (RFMOs). Welcoming efforts undertaken
by RFMOs to conduct independent performance
reviews, my delegation urges all RFMOs to undertake
such reviews and to make publicly available the results
and any actions taken to address those results. The
General Assembly may wish to consider the adequacy
and outcomes of the reviews and to provide advice as to
how they may be strengthened and improved.
In “The future we want”, leaders affirm the
importance of area-based conservation measures,
including marine protected areas. Aichi Biodiversity
Target 11 states:

24

“By 2020 ... 10 per cent of coastal and marine
areas, especially areas of particular importance for
biodiversity and ecosystem services, are conserved
through effectively and equitably managed,
ecologically representative and well-connected
systems of protected areas and other effective areabased conservation measures.”
IUCN’s members at Jeju emphasized the importance
of achieving that Target, through the establishment
of representative networks of marine protected areas,
ranging from no-take reserves to multiple use zones,
where the pressures of extractive use on marine
species and habitats are minimized, consistent with
international law, including customary international
law, as reflected in the Convention, and based on the best
scientific information available. They also stressed the
importance of developing other effective management
and protection tools to complement those efforts in the
oceans, addressing areas within and beyond national
jurisdiction, as appropriate.
IUCN members in Jeju welcomed progress towards
completion of the first global integrated assessment
of the state of the marine environment by 2014, and
welcomed the sharing of information, data and best
practices through that process.
The Acting President: We have heard the
last speaker in the debate on agenda item 75 and its
sub-items (a) and (b).
The Assembly will now consider draft resolutions
A/67/L.21 and A/67/L.22.
I shall now give the floor to the representative
who wishes to speak in explanation of vote before the
voting. May I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Ms. Diaz Mendoza (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation wishes
to address the draft resolution contained in document
A/67/L.21, on oceans and the law of the sea, under
agenda item 75 (a), which is before the General
Assembly for consideration.
I take this opportunity to recall once again
that Venezuela is not a party to the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). For
this reason, the norms mentioned in that instrument,
12-64324

A/67/PV.52

including those that could be characterized as
customary law, are not applicable, except for those
that the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela recognizes
expressly. We reiterate that Venezuela is not a party to
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS) since it cannot contravene fundamental
principles and basic rights to which it adheres and that
remain valid and relevant to this day.
Venezuela has fulfilled its international obligations
under the law of the sea. It has advocated the
comprehensive development of the law of the sea with
a view to ensuring justice and has emphasized that all
negotiations related to that law should reflect criteria
and principles related to sustainable development and
the preservation and sustainable use of the marine
environment and its resources for future generations.
In that spirit, my delegation has cooperated with
efforts to promote coordination on matters pertaining
to the oceans and the law of the sea, in accordance
with international law, and in that regard participated
constructively in consultations on the draft resolution.
However, and despite the efforts and the flexibility
shown by some delegations to ensure that the text of the
draft resolution would reflect the concerns and interests
of all Member States and allow for the legal freedom
of States not parties to UNCLOS, the text produced
during the recently concluded Open-ended Informal
Consultative Process does not reflect the consensus of
all Member States on issues pertaining to oceans and
the law of the sea. In particular, it was not possible to
reflect in the text those issues that could affect sensitive
interests of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Therefore, in this statement my delegation ratifies
its historical position on the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea, which it has expressed in various
international forums, that this instrument should not
be considered the sole legal framework governing all
activities related to oceans and seas, and that it cannot
be characterized as a universal instrument. Thus,
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela believes that,
although the text before us contains elements that we
are able to endorse, it also contains elements that led my
country to withhold support from the outcome document
(resolution 66/288, annex) of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20),
including matters relating to marine biodiversity that
are reflected in section XI, and particularly paragraphs
181 and 183, of the draft resolution.

In this regard, my country attaches the highest
importance to the sustainable exploitation of
biodiversity-related
resources
beyond
national
jurisdiction being governed by a distinct international
instrument that is separate from UNCLOS and the
Convention on Biological Diversity. My delegation
expresses its hope that future decisions on the subject,
including the negotiation of a multilateral instrument,
will be guided by a spirit of inclusion.
The delegation of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela reiterates the arguments put forward in the
most recent Consultative Process, which are closely
related to the reasons that prevented and continue
to prevent my country from being a party to the
Convention. In this regard, our lack of objection to the
texts adopted at Rio+20 and other aspects of the draft
resolution cannot be interpreted as a change of position
on the part of my country towards UNCLOS, including,
inter alia, its relevance with regard to the definition of
a possible legal regime applicable to marine resources
beyond national jurisdiction.
Finally, the lack of consensus on various issues
addressed in the draft resolution, not to mention
practices that are contrary to jurisprudence, highlight
the need to review any future updating of the terms of
the Convention, including a review of those matters
that prevent this instrument from being truly universal.
There are new situations for it to address. The forced
extension of the principles, norms, criteria and
procedures of UNCLOS has proved at the very least
to be insufficient, if not counterproductive. This has
affected the development of a regime that should address
the most important contemporary issues relating to the
oceans and seas in an inclusive and equitable manner.
In view of all of this, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela will abstain in the voting.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
We turn first to draft resolution A/67/L.21, entitled
“Oceans and the law of the sea”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I would like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/67/L.21, the following countries have

12-6432425

A/67/PV.52

become sponsors: Argentina, Barbados, Belgium,
Cameroon, Chile, Greece, Ecuador, Honduras,
Indonesia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Malta, the Federated States of Micronesia,
Montenegro, the Philippines, Portugal, the Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, Slovenia, South Africa,
Sweden, Tonga, Ukraine and the United States of
America.

Abstaining:
Colombia, Dominican Republic, El Salvador,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.

The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution A/67/L.22, entitled “Sustainable fisheries,
including through the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks, and related instruments ”.

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Germany, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Nauru, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Palau,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Against:
Turkey

26

Draft resolution A/67/L.21 was adopted by 125
votes to 1, with 4 abstentions (resolution 67/78).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Greece advised the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]

I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I would like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/67/L.22, the following countries have
become sponsors: Barbados, Belgium, Canada,
Greece, Honduras, Madagascar, the Federated States
of Micronesia, Monaco, Montenegro, the Philippines,
Portugal, the Republic of Moldova, Samoa, Slovenia,
Tonga, Ukraine and the United States of America.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/67/L.22?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 67/79).

A/67/L.22

was

adopted

The Acting President: I shall now give the floor to
those representatives who wish to speak in explanation
of vote. May I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Ms. Diaz Mendoza (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela would like to comment
on resolution 67/79, which the General Assembly has
just adopted under agenda item 75 (b), entitled “Oceans
and the law of the sea: Sustainable fisheries, including
through the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation
of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to
the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish

12-64324

A/67/PV.52

Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, and related
instruments”.
The topic of sustainable fisheries is a priority for my
delegation and represents a sector of great importance.
That is why significant initiatives have been undertaken
to promote and implement programmes for the
conservation, protection and management of marine
biological resources within our national legislative
framework, which seeks to harmonize the legal order
with the criteria applied in this sphere by the countries
of the region.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is not party
to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea (UNCLOS), including the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks. The standards of those international instruments
are not applicable in the national context, except where
expressly recognized by the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela or where they may be so in the future.
However, for the sake of consensus, my delegation
did not oppose the resolution on sustainable fisheries
adopted today. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
nonetheless reaffirms its established position regarding
UNCLOS and related agreements, wherefore we express
our reservations on the content of the resolution.
Mr. Martinsen (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
My explanation of vote refers to resolution 67/79, on
sustainable fisheries. While Argentina joined in the
consensus adoption of the resolution, I wish to state
once again that none of the recommendations in the
text can be interpreted as meaning that the provisions
of the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the
Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks can be
considered as binding on States that have not explicitly
expressed their consent to fulfilling obligations under
the Agreement.
The resolution we have just adopted contains
paragraphs relating to the implementation of the
recommendations of the Review Conference on
the Agreement. Argentina reiterates that those
recommendations cannot be considered applicable,
even as recommendations, to States that are not parties

to the Agreement. This is particularly relevant in the
case of States, including Argentina, that disassociated
themselves from those recommendations. As it did at the
sixty-sixth session, therefore, Argentina disassociates
itself from the consensus reached by the Assembly with
regard to the paragraphs of the resolution referring to
the recommendations of the Review Conference on the
1995 Agreement.
At the same time, Argentina wishes to point out
that current international law allows neither regional
fisheries management organizations or arrangements
nor their member States to adopt any measure with
respect to vessels whose flag States are not members
of such organizations or arrangements or have not
expressly consented that such measures may be
applied to the vessels flying their flag. Nothing in the
resolutions of the General Assembly, including that just
adopted, can be interpreted as in any way contrary to
that conclusion.
In addition, conservation measures, the pursuit of
scientific research, or any other activity recommended
in the resolutions of the General Assembly, in
particular resolution 61/105, are to be implemented
within the irreplaceable framework of international
law of the sea already in force, as reflected in the
Convention, including its article 77 and Part XIII. The
implementation of such resolutions cannot therefore
be claimed as an alleged justification for ignoring or
denying the rights established under the Convention,
and nothing in the resolution adopted today or others
adopted by the General Assembly is of a nature to
affect the sovereign rights of coastal States over their
continental shelf or the exercise of jurisdiction by
coastal States with regard to their continental shelf, in
accordance with international law.
Paragraph 137 of the resolution we have just
adopted contains an extremely relevant reminder of that
concept, as reflected in resolution 64/72 and subsequent
resolutions. In that vein, paragraph 138 recognizes the
adoption by coastal States, including Argentina, of
measures to address the impacts of bottom fishing on
vulnerable marine ecosystems in the whole extent of
their continental shelf as well as their efforts to ensure
compliance with those measures.
Finally, we reiterate that the growing differences
concerning the contents of the resolution on sustainable
fisheries seriously compromise the possibility of its
consensus adoption in the future.

12-6432427

A/67/PV.52

Mr. Şahinol (Turkey): Turkey voted against
resolution 67/78, entitled “Oceans and the law of the
sea” under agenda item 75 (a). I would like to recall
that the reasons that have prevented Turkey from being
a party to the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea remain valid. Turkey supports international
efforts to establish a regime of the sea that is based on
the principle of equity and acceptable to all States.
However, in our opinion the Convention does not
provide sufficient safeguards for special geographical
situations and, as a consequence, does not take into
consideration conflicting interests and sensitivities
arising from special circumstances. Furthermore,
the Convention does not allow States to register
reservations to its articles. Although we agree with the
Convention in its general intent and with most of its
provisions, we are unable to become a party to it owing
to those prominent shortcomings. That being the case,
we cannot support a resolution that calls on States to
become parties to the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea and to harmonize their national
legislation with its provisions.

28

As for resolution 67/79 on sustainable fisheries,
adopted under sub-item (b) of agenda item 75, I
would like to state that Turkey is committed to the
conservation, management and sustainable use of
marine living resources, and attaches great importance
to regional cooperation to that end. In that context,
Turkey supported the resolution; however, we dissociate
ourselves from references made in the resolution to
international instruments to which Turkey is not a party.
Those references should therefore not be interpreted as
representing any change in Turkey’s legal position with
regard to those instruments.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 75 and its sub-items (a)
and (b)?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

12-64324
