82

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

regularly to the Secretary-General on the steps taken
by them and the resources they have made available
to assist Mozambique;
11. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the resources necessary for an effective programme of financial, technical and material assistance to Mozambique;
( b) To ensure that adequate financial and budgetary arrangements are made to continue the mobilization of resources and to co-ordinate the international
programme of assistance to Mozambique;
( c) To arrange for a review of the economic situation of Mozambique in time for the matter to be considered by the Economic and Social Council at its
sixty-fifth session;

(d) To keep the situation in Mozambique under
constant review, to maintain close contact with Member
States, regional and other intergovernmental organizations, the specialized agencies and international financial
institutions, and to report on the question to the General
Assembly at its thirty-third session.

101st plenary meeting
I 3 December 1977

32/96.

Assistance to Sao Tome and Principe

The General Assembly,
Mindful of its resolution 31 / 187 of 21 December
1976, in which it expressed deep concern at the serious
economic and social situation in Sao Tome and Principe
as a result of the total lack of infrastructure for development,
Recalling its resolution 31 / 156 of 21 December
1976, in which it urged all Governments, in particular
those of the developed countries, to lend their support,
in the context of their assistance programmes, for the
implementation of the specific action envisaged in
favour of developing island countries within the framework of their development plans and priorities.
Noting that the appeal made in resolution 31 / 187
for assistance to Sao Tome and Principe thus far has
not met with the desired response,
Having noted the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to Sao Tome and Principe 3 " and the statement submitted by the Government of that country on
its most urgent needs, 36
Having noted the report of the Committee for Development Planning, in which the Committee decided
to cxamine 37 at its fourteenth session the question of
the inclusion of Sao Tome and Principe in the list of
the least developed countries, 38 on the basis of more
recent and more detailed information,
1. Renews the
31/187;

2.

appeal

made

in its resolution

Requests the Secretary-General:

35 A/32/220 and Add. t.
36 A/32/220/ Add.1, appendix.
3 7 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 4 ( El 5939 and Corr. I),
para. 83.
38See resolutions 2768 (XXVI) and 3487 (XXX).

(a) To continue his efforts for the mobilization of
the financial, technical a:1d economic assistance of the
international community, in particular of the developed
countries and the appropriate organizations within the
United Nations system, with a v;ew to meeting the
short-term and long-term needs of Sao Tome and
Principe;
( b)
To ensure that adequate financial and budgetary arrangements arc made to continue the mobilization of resources and to co-ordinate the international
programme of ~1~;sistance to Sao Tome and Principe;
( c)
To send a special mission to Sao Tome and
Principe with a view to continuing the consultations
with the Government on urgent needs and identifying
the ernnomic problems facing the country, and to
ensure that the report of the mission is issued in time
to enable the Economic and Social Council to consider
the q ucstion at its sixty-fifth session;

( d)
To ensure that the report of the special mission is circulated to all Member States and to all regional and international organizations concerned, including the United Nations Development Programme.
the World Bank, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Food Programme
and the United Nations Children's Fund;
( e)
To keep the situation in Sao Tome and
Principe under constant review and to maintain close
contact with Member States, regional and other intergovernmental organizations, the specialized agencies
and international financial institutions, and to report on
the question to the General Assembly at it thirty-third
session.
101st plenary meeting
13 December 1977

32/97.

Assistanee to Botswana

The General Assembly,
Recalling Security Council resolutions 403 (1977)
of 14 January 1977 and 406 (1977) of 25 May 1977
concerning the complaint by the Government of Botswana of acts of :w:gression committed airninst its territory by the illegal ;cgimc in Southern Rhodesia,
Deep/v com·emed at the loss of human life and
damage to property caused by the acts of the illegal
regime in Southern Rhodesia against Botswana,
Realizing the need for Botswana to strengthen its
security in order to safeguard its sovereignty, territorial
integrity and independence.
Recogni::.ing the plight of the refugees lkeing from
oppression and the additional burden imposed upon
Botswana by their continuing influx,
Noting the report of the mission to Botswana,
transmitted by a note by the Secretary-General dated
28 March 1977,:rn which assessed the special economic
needs of Botswana in February 1977,
Having examined the report of the review mission to
Botswana, transmitted by a note by the SecretaryGeneral dated 26 October 1977 40 in accordance with
39
Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second
Year, Supplement for January, February and March 1977,
document SI 123 07.
40
A/32/287-S/12421. For the printed text, see Official
Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1977.

V,

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second C:ommitte.-

Economic and Social Council resolution 2095 (LXIII)
of 29 July 1977, which outlines the programme of
international assistance to Botswana,
Convinced that international solidarity with Botswana is essential for the promotion of a solution to
the problems of southern Africa,
l. Expresses full support for the Government of
Botswana in its efforts to safeguard its sovereignty;
2. Recognizes the special economic hardship confronting Botswana caused by the diverting of funds
from current and planned development projects to
effective arrangements for security against attacks and
threats by Southern Rhodesia;
3. Endorses the assessments and recommendations
contained in the notes by the Secretary-Gcncrnl dated
28 March and 26 October 1977;
4. Notes with appreciation the assistance so far
provided to Botswana by the international community, 41
5. Draws the attention of Member States and international organizations to the fact that the assistance
received to date falls short of Botswana's requirements;
6. Strongly endorses the appeal of the Security
Council and of the Secretary-General 42 to all States
and intergovernmental organizations to provide generous assistance in order to enable Botswana to carry
out its planned development projects;
7. Calls upon all States, regional and interregional
organizations, and other governmental and non-governmental bodies to respond to the appeals of the Security
Council to provide assistance on a generous scale to
Botswana;
8. Requests the appropriate organizations and
programmes of the United Nations system-in particular the United Nations Development Programme, the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Monetary Fund, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the
International Fund for Agricultural Development, the
World Food Programme, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the World Health
Organization, the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees-to maintain
and increase their current and future programmes of
assistance to Botswana in carrying out its planned development projects without interruption and to cooperate closely with the Secretary-General in organizing
an effective international programme of assistance;
9. Further draws the attention of the international
community to the special account which was established at United Nations Headquarters by the SecretaryGeneral to receive contributions for assistance to Botswana;
10. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to continue his huminitarian assistance programmes on behalf of refugees in Botswana and urges the international community to provide
him speedily with the necessary means to carry out
these programmes;
41 A/32/287-S/12421, annex. For the printed text, see
Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second Year,
Supplement for October, November and December 1977.
4 2 Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second
Year, Supplement for April, May and June 1977, document S/12326.

11 . Further requests the specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system to
report regularly to the Secretary-General on the ~teps
they have taken and the resources they have made
available to assist Botswana;
12. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the resources
necessary for an effective programme of financial,
technical and material assistance to Botswana;
(h) To ensure that adequate financial and budgetary
arrangements are made to continue the mobilization of
resources and to co-ordinate the international programme of assistance to Botswana;
(c)
To arrange for a review of the economic situation of Botswana in time for the matter to be considered bv the Economic and Social Council at its
sixty-fifth' session;
(d) To keep the situation in Botswana under constant review, to maintain close contact with Member
States, regional and other intergovernmental organizations, the specialized agencies and international financial
institutions and other organizations mentioned in the
present resolution, and to~ report on the question to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session.
l Ol st plenary meeting
13 December 1977
32/98.

Assistancf' to Lesotho

The General Assembly,

Recalling Security Council resolution 402 ( 1976)
of 22 December 1976, in which the Council, inter alia,
expressed concern at the serious situation created by
South Africa's closure of certain border posts between
South Africa and Lesotho aimed at coercing Lesotho
into according recognition to the bantustan Transkei,
Commending the decision of the Government of
Lesotho not to recognize the bantustan Transkei in
compliance with United Nations decisions, particularly
General Assembly resolution 31 /6 A of 26 October
1976,
Fully aware that the decision of the Government of
Lesotho not to recognize the Transkei has imposed a
special economic burden upon its people,
S1ro11gly ('ndorsing the appeals by the Security Council, voiced in resolutions 402 ( 1976) of 22 December
19'!6 and 407 (1977) of 25 May 1977, to all States,
regional and intergovernmental organizations and the
appropriate agencies of the United Nations system to
contribute generously to the international programme
of assistance to enable Lesotho to carry out its economic development and enhance its capacity to implement fully United Nations resolutions,
Noting the report of the mission to Lesotho, transmitted by a note by the Secretary-General dated 30
March 1977, 4 :: sent in compliance with Security Council resolution 402 (1976) to assess the specific requirements of Lesotho resulting from the closure of border
posts,
Recognizing that the continuing influx of refugees
from southern Africa imposes an additional burden on
Lesotho,
43 Ibid., Supplement for January, February and March 1977,
document S/12315.
