United Nations

A/RES/59/203

General Assembly

Distr.: General
23 March 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 105 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2004
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/59/503/Add.2)]

59/203. Respect for the right to universal freedom of travel and the
vital importance of family reunification
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 57/227 of 18 December 2002,
Reaffirming that all human rights and fundamental freedoms are universal,
indivisible, interdependent and interrelated,
Recalling the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 as
well as article 12 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 2
Stressing that, as stated in the Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development, 3 family reunification of documented
migrants is an important factor in international migration and that remittances by
documented migrants to their countries of origin often constitute a very important
source of foreign exchange and are instrumental in improving the well-being of
relatives left behind,
Noting that while some positive developments occurred during the past two
years in the accomplishment of the objectives highlighted in resolution 57/227, in
particular the commitment made on 9 June 2004 at the summit meeting of the Group
of Eight, held at Sea Island, United States of America, to facilitate the flow of
remittances across international borders to help families, in certain cases it has been
reported that measures have been adopted that have increased the restrictions
imposed on documented migrants in relation to family reunification and the
possibility of sending remittances to their relatives in the country of origin,
Recalling that the family is the basic unit of society and, as such, should be
strengthened, and that it is entitled to receive comprehensive protection and support,
1.
Once again calls upon all States to guarantee the universally recognized
freedom of travel to all foreign nationals legally residing in their territory;
_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
2

04-48844

A/RES/59/203

2.
Reaffirms that all Governments, in particular those of receiving
countries, must recognize the vital importance of family reunification and promote
its incorporation into national legislation in order to ensure protection of the unity
of families of documented migrants;
Calls upon all States to allow, in conformity with international
3.
legislation, the free flow of financial remittances by foreign nationals residing in
their territory to relatives in the country of origin;
Also calls upon all States to refrain from enacting, and to repeal if it
4.
already exists, legislation intended as a coercive measure that discriminates against
individuals or groups of legal migrants by adversely affecting family reunification
and the right to send financial remittances to relatives in the country of origin;
Decides to continue its consideration of the question at its sixty-first
5.
session under the item entitled “Human rights questions”.
74th plenary meeting
20 December 2004

2
