United Nations

A/RES/62/64

General Assembly

Distr.: General
8 January 2008

Sixty-second session
Agenda item 81

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 6 December 2007
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/62/449)]

62/64. Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its fortieth session
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it
established the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law with a
mandate to further the progressive harmonization and unification of the law of
international trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of all peoples, in
particular those of developing countries, in the extensive development of
international trade,
Reaffirming its belief that the progressive modernization and harmonization of
international trade law, in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of
international trade, especially those affecting the developing countries, would
contribute significantly to universal economic cooperation among all States on a
basis of equality, equity, common interest and respect for the rule of law, to the
elimination of discrimination in international trade and, thereby, to peace, stability
and the well-being of all peoples,
Having considered the report of the Commission on the work of the first part
of its fortieth session, 1
Reiterating its concern that activities undertaken by other bodies in the field of
international trade law without adequate coordination with the Commission might
lead to undesirable duplication of efforts and would not be in keeping with the aim
of promoting efficiency, consistency and coherence in the unification and
harmonization of international trade law,
Reaffirming the mandate of the Commission, as the core legal body within the
United Nations system in the field of international trade law, to coordinate legal
activities in this field, in particular to avoid duplication of efforts, including among
organizations formulating rules of international trade, and to promote efficiency,
consistency and coherence in the modernization and harmonization of international
trade law, and to continue, through its secretariat, to maintain close cooperation with
_______________
1
A/62/17 (Part I). For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session,
Supplement No. 17.

07-46761

A/RES/62/64

other international organs and organizations, including regional organizations,
active in the field of international trade law,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work of the first part of its fortieth
session;1
2.
Commends the Commission for its work on the preparation of a
legislative guide on secured transactions, which has been designed to facilitate
secured financing, thus promoting increased access to low-cost credit and enhancing
national and international trade, and notes with satisfaction that the Commission
expects to complete that work in the nearest future;
Welcomes the progress made by the Commission in its work on a revision
3.
of its Model Law on Procurement of Goods, Construction and Services 2 and of the
Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, 3
and on the preparation of a draft instrument on transport law and on future
developments in insolvency law, and endorses the decision of the Commission to
undertake further work in the area of security interests;
Endorses the efforts and initiatives of the Commission, as the core legal
4.
body within the United Nations system in the field of international trade law, aimed
at increasing coordination of and cooperation on legal activities of international and
regional organizations active in the field of international trade law, as well as
promoting the rule of law at the national and international levels in this field, and in
this regard appeals to relevant international and regional organizations to coordinate
their legal activities with those of the Commission, to avoid duplication of efforts
and to promote efficiency, consistency and coherence in the modernization and
harmonization of international trade law;
Reaffirms the importance, in particular for developing countries, of the
5.
work of the Commission concerned with technical assistance and cooperation in the
field of international trade law reform and development, and in this connection:
(a) Welcomes the initiatives of the Commission towards expanding, through
its secretariat, its technical assistance and cooperation programme, and in that
respect, encourages the Secretary-General to seek partnerships with State and
non-State actors to increase awareness about the work of the Commission and
facilitate the effective implementation of legal standards resulting from its work;
(b) Expresses its appreciation to the Commission for carrying out technical
assistance and cooperation activities, including at the country, subregional and
regional levels, and for providing assistance with legislative drafting in the field of
international trade law;
(c) Expresses its appreciation to the Governments whose contributions
enabled the technical assistance and cooperation activities to take place, and appeals
to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, organizations,
institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law Trust Fund for Symposia and, where
appropriate, to the financing of special projects, and otherwise to assist the

_______________
2
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 17 and corrigendum
(A/49/17 and Corr.1), annex I.
3
United Nations publication, Sales No. E.77.V.6.

2

A/RES/62/64

secretariat of the Commission in carrying out technical assistance activities, in
particular in developing countries;
(d) Reiterates its appeal to the United Nations Development Programme and
other bodies responsible for development assistance, such as the World Bank and
regional development banks, as well as to Governments in their bilateral aid
programmes, to support the technical assistance programme of the Commission and
to cooperate and coordinate their activities with those of the Commission, in the
light of the relevance and importance of the work and programmes of the
Commission for promotion of the rule of law at the national and international levels
and for the implementation of the United Nations development agenda, including
the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals;
Takes note with regret that, since the thirty-sixth session of the
6.
Commission, no contributions have been made to the trust fund established to
provide travel assistance to developing countries that are members of the
Commission, at their request and in consultation with the Secretary-General, 4
stresses the need for contributions to the trust fund in order to increase expert
representation from developing countries at sessions of the Commission and its
working groups, necessary to build local expertise and capacities in the field of
international trade law in those countries to facilitate the development of
international trade and the promotion of foreign investment, and reiterates its appeal
to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, organizations,
institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the trust fund;
Decides, in order to ensure full participation by all Member States in the
7.
sessions of the Commission and its working groups, to continue, in the competent
Main Committee during the sixty-second session of the General Assembly, its
consideration of granting travel assistance to the least developed countries that are
members of the Commission, at their request and in consultation with the SecretaryGeneral;
Welcomes the decision by the Commission to hold a comprehensive
8.
review of its working methods, in particular in the light of the recent increase in
membership of the Commission and the number of topics being dealt with by the
Commission, which should ensure the high quality of the work of the Commission
and international acceptability of its instruments, and in this regard recalls its
previous resolutions related to this matter; 5
9.
Recalls its resolutions on partnerships between the United Nations and
non-State actors, in particular the private sector, 6 and its resolutions in which it
encouraged the Commission to further explore different approaches to the use of
partnerships with non-State actors in the implementation of its mandate, in
particular in the area of technical assistance, in accordance with the applicable
principles and guidelines and in cooperation and coordination with other relevant
offices of the Secretariat, including the Global Compact Office; 7
10. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, in conformity with the
General Assembly resolutions on documentation-related matters, 8 which, in particular,
_______________
4

Resolution 48/32, para. 5.
See in particular resolutions 36/32, 37/106, 38/134, 39/82, 40/71, 41/77, 42/152, 43/166 and 57/20.
6
Resolutions 55/215, 56/76, 58/129 and 60/215.
7
Resolutions 59/39, 60/20 and 61/32.
8
Resolutions 52/214, sect. B, 57/283 B, sect. III, and 58/250, sect. III.
5

3

A/RES/62/64

emphasize that any reduction in the length of documents should not adversely affect
either the quality of the presentation or the substance of the documents, to bear in mind
the particular characteristics of the mandate and work of the Commission in
implementing page limits with respect to the documentation of the Commission;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue providing summary records
of the meetings of the Commission relating to the formulation of normative texts;
12. Recalls its resolution approving the establishment of the Yearbook of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, with the aim of making the
work of the Commission more widely known and readily available, 9 expresses its
concern regarding the timeliness of the publication of the Yearbook, and requests the
Secretary-General to explore options to facilitate the timely publication of the
Yearbook;
13. Stresses the importance of bringing into effect the conventions emanating
from the work of the Commission for the global unification and harmonization of
international trade law, and to this end urges States that have not yet done so to
consider signing, ratifying or acceding to those conventions;
14. Welcomes the preparation of digests of case law relating to the texts of
the Commission, such as a digest of case law relating to the United Nations
Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods 10 and a digest of case
law relating to the Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, 11 with the aim of assisting
in the dissemination of information on those texts and promoting their use,
enactment and uniform interpretation;
15. Notes with satisfaction that the Congress “Modern Law for Global
Commerce”, held in Vienna from 9 to 12 July 2007 in the context of the
Commission’s fortieth session, reviewed the results of the past work of the
Commission as well as related work of other organizations active in the field of
international trade law, assessed current work programmes and considered topics
and areas for future work, and, acknowledging the importance of the results of the
Congress for the coordination and promotion of activities aimed at the
modernization and harmonization of international trade law, requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure the publication of the proceedings of the Congress to the extent
permitted by available resources;
16. Recalls its resolutions affirming the importance of high-quality,
user-friendly and cost-effective United Nations websites and the need for their
multilingual development, maintenance and enrichment, 12 commends the
restructured website of the Commission in the six official languages of the United
Nations, and welcomes the continuous efforts of the Commission to maintain and
improve its website in accordance with the applicable guidelines.
62nd plenary meeting
6 December 2007
_______________
9

Resolution 2502 (XXIV), para. 7.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1489, No. 25567.
11
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fortieth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/40/17), annex I.
12
Resolutions 52/214, sect. C, para. 3; 55/222, sect. III, para. 12; 56/64 B, sect. X; 57/130 B, sect. X;
58/101 B, sect. V, paras. 61–76; 59/126 B, sect. V, paras. 76–95; 60/109 B, sect. IV, paras. 66–80; and
61/121 B, sect. IV, paras. 65–77.
10

4
