S/PV.8622

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8622nd meeting

Thursday, 19 September 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Van Shalkwyk
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Craft

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-28650 (E)
*1928650*

S/PV.8622

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Ursula
Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mueller.
Ms. Mueller: There have been several notable
developments in Syria since the Under-SecretaryGeneral briefed the Council three weeks ago about the
humanitarian situation (see S/PV.8609). I wanted to
start today with an update about north-west Syria.
On 30 August, the Russian Federation announced
a unilateral ceasefire in the Idlib de-escalation area,
which the Government of Syria later confirmed.
Reports indicate a decline in the fighting compared
with the period since late April, when the military
escalation began. It is critical that this much-needed
respite for civilians continue, unimpeded humanitarian
access be facilitated to all civilians in need and the
protected status of civilian infrastructure be respected.
Worrying signs of insecurity are, however, present.
Ground forces have continued to exchange shelling in
southern Idlib and eastern Latakia, and air strikes were
reported in central and northern Idlib over the past
week. At the same time, the listed terrorist group Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham and other non-State armed groups
continue to harass, intimidate and coerce civilians,
including medical workers.
The humanitarian situation remains alarming. An
estimated 400,000 people fled their homes in northwest Syria in the period from May to August. Many
of those people have been displaced multiple times,
both prior to and during the current military escalation.
These displacements follow familiar patterns, with
2/14

19/09/2019

civilians largely moving northward, away from
conflict-affected areas, to already densely populated
areas in northern Idlib.
In addition to the needs of those displaced, host
communities are becoming increasingly strained,
leading to additional demands on overstretched
humanitarian assistance. Needs in these areas are
considerable across all sectors: food and non-food,
water and sanitation, health, education and protection.
The shelter situation is of particular concern.
Increased demand and short supply mean that many
families are unable to afford rents in urban areas. A
survey earlier this month found that about 600,000
people live in tents, camps and sites for internally
displaced persons. Humanitarian partners report that
in the absence of viable alternatives, families in some
areas resort to living out in the open.
Following months of intensive fighting, the outlook
in north-west Syria remains uncertain. We know, though,
that winter is coming. Humanitarian organizations are
already planning how to help people in need before
temperatures drop and inclement weather arrives.
Humanitarians estimate that an additional $68.4 million
is required to address expected winterization, shelter
and non-food item needs. Continued donor support is
essential to maintain the current humanitarian response,
but also to scale up operations to meet the expected
needs across north-west Syria in the months ahead.
Humanitarian efforts to assist civilians in need
across north-west Syria depend on more than just
financial support. As the Under-Secretary-General
stressed last month, the people in Idlib are reached
exclusively through the cross-border operation. On a
monthly basis, more than 1.6 million people in need
receive some form of assistance. The renewal of
resolution 2165 (2014) later this year will be crucial
to sustaining the ongoing support to millions of
people in need and to respond to further needs in the
months ahead.
As members of the Council are aware, on
13 September the Secretary-General announced the
establishment of an internal, independent United
Nations Headquarters Board of Inquiry to investigate
a series of incidents that have occurred in northwest Syria. The board will commence its work on
30 September to ascertain the facts of specific incidents
of concern and report to the Secretary-General about
19-28650

19/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

its conclusions. We stand ready to support the Board in
its inquiry.
I have some developments to report about another
intractable humanitarian situation in the Rukban area.
On 11 September, a team comprised of 20 United Nations
staff and 170 staff and volunteers from the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent (SARC) completed a six-day mission to
Rukban, delivering food and nutrition assistance for
approximately 15,000 internally displaced persons.
That joint mission was the second United NationsSARC convoy in 2019 to reach the remote area with
humanitarian assistance.
The mission was not without difficulties. Access to
people in the area depended on extensive coordination
with community leaders, armed groups and multiple
Member States, including the Syrian Arab Republic,
the Russian Federation, the United States and Jordan.
Tensions on the ground were high. Moreover, the teams
found that conditions have gradually deteriorated in
the past months, with reports that several children have
died of preventable causes.
The work to support people in Rukban is not over.
United Nations-SARC teams are preparing for the
next phase of their plan, which is to assist up to 6,000
people who have expressed the wish to depart Rukban
for areas under Government control. Such an operation
depends on the continued cooperation of all parties to
facilitate the United Nations-SARC teams in supporting
the voluntary departure of civilians from Rukban, in a
safe, well-informed and dignified manner. The relevant
parties will also need to make further efforts to find
solutions for the population staying in Rukban, in
consultation with them. On a related note, I welcome
the arrival of Mr. Imran Riza, the new United Nations
Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator
for Syria, who presented his credentials to the Syrian
Government on Monday.
We have frequently reported to the Council about
the desperate situation in Al-Hol camp. As of early
September, some 68,600 individuals were residing
in the camp, 94 per cent of whom were women and
children. Humanitarian organizations continue to seek
ways to improve camp facilities, particularly in the
water and sanitation conditions and the availability of
health care. Their efforts have contributed to a decrease
in reported illnesses in recent weeks. Negotiations
continue with camp administrators to ensure sustained
humanitarian access to civilians in need, particularly

S/PV. 8622

in the camp’s annex, where third-country nationals are
accommodated. If agreed, humanitarian organizations
are prepared to provide around-the-clock health services,
which are currently restricted to daylight hours.
Despite those efforts, the situation in Al-Hol
remains extremely challenging and seemingly without
an imminent solution. Children comprise two-thirds of
the camp population. Many of them have been exposed
to extreme violence and trauma under the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant. Insecurity and violence continue
to be reported inside the camp. Many households face
uncertainties about their future and remain concerned
about the fate of missing male family members.
In that regard, solutions for foreign nationals need to
be urgently found so as not to prolong their conditions.
We call yet again on all Member States to take the
measures necessary to ensure that their nationals are
repatriated for rehabilitation and reintegration or
prosecution, as appropriate, in line with international
law and standards. Failure to do so now can place
children at risk of future radicalization, which will only
make future action more difficult.
Still in north-east Syria, in Deir ez-Zor governorate,
humanitarian actors are increasingly concerned about
new access challenges. On 13 September, the Syrian
Democratic Forces reportedly closed all crossing points
to areas under the Government of Syria until further
notice, forcing civilians to resort to more dangerous
informal crossings and interfering in humanitarian
operations. Unimpeded humanitarian access remains
essential to ensuring that the estimated 1.2 million
people in need across north-east Syria have access to
essential services and assistance.
I would like to take a step back from those urgent
humanitarian situations, which we brief the Council
about on a routine basis, to highlight two cross-cutting
dynamics affecting civilians across Syria.
The first is food insecurity. Earlier this month, the
World Food Programme and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations reported greater
harvests in Syria compared to last year. Wheat
production, for instance, is estimated at 2.2 million
tonnes, up from 1.2 million in 2018. Even if the overall
production remains a fraction of pre-crisis levels, an
improved agricultural outlook is hopeful news. At
the same time, families in Syria face even greater
challenges in making ends meet. Food prices have
gradually increased nationwide over the past 12 to

19-286503/14

S/PV.8622

The situation in the Middle East

19/09/2019

14 months, just as the value of their currency has gone
down. Importantly, we know that the most vulnerable
families are the least able to cope with such pressures.

Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I deliver this statement
on behalf of the co-penholders — Belgium, Kuwait
and Germany.

Such conditions only heighten the importance of
ongoing efforts to support the more than 6.5 million
people estimated to need food and livelihood support.
On a monthly basis, humanitarian organizations
deliver food assistance to 4.4 million people in need.
It is important to stress that this assistance is provided
based on assessed needs; almost 75 per cent of that food
assistance reaches districts identified with the most
severe needs.

At the outset, let me thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Mueller for her comprehensive briefing on the
humanitarian situation in Syria. We once again reiterate
our appreciation for all the efforts of humanitarian and
medical personnel to alleviate human suffering in Syria.

The second dynamic that I would like to highlight
is the threat posed by unexploded ordnance. Civilians
in Syria face a chronic danger, even in areas where
fighting has subsided. More than 10 million people
in Syria are estimated to live in contaminated areas.
Indeed, incidents have been recorded across Syria
since the end of August. On 8 September, in Deir ezZor, an unexploded ordnance reportedly killed a man
while he was checking on his house in the district of
Abu Kamal. Days earlier, in northern rural Aleppo,
two separate landmine explosions reportedly caused
multiple casualties. On 1 September, a landmine
reportedly injured 11 people, including five women and
three children, in western rural Dara’a governorate.
The indiscriminate nature of unexploded ordnance
makes it a shared challenge. I support standing calls
on all parties to the conflict to allow the clearance of
unexploded ordnance, to safely conduct risk-education
efforts and to ensure respect and safety for the
humanitarian staff conducting clearance activities.
I want to return to north-west Syria to conclude
my briefing. In recent weeks, the fragile ceasefire has
brought into focus an outlook that, for the Security
Council, should be all too familiar. Further fighting
will endanger and displace thousands of civilians.
Further displacement will create even more needs.
Further needs will stretch humanitarians who are
already at their limit. The world is watching in the hope
that a more humane outlook for Syria will be created,
one where civilians are safe, needs are addressed and
humanitarians are protected.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ms. Mueller for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
4/14

We heard again from the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs about the dire situation in
north-western Syria and the fragility of the unilateral
ceasefire. The number of people in need of humanitarian
assistance is staggering. There are almost 3 million
people in Idlib, the vast majority of whom are women
and children. Over half a million people have fled the
violence over the past few months, some of them having
to flee more than once. Over 1,000 civilians have been
killed. Hospitals, schools, and locations of internally
displaced persons have been targeted and destroyed
by bombardments. If this situation does not move the
Council to take action, what will?
That is why today we will be voting on a draft
resolution proposed by the Syria humanitarian
co-penholders — Kuwait, Belgium and Germany.
We have been negotiating this text in an inclusive,
transparent and thorough manner for the past few
weeks with all Council members. The aim of the text is
purely humanitarian — it intends to protect the civilian
population of Idlib from the ongoing offensive. It also
emphasizes that counter-terrorism operations must be
in compliance with international humanitarian law;
respect the principles of distinction, proportionality
and precaution; and distinguish between the civilian
population and combatants.
Civilians must never be the victims of a fight
against terrorism. We hope that our draft resolution
will gain the support of the entire Council, especially as
its objective is purely humanitarian. The Council must
speak up in a united manner to address the immense
human suffering faced by the civilian population of
Idlib. We call for the Council to urgently take a unified
stance in support of our humanitarian draft resolution.
We are also extremely concerned by the situation in
other areas of Syria, which was also highlighted by the
Assistant Secretary-General. In the south, 2.8 million
people require humanitarian assistance. In Rukban,
we continue to call for a sustainable solution for the
thousands of people there. In Al-Hol camp, where over
19-28650

19/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

70,000 people still receive humanitarian assistance, the
situation remains of deep concern, especially as women
and children — who make up more than 90 per cent
of the camp’s population — are highly vulnerable and
need specific protection.
We welcome the composition and the start of work
of the Board of Inquiry. It is important to conduct a
quick and thorough investigation of the incidents
that took place, in particular the attacks on facilities
identified under the de-confliction mechanism.
The cross-border mechanism, renewed under
resolution 2449 (2018), remains a critical lifeline for
millions of Syrians, particularly in the north-west. The
United Nations has repeatedly stated that there is no
other way to provide support for those civilians. The
continuation of the mechanism is essential to alleviating
human suffering, as the Assistant Secretary-General
indicated this morning.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I would
like to thank the Assistant Secretary-General for her
sobering but necessary update on the humanitarian
crisis in Syria.
First, let me commend the organizations and
individuals that are providing life-saving assistance
to millions of Syrians. Their work is heroic, and the
United States proudly supports them. At the same time,
I regret the fact that the Security Council is yet again
hearing reports of medical facilities being targeted by
the Al-Assad regime and its allies, civilians being killed
and humanitarians being denied access to desperate
populations. Business as usual cannot continue to
define these monthly meetings. The Council must hold
the regime and its allies accountable for the atrocities
it has committed, and we must ensure access for
humanitarians wherever aid is needed in Syria.
As we have heard, the toll in Idlib over the past
four months has been gruesome — more than 1,000
people killed, including at least 304 children, 164
women and 30 humanitarian workers, and roughly
2,000 people wounded. Nearly all of the 1,089 civilians
killed between April and August were attributed to
Syrian regime forces and their allies, according to the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Ms. Michelle Bachelet.
The Al-Assad regime unilaterally announced a
ceasefire on 30 August, but that so-called ceasefire,
like others before it, merely offered cover for the

S/PV. 8622

regime to regroup, reorganize and rest before its next
attack. The regime’s despicable, if familiar, practice of
launching attacks that damage health-care facilities has
likewise resumed. On 13 September, a regime artillery
strike hit the Kiwan Hospital in Idlib. That marks the
fifty-second medical facility struck in the past five
months. In the short term, these effects are horrific,
but the lasting effects are catastrophic and will persist
for generations.
Meanwhile, in Sufuhan, a White Helmet centre was
destroyed on 12 September. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s decision to establish a Board of Inquiry to
investigate attacks that damaged humanitarian facilities
in north-west Syria and that the United Nations has
selected the Board’s members to manage that important
accountability effort. We stand ready to support the
Board’s work and encourage all Member States to do
the same.
Additionally, we call for the Secretary-General to
make the Board’s final report public. The intentional
targeting of civilians and civilian objects is a violation of
international humanitarian law, especially when those
persons and objects reside in formally de-conflicted
zones. Issuing a public report will greatly aid in holding
responsible parties to account. The Al-Assad regime
and Russia must cease bombardments that would wound
and kill civilians and devastate civilian infrastructure.
As the United States has reiterated time and time again,
there is no military solution to this conflict.
With respect to the Rukban settlement, we commend
the United Nations and its partners for completing their
assessment mission and delivering critical supplies to
nearly 15,000 displaced Syrians. We urge the Al-Assad
regime and Russia to allow sustained deliveries of
humanitarian assistance to Rukban from Damascus and
to keep commercial routes to the encampment open as
long as the civilians choose to remain in the settlement.
The return of internally displaced persons and
refugees in Syria must be informed, safe, voluntary
and dignified. We strongly urge all parties to work with
the United Nations to ensure that proposals for return
align with the United Nations guiding principles on
internal displacement, and that the displaced persons
receive all relevant information so that they may
make informed decisions about their movement and
safety. We were alarmed by reports that the Al-Assad
regime has detained thousands of returning Syrians
and continues to arrest and torture civilians, including

19-286505/14

S/PV.8622

The situation in the Middle East

those who signed reconciliation agreements with the
regime. We call for an end to the Al-Assad regime’s
cruel detention practices.
We welcome the efforts by the members of this organ
to stop the unfolding of this humanitarian catastrophe
in Idlib. To meet that goal, we strongly support the draft
resolution submitted by Kuwait, Belgium and Germany,
which includes a meaningful ceasefire to the ongoing
hostilities in Idlib and will protect civilians and provide
needed accountability measures. All Council members
should support the draft resolution.
Finally, efforts by other members of the Council
to promote a separate draft resolution that denies the
people of Syria a full ceasefire will not halt the suffering
of Syrians and should not receive the support of any
Council member. I would certainly like to believe that
the entire Council will join me in standing with the
people of Syria by supporting the sole draft resolution
that will bring an end to the ongoing regime strikes.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank Ms. Mueller for her very
useful briefing. I also reiterate my appreciation for the
outstanding commitment of all humanitarian personnel
in Syria.
More than ever, we must focus our efforts on three
areas. The first, which must be an absolute priority, is
the implementation of the ceasefire in Idlib. We are very
concerned about the resumption of air strikes last week,
following the announcement of a unilateral ceasefire
on 31 August. We will continue to closely monitor
developments on the ground and to call for the strict
implementation of the Sochi memorandum, one year
after its signature between Turkey and Russia. Every
effort must be made to ensure an effective ceasefire
in the north-west with a view to halting hostilities and
to instating a nationwide ceasefire, in keeping with
resolution 2254 (2015). In that regard, we support
the draft resolution submitted by Germany, Belgium
and Kuwait.
The second area of focus is respect for international
humanitarian law, which is binding on all and
non-negotiable. In that connection, I would like to
recall two imperatives.
The first is the protection of civilians, including
humanitarian and medical personnel. The fight against
terrorism, which is undisputedly an essential issue,
cannot be invoked to justify violations of international
6/14

19/09/2019

humanitarian law. For that reason, we welcome the
launch of an internal investigation by the SecretaryGeneral into the attacks on de-conflicted infrastructure
in the north-west and reaffirm our full support to him.
I repeat that the fight against terrorism cannot under
any circumstances justify the sacrifice of civilian
populations, let alone children, nor does it justify
indiscriminate bombing or the deliberate destruction
of hospitals and schools. The crimes committed in
Idlib and the rest of Syria cannot and must not go
unpunished. Those who commit such acts will one day
be held accountable by the courts.
The second imperative is guaranteeing immediate,
safe, secure, comprehensive, sustainable and
unhindered humanitarian access to the entire Syrian
territory for those who need it most. For that to happen,
the violence in Idlib must stop immediately. We reiterate
our call on those with the means to do so to exert the
necessary pressure on the regime to ensure unimpeded
humanitarian access throughout Syria, in particular in
the areas under its control, including the territories it
reclaimed in 2018 in the south-west, eastern Ghouta
and the Rukban camp. Ensuring humanitarian access
also implies — and this is an essential point — that the
United Nations have access to displaced persons and
refugees who have returned home.
Thirdly, the urgency of the situation in Idlib is a
cruel reminder that only an inclusive political solution
can bring lasting peace and stability to Syria and
enable refugees to return to their country. We reiterate
our full support for the efforts of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria, Geir Pedersen,
with the aim of concluding a balanced agreement
on the constitutional committee, regarding both its
composition and its rules of procedure. We take note
of the latest encouraging developments related by
the Secretary-General and call for the launch of the
constitutional committee as soon as possible, under
the auspices of the United Nations in Geneva. The
procrastination must stop.
It is important that, in parallel, the Special Envoy
work on the basis of all the elements of resolution 2254
(2015), in particular on the preparation of elections and
confidence-building measures. We hope that the highlevel week of the General Assembly will provide an
opportunity to increase mobilization in support of the
political process. In the absence of any progress and
without the prospect of a political settlement, France
and the European Union cannot participate in the
19-28650

19/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

financing of reconstruction. That will fall to the regime
and its allies. We call on each and every member of the
Security Council to take responsibility for putting an
end to the tragedy that is unfolding before our eyes in
Idlib, and we invite them to vote in favour of the text
presented by Germany, Belgium and Kuwait.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller for her
detailed account of the current situation in Syria.
Since March 2011, Syria has been in the throes of
a conflict that has forced more than half of all Syrians
to leave their homes. Millions of Syrians are either
displaced or have been forced to seek refuge outside the
country. The crisis has resulted in more than 12 million
people needing assistance.
The current situation in Syria remains unacceptable.
Poland is deeply concerned about the possible surge
of violence across Syria, in particulier in the north,
resulting in a high number of casualties among civilians
and threatening the vital lifeline provided by the import
and distribution of basic supplies and services across
the country.
Air strikes have been destroying civilian
infrastructure, including camps for the internally
displaced, markets, schools and, most importantly,
health-care facilities. Children, pregnant and lactating
women, persons with disabilities, the elderly and other
groups or individuals with specific needs or diminished
coping mechanisms are particularly at risk. The
protection of civilians and the provision of unhindered
access to humanitarian assistance are not a choice but a
legal obligation on all sides of the conflict. Those who
do not comply should be held accountable. Multilateral
cooperation in this respect is urgently needed.
As we hear almost daily about the suffering of
the civilian population in Idlib province, we want to
underline that civilians should be subject to protection
in line with international law. Unfortunately, this
basic condition is still not being met. Enhanced efforts
aimed at the promotion of and respect for international
humanitarian law are of the utmost importance.
Ensuring that the de-escalation zone in Idlib, agreed
by Russia and Turkey, is fully respected is crucial to
preventing a full-scale humanitarian catastrophe. All
parties to the conflict should spare no effort in ensuring
the full implementation of the agreement. For that
reason, Poland supports the draft resolution presented
by the humanitarian penholders on Syria.

S/PV. 8622

Let me conclude by stressing that there can be
no military solution to the Syrian crisis. A lasting
settlement can be achieved only through a political
agreement, in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and
the 2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) . A
political settlement is urgently needed, as it remains
the only way to achieve sustainable peace under these
extremely dire circumstances.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for her briefing.
The relevant actors of the international community
have recently made active diplomatic efforts to improve
the situation in Idlib. Since 31 August, Russia and the
Syrian Government have implemented a ceasefire in
Idlib, which has generally held. On 16 September, the
Presidents of Russia, Turkey and Iran met in Ankara
and agreed to take measures to ease the tension in
Idlib, stressing that no party is allowed to violate
Syrian sovereignty, independence, unity or territorial
integrity and reiterating their intention to cooperate
to fight terrorism and to take concrete measures to
protect civilians. China welcomes those developments
and supports Russia, Turkey and Iran in seeking,
in the interests of the Syrian nation and people, a
comprehensive solution to fight terrorism and address
the humanitarian issues in Idlib. We expect the Astana
process to continue its important role.
China has been closely following the humanitarian
situation in Syria, as it cares about the interests and
well-being of the Syrian people. Years of conflict have
resulted in a huge demand for humanitarian aid in
Syria, and the economic sanctions have worsened the
living conditions of the Syrian people. The international
community must take into account the current food
situation and other living conditions of the Syrian
people and issues relating to the country’s post-war
reconstruction, national security and development. We
should also properly tackle the issue of foreign terrorist
fighters and their families and the return of refugees
and internally displaced persons to the homes.
The international community has a moral
responsibility to help the Syrian people emerge from
the shadow of war and lead a peaceful, stable and
promising life. In conducting humanitarian relief
operations in Syria, the United Nations and its relevant
agencies should fully respect Syria’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territory integrity, and strictly
abide by the resolutions of the Security Council, the

19-286507/14

S/PV.8622

The situation in the Middle East

United Nations guiding principles on humanitarian
assistance and relevant provisions of international law.
They should step up communication and coordination
with the Syrian Government.
There has been a great deal of controversy over
the Secretariat’s move to establish a Board of Inquiry
into incidents in north-west Syria. China is concerned
about the implications that might have on Syria’s
political process. At present, the Syrian Government
is actively promoting development and improving
people’s livelihoods. China appreciates those efforts.
In communication and coordination with the Syrian
Government, China plans to focus on launching
livelihood-related projects to support Syria in its
post-war reconstruction. A political solution to the
situation in Syria is the fundamental way to ease the
humanitarian situation in the country.
For some time now, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen, has
been actively engaged in good offices to promote
the political process based on the principle of Syrian
leadership and ownership and on resolution 2254 (2015).
With momentum now building for a political settlement
to the Syrian issue, China supports the Special Envoy’s
efforts and calls for all parties in Syria to resolve their
differences through dialogue and consultation. Members
of the Council should also remain united in providing
political support for the Special Envoy’s efforts, such as
that in forming a constitutional committee.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Ms. Mueller for
her briefing.
Once again, we express our gratitude to all
humanitarian actors who continue to provide assistance
under truly challenging conditions. We believe we should
commend in particular the Syrian non-governmental
organizations engaged in humanitarian in work.
Those organizations are proof of the often-overlooked
resilience and solidarity of the Syrian people. To all of
them, I express our deepest gratitude.
The growing humanitarian needs of the vulnerable
population, fuelled by successive displacement and
conditions of insecurity, are a source of grave concern
to the Dominican Republic. The alarming statistic of
630,000 newly displaced persons represents a major
humanitarian challenge that demands a robust and
urgent collective response backed by the necessary
funding to achieve the objectives of providing
8/14

19/09/2019

protection, basic services and shelter, while preserving
the humanity and dignity of those people. We are
talking about a population that was mostly already in
conditions of extreme poverty, with little capacity to
withstand further blows.
We echo the joint appeal issued by the SecretaryGeneral and the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross regarding the use of
explosive weapons in urban areas, which affirmed that
parties in conflict
“must recognize that using explosive weapons with
wide area effects in cities, towns and refugee camps
places civilians at high risk of indiscriminate harm”.
Idlib is no exception.
Hundreds of thousands of girls and boys in the
north-west of the country have been unable to begin
because their schools have either been attacked or are
being used as a shelters. How could we possibly justify
this situation to those children? What promises for the
future can be made in such a climate of insecurity? For
the Dominican Republic, the price that children have
paid for this conflict is particularly alarming. It is more
crucial than ever that we ensure those children will enjoy
a better future, free of threats to their development.
We wish to draw the Security Council’s attention
to an important point Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock raised during our latest briefing (see
S/PV.8619), when he quite rightly noted that it had not
received a great deal of attention: food security. While
harvests have increased as compared to 2018, according
to the latest report of the United Nations Food and
Agriculture Organization on the situation on Syria,
6.5 million people suffer from acute food insecurity
and 2.5 million additional people are on at risk of food
insecurity. The factors driving that food insecurity
include conflict-induced migration, the destruction of
crops, limited agricultural equipment, a lack of inputs
and rising food prices, to name but a few. As a result,
millions of Syrians are dependent upon food assistance,
which means it remains an urgent priority for Member
States to honour their financial commitments to the
humanitarian response plan.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the holding of this meeting and express our
gratitude for the important information provided by
Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller.
19-28650

19/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Peru continues to follow with grave concern the
continuing conflict and grave humanitarian situation
in the Syrian Arab Republic. While recent days have
seen positive developments in the north-west of the
country, the overall situation remains uncertain and
millions of people continue enduring conditions of
extreme vulnerability.
We note with alarm the report of approximately
630,000 new internally displaced persons since May,
the majority located along the Turkish border. Those
people, largely women and children, are facing abjectly
precarious conditions as a result of the extensive
territorial control attained by terrorist groups and the
continuous air strikes that make no distinction between
civilians and combatants.
Peru once again expresses its profound solidarity
with the Syrians enduring this cruel and protected
conflict, as well as our gratitude and support to United
Nations personnel and other humanitarian agencies
deployed on the ground.
We hope that, given this delicate situation, the
bilateral arrangements announced relating to those
areas will pose no threat to the civilian population or
affect humanitarian assistance operations. We wish to
underscore the joint United Nations operation with the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the Red
Crescent, as mentioned by Ms. Mueller, to address the
grave situation facing the thousands of displaced people
in Rukban, characterized by daily shortages of food,
drinking water, health care and medical supplies as
well as extreme weather conditions. While we welcome
the recent humanitarian deployment by the United
Nations to the camp, we stress the obligation to provide
continuous access to humanitarian assistance for as
long as necessary and continue in efforts to guarantee
the safe and dignified return of persons currently in the
camp due to a lack of resources to move.
We must also emphasize the major challenge
involved in meeting the critical needs of the more
than 70,000 people in the Al-Hol camp and the
importance of continuing to mobilize the support of the
international community.
We encourage the Government of Iraq to implement
the repatriation plans for its 30,000 nationals with the
support of the United Nations. To that end, we believe
it vital that the parties continue to work on measures
that foster a climate of better understanding, including
the release of detainees, the identification of missing

S/PV. 8622

persons and the transfer of human remains. We welcome
the work being done in that regard within the Astana
framework but we note the urgent need to make more
substantive progress in that area.
We also highlight the importance of continuing to
promote humanitarian demining work and the clearance
of improvised explosive devices in Syria, whose effects
not only wreak havoc among the population but also
hamper the delivery of the necessary assistance.
I would like to conclude by underlining the
urgent need for a permanent end to the hostilities as
the only way to begin to put an end to the suffering
that the continuation of the conflict will cause to
Syrian civilians.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): The situation for
civilians in northwest Syria is devastating. More than
1,000 civilians have been killed, including over 500
women and children, and almost 630,000 people have
been forced to leave their homes since the beginning
of May. I would like to thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Mueller for her briefing and for the work that
her officials and colleagues are doing. We commend
their work and that of the humanitarian agencies to
address the humanitarian suffering of the people in
Idlib. The United Kingdom has contributed more
than $150 million to humanitarian assistance in Idlib
over the past 18 months. I took careful note of what
Assistant-Secretary-General Mueller had to say about
the importance of resolution 2165 (2014) regarding
cross-border operations in that context. We of course
support that resolution.
The Security Council must act to protect civilians
in Idlib. That is why we fully support the humanitarian
penholders — Belgium, Kuwait and Germany — with
regard to their proposed draft resolution S/2019/756. We
will vote in favour of the draft resolution and in favour of
protecting civilians and ending indiscriminate attacks.
The Council has a duty to protect those suffering on the
ground. We need to send a message to the regime that
the international community is resolute in condemning
its actions and will not allow them to continue unabated.
Only a vote in favour of the co-penholders’ draft
resolution will send the message that countries around
this table, representing the international community,
will not accept the wanton targeting of civilians and
civilian infrastructure regardless of the stated objective.
Now is not a time to sit on the fence.

19-286509/14

S/PV.8622

The situation in the Middle East

We know that the Syrian regime does not care
how many of its civilians it kills but Russia says
that it does care. If so, Russia should vote in favour
of the co-penholders’ draft text and it and China
should withdraw their draft text, which would permit
continued attacks on civilians. We note Russian claims
to the press recently that the information of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
is apparently not up to date given its lack of presence on
the ground. That only reinforces the need for Russia to
press the Syrian authorities to approve OCHA’s request
for greater humanitarian access on the ground.
On Monday, the Astana guarantors noted their
commitment to sustainable peace in Syria and that that
can be achieved only through political and diplomatic
methods. We have been waiting a very long time for
political progress. We ask again for Russia to maintain
pressure on the regime, to fully engage with the
political process and, of course, to end the violence in
Idlib, which threatens that political process.
Finally, we welcome the Secretary-General’s board
of inquiry, which will soon begin to investigate some
of the recent appalling attacks in Idlib. We call for the
findings of the inquiry to be released to the public. Some
of the information underlying those findings may need
to remain confidential but it is crucial that the board be
transparent in its mandate and output. The international
community, but, more importantly, the Syrian people,
deserve to be privy to its findings on events in Idlib.
Assistant Secretary-General Mueller said that
the world was watching the Council but the Syrian
people — men, women and children — are dying while
they watch.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Mueller for updating the Council on
the current humanitarian situation in Syria.
Indonesia is following very closely developments
on the ground across northwest Syria. My delegation
believes that when civilians have been killed and
injured, the Council really needs to act. That is not
something new. Many of us have repeatedly voiced the
need for the Council to prevent the further deterioration
of the humanitarian suffering in Idlib. Indonesia would
like to highlight three points.
First, respecting and upholding the ceasefire
agreement is of crucial importance. Fully implementing
the September 2018 memorandum of understanding on
10/14

19/09/2019

Idlib is essential. We appreciate the ceasefire that began
on 31 August and encourage all parties to respect it. We
regret to note the shelling that reportedly continues to
affect civilians in southern Idlib. More than 630,000
individual displacements were also reported. Those
people are fighting for their lives. They need to
survive. Again, to immediately cease hostilities in Idlib
governorate is the priority.
Secondly, pursuing a peaceful resolution should
be the priority, with the aim of achieving concrete
results so as to alleviate the suffering of civilians on
the ground. In that regard, the Council should spare
no effort in creating a conducive atmosphere and in
avoiding further humanitarian catastrophe.
We note the most recent joint statement of the
tripartite summit held in Ankara, which agreed to
take concrete steps to reduce violations in the Idlib
de-escalation area and to ensure the protection of the
civilian population, in accordance with international
humanitarian law.
Thirdly, my delegation would like to urge all
parties to facilitate immediate, safe, unimpeded and
sustained humanitarian access for the United Nations
to the requested areas and populations in need.
The Council is scheduled to take action today on
draft resolutions S/2019/756 and S/2019/757 regarding
the humanitarian situation in Idlib. My delegation
wishes to emphasize that it is indeed important for us,
the Council, to truly focus on the humanitarian aspect
and to ensure that we are not too late in responding to
the humanitarian situation in Idlib.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Ms. Ursula Mueller
on her very comprehensive and informative briefing on
the latest developments in the humanitarian situation in
the Syrian Arab Republic.
Côte d’Ivoire notes with concern the continuing
deterioration of the already alarming humanitarian
situation in Syria, particularly in Idlib. Despite the
agreement between Russia and Turkey, signed in Sochi
on 17 September 2018, which created a demilitarized
zone in Idlib governorate, the latter is facing an
unprecedented military escalation. The escalating
violence has resulted in many deaths, thousands of
wounded and massive population displacements. The
destruction of hospital and school infrastructure, as well
19-28650

19/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

as attacks on internally displaced persons camps, further
aggravate an already worrying humanitarian situation.
Given the situation, Côte d’Ivoire calls on all parties
to respect the demilitarized zone, which should ensure a
cessation of hostilities in that area. My country remains
convinced that the cessation of fighting will create
the necessary conditions for the voluntary return of
refugees and pave the way for creating a climate of trust
in support of an ongoing and inclusive political process.
My delegation also urges the parties to the conflict to
respect international humanitarian law, including by
removing all obstacles to the provision of assistance to
refugees and displaced persons, including women and
children, and by protecting humanitarian personnel.
It therefore rightly welcomes the unilateral
ceasefire declared on 31 August by the Russian
Federation and Government forces in Idlib province. It
calls on the parties to respect that ceasefire in order to
allow humanitarian aid to be delivered to those in need.
My country also welcomes the commitments made by
the guarantors of the Astana process at the fifth summit
on Syria, held in Ankara on 16 September. It welcomes
in particular news of an agreement reached on the
establishment of entities to draft a new constitution for
the Syrian Arab Republic. We believe that that initiative
would be another important and effective step towards
lasting peace in the country.
My delegations also welcomes the dispatch, on the
same day, of a mission with 22 trucks of humanitarian
aid to Syria to provide assistance to suffering people
in Idlib and its surrounding villages. We also welcome
the resolve of Russia and Turkey to implement all
agreements reached on Idlib and take concrete steps to
ensure the protection of civilians.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire encourages the
international community to pursue its humanitarian
assistance efforts in Syria and reiterates its support for
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General in his firm
commitment to creating the conditions for a peaceful
and lasting solution to the Syrian crisis, in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015).
Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): Let me begin
by thanking Ms. Ursula Mueller for her briefing on the
humanitarian situation in Syria. We, too, are deeply
concerned about the dire humanitarian situation in
Syria, particularly with regard to the thousands of
civilians who continue to suffer.

S/PV. 8622

While we continue our deliberations here in the
Council, we should not forget those who remain under
the threat of violence, in particular those civilians still in
Idlib. South Africa remains deeply disturbed about the
high number of civilians, especially women and children,
who have lost their lives, sustained severe injuries or
have been displaced, in some cases multiple times,
since April of this year. In addition to the grave loss of
lives, the destruction of civilian infrastructure — such
as schools, health facilities, markets and water stations,
which are essential to the survival of civilians still
in the area — is particularly concerning and must be
condemned. In that regard, South Africa calls on all
parties to ensure that they respect their obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law for the protection of civilians and
civilian infrastructure. We wish to re-emphasize that
health facilities hold a special status under international
law, which must be respected.
The damage and destruction of civilian of civilian
infrastructure and the inability to provide basic
services contribute to the further deterioration of the
humanitarian situation, pushing thousands of civilians
towards Syria’s northern border. If no intervention is
made to address the humanitarian situation in Syria, it
will result in further deaths of innocent civilians. An
alternative to war has to be found.
While my delegation acknowledges the threat and
violence committed by terrorist groups, we must also
acknowledge and ensure that no counter-terrorism
actions should be taken at the expense of civilian lives.
We reiterate our position that any such action should be
taken only within the boundaries of international law.
South Africa has noted and welcomes the unilateral
ceasefire declared on 31 August by the Syrian
Government. We hope that it will be but one of many
steps towards long-term peace in Idlib and in Syria as
a whole.
With regard to the humanitarian situation in other
parts of Syria, South Africa wishes to welcome the
recent delivery by the United Nations and the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent of essential humanitarian assistance
to the people in Rukban. That assistance has long been
awaited and is much needed by the people remaining in
Rukban. South Africa maintains its position that while
civilians remain in Rukban, humanitarian assistance,
as needed, should be provided, and also that those wish
to leave should be assisted in doing so.

19-2865011/14

S/PV.8622

The situation in the Middle East

With regard to my last point on recent political
developments, we note the joint statement of Iran, Turkey
and the Russian Federation regarding the situation in
Syria, following their discussions in Turkey earlier
this week. We welcome their unified commitment to
increasing humanitarian assistance to all Syrians
throughout the country, without preconditions.
With regard to the constitutional committee, we
look forward to receiving an update from the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Geir
Pedersen, at his next briefing to the Council.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates that
the situation in Syria can be resolved only through
negotiations and dialogue under the auspices of
resolution 2254 (2015) and under the guidance of
Special Envoy Pedersen, in order to halt the loss of
innocent civilian lives and to restore peace, stability
and security in Syria.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): Equatorial Guinea thanks you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s meeting. We also thank
Ms. Ursula Mueller for her informative briefing.
The Second World War is said to have ended in
1945, following 2,194 days of conflict. The war in
Syria has already surpassed that time frame. More than
3,000 days have passed since the start of the crisis on
15 March 2011. To date, the conflict has lasted eight
years and six months and continues owing primarily
to hostilities among the warring parties and to the
actions of the Security Council, which is responsible
for ensuring international peace and security.
For Equatorial Guinea, the situation in Syria, and
in particular in Idlib, is completely unacceptable. Our
position remains unchanged. We cannot continue to
sacrifice the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people
for prosperity and well-being at the altar of political
or geostrategic interests. In the current atmosphere of
tension, the Security Council should remain united and
spare no effort to promote and ensure the definitive
end of hostilities in north-western Syria. In that regard,
we welcome the new unilateral ceasefire imposed by
Syrian Government forces on 31 August and call for
the moratorium on hostilities to be maintained so as
to ensure the speedy normalization of the situation
in Idlib. Actions that jeopardize the ceasefire in the
de-escalation zone must also be avoided.
12/14

19/09/2019

Furthermore, we strongly welcome the third
round of humanitarian aid, made possible by the
United Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, to
approximately 15,000 residents of the Rukban refugee
camp, whose living conditions are approaching the
level of a humanitarian disaster. We urge United
Nations humanitarian agencies to continue to provide
aid to those who intend to leave the camp.
We reiterate that, even in the fight against
terrorist remnants in Syria, respect for international
humanitarian law must always be ensured. In order to
avoid causing further harm to civilians and damage to
infrastructure during counter-terrorism operations, the
parties must be fully resolved to cease indiscriminate
attacks and to apply the principles of distinction and
proportionality. It is within that logic that, as on other
occasions, we reiterate our strong condemnation of any
act of violence by any of the parties involved in the
Syrian conflict that results in the loss of civilian life
and damage to the infrastructure that provides basic
services to the population, such as medical facilities
and schools. Indeed, attacks on and the destruction
of medical facilities and schools whose locations are
known to the warring parties demonstrate the gravity of
the violations of international law and of international
humanitarian law, as well as the lack of respect for the
rules of the game in the context of the Syrian conflict.
In conclusion, I reiterate the firm conviction of the
Government of Equatorial Guinea that the Syrian conflict
can be settled only through political and diplomatic
means, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and the delegation of your friendly
country on the assumption by the Russian Federation of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
also would like to express our deepest appreciation for
your country’s positions, which are underpinned by the
principles of international law and the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, which are defended by
your country.
A well-known Arab philosopher, Al-Mutanabbi,
who lived 1,000 years ago in Baghdad, Damascus and
Aleppo, said something that remains very valid today.
He said, “If someone does something wrong, then his
suspicions worsen”. I will explain why that saying is
still valid.
19-28650

19/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East

The Governments of some permanent members of
the Council, which are supposed to be entrusted with
upholding the principles of our Charter and maintaining
international peace and security, continue to misuse
the mechanisms of this international Organization,
including this important forum, to politicize the
humanitarian situation in my country, Syria. They are
using it also as an instrument in a hostile campaign
aimed at undermining the security and stability of my
country, supporting terrorism and levelling accusations
aimed at tarnishing the image of the Syrian Government
and its allies and at covering up the crimes committed
by those same countries and by their allies, proxies and
tools in the region.
Many realize that some parties have gambled a
great deal of money, effort, weapons and diplomacy in
the market for Syrian blood, within the Wall Street of
terrorism, located in the caves of Idlib. I am pleased
to tell those investors that they have lost their bets and
investments, which, to themselves and to those they use
as tools, will only bring them defeat and debacle on our
beloved national soil in Idlib.
The truth that is absent in the statements of those
countries that have adopted hostile positions against
Syria in the Council and in the briefings of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is that
alleviating the situation in Syria and addressing the
challenges that the Syrians are facing to secure their
basic living needs require the following.
First, there is a need for full respect for the
sovereignty of the Syrian Arab Republic and its
unity and territorial integrity. This is the substantive
principle underscored by the Security Council in the
more than 20 resolutions that have been adopted over
the past eight years on the situation in my country at the
humanitarian and political levels.
Secondly, there must be support for the efforts of
the Syrian Government and its allies in combating the
remnants of armed terrorist groups and foreign terrorist
fighters to implement the 12 resolutions of the Council
on counter-terrorism.
Thirdly, there is a need to put an end to the illegal
presence of foreign troops on Syrian Arab Republic
territories and to end the war crimes and crimes against
humanity perpetrated by the illegal global coalition.
Fourthly, there must be cooperation with the Syrian
Government as a key partner at the humanitarian

S/PV. 8622

development level, free of any political preconditions,
rejected diktats or extortion attempts aimed at
undermining reconstruction efforts and the return
of refugees.
Fifthly, an immediate end must be put to the
unilateral coercive measures that have significantly
affected the lives of Syrians and impeded their ability
to meet their basic daily needs.
The Syrian Government is sparing no effort to lend
support to and secure the basic needs of all its citizens,
wherever they may be on the Syrian territories. The
Government is also supporting and facilitating the
efforts of the United Nations and its humanitarian
partners, in accordance with the guidelines set out in
General Assembly resolution 46/182.
I would recall that the Syrian Government accepted
the ceasefire in the de-escalation zone in Idlib effective
from 31 August while reserving the right to reply to
any violation by terrorists. My Government also
coordinated with the friendly Russian side the opening
of a second humanitarian corridor in Abu Al-Duhur,
in Idlib, in addition to the first humanitarian crossing
that had previously been opened in the city of Souran
to enable civilians to leave the areas where armed
terrorist groups are present — groups that use them as
human shields. This would enable those civilians to go
to areas that have been liberated from terrorists by the
Arab Syrian army and its allies. But terrorist groups,
for the seventh day in a row, are targeting and shooting
civilians to prevent them from leaving through those
two crossings.
Coordinated Syrian-Russian efforts culminated
in the removal from Rukban camp of more than
29,000 civilians who had been held there and in
securing temporary shelters to receive them and then
move them to areas liberated from the terrorists. The
Syrian Government recently facilitated a visit by a
United Nations assessment mission and the Syrian
Red Crescent, as well as an aid convoy to the camp
in the occupied area of Al-Tanf, which is controlled
by United States troops and the Maghawir al-Thawra
terrorist group.
The United Nations, following that visit, announced
that only 13,000 people were in the camp and that 37 per
cent of them wished to leave and return to the areas
controlled by the Government. But the terrorist groups
supported by occupying United States troops did not
allow them to do so and forcibly seized a significant

19-2865013/14

S/PV.8622

The situation in the Middle East

part of the humanitarian assistance and transferred it
to one of their posts in the Al-Tanf area. The Syrian
Government continues to cooperate with humanitarian
partners to address the situation in Al-Hol camp. The
Government granted the International Committee of
the Red Cross authorization to bring a mobile field
hospital into the camp along with 100 technicians and
medical personnel, as well as to render assistance to
those in need in the camp and surrounding areas. Here
we would underscore the responsibility of the countries
concerned to withdraw their terrorists and their families
from the camp without delay.
These points are but a few examples that demonstrate
the significant efforts, about which there is no doubt,
made by the Syrian State at the humanitarian level. This
also testifies to the results of international cooperation
when there are good intentions and willingness. I
reiterate my thanks to the Russian Federation for its
efforts to this end.
I would recall that had it not been for the support
provided by the Syrian Government for the work
of the United Nations and other partners in terms of
humanitarian action, the United Nations would not
have been able to perform the achievements noted in
its reports.
In the past few weeks, humanitarian penholders
have drawn up a draft resolution on my country. The
draft has nothing to do with its declared objectives.
My country categorically rejects it for many reasons,
foremost of which are the following.
First, there was no serious consultation and
coordination with the key party concerned: the
delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Secondly, the draft resolution ignores the root
causes of the exacerbated humanitarian crisis, namely,
the globally supported terrorism, the illegal presence
of foreign troops on my country’s territories and their

14/14

19/09/2019

policy of imposing a new fait accompli that contravenes
the stipulations of the Council’s resolutions regarding a
full commitment to the sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Thirdly, the draft resolution ignores the need
to exclude terrorist groups from the cessation of
hostilities, flouting the Sochi and Astana agreements.
It also elides the responsibility of Member States to
repatriate the foreign terrorists and their families and
to hold them accountable, rather than the practice of
some to show indifference and of others to shirk their
responsibilities. They revoke the citizenship of those
terrorists in order to keep them in Syria, at the expense
of the Syrian people.
Fourthly, the countries that submitted the draft
resolution were hasty, not out of benevolence but in their
belligerence against the Syrian State, reflecting the
efforts of certain States to undermine the security and
stability of the region to serve the interests of the Israeli
occupation. They joined the illegal global coalition and
have stained their history of relations with the Syrian
people. They have perpetrated economic terrorism
against the Syrians by imposing and implementing
unilateral coercive measures.
I advise those who harbour illusions and believe
that they can turn Al-Tanf into an occupied pocket
like Guantanamo, or Idlib into another Tora Bora,
to abandon those illusions. My delegation therefore
invites the members of the Council to vote against
the draft resolution that has been submitted by the
humanitarian penholders.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.

19-28650
