III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

form the General Assembly from time to time of the state
of adherence to the Convention and its Protocols;
_4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "United Nations
Conference on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of
Certain C<:mventi<?n~I Weapons Which May Be Deemed to
Be Excessively InJunous or to Have Indiscriminate Effects'' .
91st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

36/94.

Conclusion of an international convention on
the strengthening of the security of non-nuclearweapon States against the use or threat of use
of nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,
Convinced of the need to take effective measures for the
stre_ngthening of the security of States and prompted by the
desue shared by all nations to eliminate war and prevent
nuclear conflagration,
Taking into account the principle of non-use of force or
threat of force enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and reaffirmed in a number of United Nations declarations and resolutions,
Noting with satisfaction the desire of States in various
~gions. to pr~ve~t n~clear weapons from being introduced
mto thetr temtones, including through the establishment of
nuclear-"".eapon-free zones, on the basis of arrangements
freely ~ved ~t among the States of the region concerned,
and bemg anxious to contribute to the attainment of this
objective,
Considering that, until nuclear disarmament is achieved
on a universal basis, it is imperative for the international
community to develop effective measures to ensure the security of non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat
of use of nuclear weapons from any quarter,
Recognizing that effective measures to assure nonnuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons can constitute a positive contribution to
the prevention of the spread of nuclear weapons,
ft!indful of the statements made and views expressed by
vanous States on the strengthening of the security of nonnuclear-weapon States,
. Con~erned at the continuing escalation of the arms race.
m particular the nuclear-arms race, and the increased danger
of recourse to the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Deeply concerned at the plans for further stationing of
nuclear weapons '?n the territories of non-nuclear-weapon
States that could duectly affect the security of non-nuclearweapon States,
Desirous. of promoting the implementation of paragraph
59 of the Fmal Document of the Tenth Special Session of
the _General Assembly, 53 the first special session devoted
to disarmament, in which it urged the nuclear-weapon States
to pursue efforts to conclude, as appropriate, effective arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the
use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Recalling its resolutions 33/72 of 14 December 1978, 34/
84 and 34/85 of 11 December 1979, 351154 and 35/ I 55 of
12 December 1980 and the relevant provisions of its resolution 35/46 of 3 December 1980,
Noting the consideration by the Committee on Disarmament in l 981 of the item entitled "Effective international

" Resolution S-1012.

67

arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against
the use or threat of us~ of nuclear weapons" and the setting
up of an Ad Hoc Workmg Group to continue the negotiations
on this item,
Recalling the drafts of an international convention submitted on that item to the Committee on Disarmament in
1979 and noting with satisfaction that the idea of concluding
such a convention has received widespread international
support,
Taking note of the report of the Committee on Disarmament, 54 including the report of the Ad H oc Working Group
on Effective International Arrangements to Assure NonNuclear-Weapon States against the Use or Threat of Use
of Nuclear Weapons, 55
Wishing t<? ~romote an early and successful completion
of the negotiations on the elaboration of a convention on
the strengthening of the security of non-nuclear-weapon
States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Noting further that the idea of interim arrangements as
a first step towards the conclusion of such a convention has
also been considered in the Committee on Disarmament
particularly in the form of a Security Council resolution o~
this subject, and recalling the recommendation made in that
respect by the General Assembly in paragraph 6 of its resolution 35/154,
Mindful of the second special session devoted to disarmament, to be held from 7 June to 9 July 1982, at which the
General Assembly will review the progress achieved in the
field of disarma~ent, including the implementation of paragraph 59 of the Fmal Document of the Tenth Special Session
of the General Assembly,
I. Welcomes the conclusion of the Committee on Disarmament that there is continuing recognition of the urgent
need to reach agreement on effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use
or threat of use of nuclear weapons;
2. Notes with satisfaction that in the Committee on
Dis~ament ther~ is onc_e again no objection, in principle,
to the idea of an mternat1onal convention on this subject;
3. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to continue
the negotiations on the question of strengthening the security
guarantees of non-nuclear-weapon States during its session
in 1982;
. 4. Calls upon all States participating in those negotiations to make efforts for the elaboration and conclusion of
an international convention on this matter;
5. Calls once again upon all nuclear-weapon States to
!11-ake solemn declarations, identical in substance, concernmg the non-use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclearweapon States having no such weapons on their territories,
as a first step towards the conclusion of an international
convention, _and recommend~ that the Security Council
should exa°:'me such_ de~larations and, if they all meet the
above-!11-enttoned. obJect1ve, should adopt an appropriate
resolution approving them;
_6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Conclusion of an
international convention on the strengthening of the security
of non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of
use of nuclear weapons''.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

1
'· Official Records of the General Ass,•mblv, Thirl\'-sixth Session, Sup{'lement No. 27 (A/36C7)
·
·
" Ibid .. para. IOI
