TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR

MEETING:

NEW

17 SEPTEMBER

197 1

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/

Adoption

of the agenda

158 1) . . . , . . . , . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Pay

, . . . . . . , . ,, . . .. . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . .. . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
fal Letter dated 13 September
1971 from the Permanent
Representative
of
Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/10313);
(b) Reports of the Secretary-General
(S/8052, S/8 146, S/9149 and Add.1,
S/9537 and S/l0124 and Add.1 and 2) . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . .

1

SfPV.158

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEEN HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-FIRST MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 17 September 1971, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Toru NAKAGAWA

(Japan).

At the invitation of the President,Mr. M. II. El-Zayyat
(Egypt), Mr. E. Ghorra (Lebanon),Mr, S, Daore (Mali),
Mr. M. M. Zentar (Morocco) andMr. J. M. Baroody (Saudi
Arabia) took the placesreservedfor them in the Council
chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America,

3. The PRESIDENT:Thefirst nameon the list of speakers
for this meetingis that of the representativeof Morocco. I
invite him to take a placeat the Counciltableandto make
his statement.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l581)
1. Adoption

of the agenda.

4. Mr. ZENTAR (Morocco) (interpretationfrom French):
First of d, I shouldlike to extend to you, Mr. President,
and to the other membersof this Council my thanks for
your having been so kind as to permit me to speakon
behalf of the Kingdomof Morocco andto expressherethe
profound concernof my country in the face of the tragic
situation in Jerusalem,
not only because
of foreignmilitary
occupation, which seemsto be continuing endlessly,but
above all becauseof the blind policy of Israel, which is
aiming at the final annexationof the whole of the Holy
City at the expenseof the legitimaterights of the Arab
people-rights which, moreover,have beenrecognizedby
the Security Council and the GeneralAssemblyof the
United Nations-and also in complete disregardof the
feelingsand beliefsof hundredsof millionsof Moslemsand
Christiansthroughoutthe world.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 13 September 1971 from the Permanent Representative
of Jordan to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/ 103 13);
(b/ Reports of the Secretary-General (S/8052, S/8146,
S/9149 and Add.1, S/9537 and S/10124 and Add.1
and 2).

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East:
(u) Letter dated 13 September 1971 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council

5. Hardly a week or a month passes
without the world
hearingof the dynamitingof whole quarters,of the forced
exodus of the smallArab population of Jerusalemto a
wretched and precariousexile in distantand overcrowded
camps,which are breeding-grounds
for violenceand resentment. Day after day Israelsetsin motion without shameor
even discretion its relentlessmachine which devours,
through new legislationand through bulldozers,the Arab
town of Jerusalem,and indeed neighbouringtowns and
villages,and all that in the nameof a new order,sometimes
in the nameof the welfare or eventhe well-beingof the
peoplewho arebeingdrivenout in that way.

(S/l03 13);

fi) Reports

of the Secretary-General (S/8052, S/8146,

S/9149 and Add.1, S/9537 and S/10124 and Add.1
and 2)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the Council’s
previous decision [1579th meeting], I shall, with the
consent of the Council, invite the representatives of Jordan
and Israel to take places at the Security Council table in
order to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote,

6, But no oneisfooled for a moment.No oneanywhereis
so criminally simple-minded
asto believefor a momentin
the hypocritical motiveswhich,areadvancedto justify the
systematicdespoliationand the economic,cultural, SpiP
itual and fina,lly humaneliminationof the Arabs-Moslem
or Christian-from a town or a country in which they have
lived for 15 centuriesand,in somecases,
evenlonger.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. B. Toukan (JOP
chn) and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took placesat the Security
Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT: I invite the representativesof Egypt,
Lebanon, Mali, Morocco and Saudi Arabia to take the
placesreserved for them at the sideof the Council chamber
in order to participate in the discussionwithout the right to
vote, on the understanding that they will be invited to take
placesat the Council table when it istheir turn to speak.

7. My friend the Ambassador
of Jordanandmy friend the
Ambassador
of Egypt havemadebrilliant statements
of rare
clarity tracing the courseof developments,
both recent and
1

“The Heads of State and Government and representatives declare that the continued threat upon the sacred
shrines of Islam in Jerusalem is the resuIt of the
occupation of this City by the Israeli forces. The
preservation of their sacred character and unimpeded
access to them require that the Holy City should be
restored to its status, previous to June 1967, which was
established and sanctified by the history of 1,300 years.

present, of this brazen operation which is being carried out
in broad daylight under the blazing sun of the Middle East
by an occupier determined to make old dreams come true
at whatever cost today to the rightful inhabitants of the
region, and perhaps tomorrow to the international community as a whole.
8. The international community must beware. Dazzling
successes, lightning wars, even six-day wars, have never
brought about any lasting change to the map of the world,
especially when they have been based only on an appetite
for illegitimate territorial conquest, like certain persons
who once sought living space at the expense of their
neighbours.

“They therefore declare that their Governments and
peoples are firmly determined to reject any solution of
the problem of Palestine which would deny Jerusalem the
status it had before June 1967.
“They urge all Governments, particularly those of
France, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America, to take into account
the deep attachment of the followers of Islam to
Jerusalem and the solemn resolve of their Governments to
strive for its liberation.

9. There are many Members of our Organization which
have suffered in one way or another from such operations.
There are also many who realize that such operations have
always come to the same end, the same sorry end-but at
what price, at the price of what turmoil and suffering which
humanity could well have been spared.

“The continued military occupation of Arab territories
by Israel since June 1967, the refusal by Israel to pay the
slightest heed to the calls by the Security Council and the
General Assembly of the United Nations to rescind the
measures purporting to annex the Holy City of Jerusalem
to Israel, have caused their peoples and their Governments the most profound concern.“r

10. If the Arab people as a whole, Moslem and Christian,
is unable to endure indefinitely the cruel law which Israel
wishes to impose upon them-Israel which rejects all the
solutions which have been proposed one after the other,
even those which have been judged to be equitable and
realistic-if the Arab people can no longer endure such
treatment indefinitely, because they are now seething and
will one day throw off their yoke, we must not disregard
the actions of a wider community, a community of more
than 600 million Moslems who also feel frustrated, humiliated and battered by the occupation of its holy places, by
a threat which is no longer potential but actual to one of
the holiest places of Islam.

13. I have made a long quotation from that noteworthy
and historic statement because-with regard to a criminal
act which is one of many other aggressive acts of which
Israel each day is guilty if only because of its continued
illegal occupation of other people’s territories-it expresses
better than I might have done, and with all the authority
belonging to the collective voice of nearly 25 Heads of
State or their representatives, the feelings and the beliefs of
the whole of Islam, its cry of distress to the international
community, and to the great Powers in particular, to put an
end to this permanent aggression.

11. The whole world remembers the impressive reaction of
the Moslem world to the announcement of the burning of
the Al Aqsa Mosque. On the initiative of His Majesty
Hassan II, Morocco had the honour of hosting the first
Islamic Conference ever held at this level and with the
participation of so many Heads of State, who were also
outraged by the criminal act perpetrated against the Holy
Mosque.

14. But behind what is expressed in words in that
statement are profound feelings of distress, indignation,
concern at the prolonged military occupation; a determination to reject any solution to the Palestinian problem that
would not restore to Jerusalem its former status; and,
finally, a pressing and final appeal to the international
conscience of which the members of the Security Council
are now the guardians.

12. In the joint statement issued by that meeting-a
statement noteworthy for its restraint, its lofty point of
view and the unreserved devotion which was expressed
therein to the principles and ideaIs of the United Nationsthe Moslem Heads of State and Government who met at
Rabat stated:

15. It is worth recalling that the essential purpose of our
Organization is to maintain international peace and security, to take all effective measures to prevent threats to
peace. The Security Council in particular has the primary
duty of taking such action when it is a question of
preventing the development in a given region of conditions
or situations which are liable, sooner or later, to degenerate
into armed conflict.

“The grievous event of 21 August 1969, which caused
extensive damage by arson to the sacred Al Aqsa Mosque,
has plunged over 600 million followers of Islam throughout the world into the deepest anguish.
“This sacrilege against one of humanity’s most venerated shrines and the acts of destruction and profanation
of the Holy Places which have taken place under the
military occupation by Israel of the Holy City of
Jerusalem, sacred to the fohowers of Islam, Christianity
and Judaism, have exacerbated tensions in the Middle
East and aroused indignation among peoples throughout
the world.

16. In the particular caseof Jerusalem, it cannot be denied
that both the General Assembly and the Security Council
1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-fourth
Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1969,

document
S/9460.

2

did adopt appropriate stands when they became well aware
in 1967, 1968 and 1969 of the dangers threatening the
Holy City and peace in the region and in the world
following the unilateral measures taken by Israel in an
attempt to sanction, by inadmissible faits accomplis, its
final grasp on its recent conquests.

all the slim chances that might still exist, aswe should like
to believe, for a peaceful, just and humane solution which
would restore the territory to the neighbouring countries
and restore to the great forgotten people in this drama their
legitimate rights?
24. In resolution 267 (1969) which the Council adopted
on 3 July 1969, it is stipulated in paragraph 6 that the
Council:

17. For the Arab peoples the matter seemed to have been
settIed, both because of the near-unanimity in support of
the pertinent resolutions and because of the measures the
Council envisaged if the decisions it had taken were not
complied with.

‘Requests Israel to inform the Security Council without any further delay”-this was two years ago-“of its
intentions with regard to the implementation
of the
provisions of the present resolution.”

18. But two years will soon have elapsed without anything
having been done to halt this relentless process. Israel, with
rare stubbornness, has flatly rejected without the slightest
explanation all your resolutions. There is a name for that
attitude: defiance, and it calls for a certain reaction on the
part of the Council, a reaction which is to be found in the
Charter. It consists of sanctions.

And in paragraph 7 the Council:
“Determines that, in the event of a negative response or
no response from Israel, the Security Council shall
reconvene without delay to consider what further action
should be taken in this matter.”

19. To all resolutions, to all condemnations, Israel replies-when it has time-that the situation is irreversible,
non-negotiable, and at the same time in the area itself the
master plan for greater Jerusalem is going on, the transfer
of Arab populations is accelerated and local leaders declare
for everyone to hear that they must make haste.

25. In invoking those two paragraphs, my delegation
would express the earnest hope that at least, and for the
moment, the Security Council will request the SecretaryGeneral, after consultation with the President of this
Council, to have recourse to the adequate means at his
disposal, including the dispatch of a representative or a
mission, in order as quickly as possible to throw some light
on the way in which Israel is complying or failing to
comply with the resolutions adopted on Jerusalem. When
that report is presented my delegation reserves the right to
draw the necessary conclusions and to support the Council
in any appropriate action it then decides to take.

20. What speaker really needs arguments proof, evidence
to persuade his audience of facts that are today so
flagrant? Who is not yet convinced that this operation is
taking place in the most outrageous colonial and imperialist
style, a style which would physically eliminate the indigenous inh.~.b.blts.~tsin order to transform the country into a
colony settled on ‘he ba:is of race, colour or religion?

26. The PRESIDENT: The next name on the list of
speakers is that of the representative of Lebanon. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

21. Who still doubts that what is happening in Jerusalem is
now being extended-and will be extended even further in
the future-to the West Bank of the Jordan, to the Golan
Heights, to Gaza, to Sharm el Sheikh, and even further?
Who CFIII doubt, for example, the real nature and objectives
of these settlements of soldier-farmers who are being
installed in great numbers right up to the cease-fireline?

27. Mr. CHORRA (Lebanon): Mr. President, I wish to
express to you and to the members of the Security Council
my appreciation for the opportunity you are according me
to present the views of my Government on the important
question of Jerusalem which is before the Council. In
response to your appeal, I shall refrain from touching upon
the other aspects of the Palestinian drama, with regard to
the other Arab territories where the Israeli occupation
weighs very heavily.

22. But the Geneva Convention of 1949-to which Israel is
a party-forbids
the transfer of people in militarily-occupied territories, and that Convention was not proposed or
adopted by any particular group of pro-Arab countries, that
is, countries that would therefore be hostile to Israel and
would only deserve its scorn.

28. My colleagues, the representatives of Jordan and
Egypt, ably presented the case to the Council yesterday in
their remarkable and well documented statements. My
delegation fully supports the contents of those statements
and the arguments contained therein.

23. If today we are asking this Council to intervene
vjgorously, it is particularly to prevent the international
community from being deceived any longer and being
deprived of any possible reaction in the face of unjust and
repugnant faits accomplis which then become irreversible
through the simple will of the perpetrators. Furthermore,
such a situation, if tolerated any longer, would not only
discredit the Organization but obviously would lead to a
chain reaction of violence, with the classic denouement,
whatever illusions may be naively nourished at present by
the invaders, who are standing athwart the current of
history in this way. But in fact would this not be one more
way of gaining time in order to compromise once and for

29. The Government and people of Lebanon attach special
importance to this question, for they are deeply concerned
about the fate of the Holy City. They are perturbed by an
Israeli policy which is designed to Judaize the City, to strip
it of its Arab character and to efface its Christian and
Moslem physiognomy. Lebanon finds itself in a unique
position to reflect the grave concern of both Christianity
and Islam for Jerusalem. Our Christian and Moslem
3

“The events which are currently taking place in the city
of Jerusalem are so grave that their dimensions and
implications go beyond the local aspects. . . , Spiritually
and morally, however, they are of the level of human
civilization. . . .

population is equally chagrined by the persistent measures

undertaken by the Israeli occupying authorities in the
tormented Old City of Jerusalem. These measures constitute a challenge to the authority of this Council and its
resolutions, to the principles of the United Nations and
international law and morality and to spiritual values and
civilization itself.

‘What we are witnessing today represents a complete
and radical distortion of the human and spiritual sign%cance of civilization. For the goal of Zionism-implicitly
or explicitly stated-is to destroy this human and spiritual
heritage in merging it in a fanatical racist State. It claims
that a haven is being founded for the Jews, but the whole
world knows that this is being done at the expense of the
Arabs. . ,

30. Since the occupation of the Holy City of Jerusalem by
the Israeli forces following the Israeli aggression of 5 June
1967, Lebanon, in its actions and pronouncements in
international forums or in its contacts with friendly
governments and concerned religious bodies, has not ceased
to bring to the attention of the international community
the dangers generated by the Israeli measures carried out in
the Holy City. Moreover, it has not failed to point out
Israel’s contempt for the will of the international community as embodied in United Nations resolutions. It has been,
and still remains, our intent to awaken the international
conscience and consciousness to the tragic events tormenting the Christians and Moslems of the area. I wish to
call special attention to those Christians of the Middle East
with historic, religious and ethnic attachment to the Holy
City-to those Christians of *hiheEastern Churches, of whom
I myself am one, who are genuinely concerned with the
situation and who sense more than ever before the dangers
threatening their Holiest City. I would remind members of
the Council that 10 million Christians live in the Middle
East-that is, more than three times the population of
Israel-and that they find themselves, because of the Israeli
occupation of that city, totally separated and estranged
from their holy places. To them Jerusalem has become a
remote and unattainable place, Their sorrow because of this
prevailing situation is boundless. The Old City of Jerusalem
constitutes in its spirituality a special fabric which has been
interwoven into their hearts by centuries of direct and
uninterrupted contacts.

“ . . . we address this appeal to human conscienceChristian and nonChristian alike, but Christian first-to
place it face-to-face with its historical responsibilities. The
Christian, Moslem and Jewish communities, believers and
unbelievers, are all equally concerned with the unfortunate consequences of Zionism. In short, it is the man asa
man who is put in doubt.”
33. I could continue indefinitely reciting the scores OF
appeals and statements made by Eastern Christian leaders,
for their concern and agitation have become a constant
theme in their speeches, sermons and prayers. I wish,
however, to refer to only one more such appeal asa further
illustration. His Beatitude Elias IV, Patriarch of the Greek
Orthodox Church of Antioch, expressed his disturbance
over the fate of Jerusalem at a Divine Liturgy held in Beirut
on 6 June 197 1, He declared:
“Should the Christians and the Moslems lose the Holy
City, they would lose the very meaning of their existence,
the significance of their mission on earth, and that of
their faiths, The loss of the Holy City would mean the
loss . . * of what we hold as most sacred.”

31. On 4 June 1971~that is, the eve of the fourth
anniversary of Israel’s aggression against the Arab StatesMr. Khalyl Abou Hamad, Foreign Minister of Lebanon,
said:
“Lebanon considers the question of Jerusalem a primary and urgent matter for which we have to mobilize all
means and deploy all efforts to prevent the Judaization of
the City. This matter supersedes the framework of the
Arab-Israeli conflict; it interests all countries whose
people believe in God, in the revealed religions and in
spiritual values.”

34, The Christians of the West look towards the Easttowards Jerusalem-for their inspiration and spiritual guidance. Jerusalem not only contains their holy shrines but is
also the eternal fountainhead of their beliefs and convictions. It is the natural right then of their Eastern brethren
to seek their understanding and their support amidst such
trying times. It is indeed gratifying to note the growing
response of Western Christians to the appeals of the
Christians of the East and their shared anxieties about the
future of the Holy City.

32. We are indebted to our colleague Ambassador George
Tomeh of the Syrian Arab Republic for bringing to the
attention of the Security Council the unanimous views of
Eastern Christianity which were expressed on 10 May 1971
in “An appeal to Christian conscience”, circulated as
document S/l0215 of 1 June. The leaders of the Eastern
Churches are indeed those personages who must be heeded,
for it is they, their parishioners and their neighbours who
are suffering from Israeli military occupation and illegal
measures. May I be permitted to repeat once more a few
lines of that appeal which summaxize most succinctly the
beliefs and the hopes of Christianity-and yet also its fears?
The Patriarchs and Pastors who assembled at the Greek
Orthodox Patriarchate in Damascus wrote:

35. In his statement yesterday, Ambassador Toukan of
Jordan quoted extensively from an article published in the
Vatican newspaper L ‘OsservatoreRoman.0of 22-23 March
197 1. I wish to repeat only a few of its words for emphasis.
The article reads, in part: “Reference to expropriating
measures is sufficient to give an idea of the radical manner
with which a physiognomy is impressed on the City that
greatly differs from its historical and religious character and
its universal vocation.” The article states further: ?Ve are
bound to feel deep apprehension at changes of such
gravity.” It also refers to the Israeli master plan for the Old
City of Jerusalem, which has been described by the Israeli
Minister of Construction himself as “a plan with Hebrew
aims”; and concludes that the Israeli projects “are not
4

peace projects and cannot leave indifferent those who really
work for definitive peace in the Middle East”.

construct large housing projects on the hills surrounding
Jerusalem, the spokesman for the United States State
Department, Mr. Robert McCloskey, declared that unilateral actions taken by Israel tending to change the status of
the City of Jerusalem were unacceptable. Another spokes.
man, Mr. Charles Bray, stated on 9 June 1971 that the
Israeli building projects in the fomler Jordanian sector of
Jerusalem “violated the 1949 Geneva Convention”. The
cynical Israeli responseto the first statement is that visitors
to Jerusalem are now being taken on a tour of what have
become known as the “McCloskey heights”.

36. On 15 December 1969, His Holiness Pope PaulVI
expressed, in an allocution delivered to the College of
Cardinals and the Roman Curia, his deep concern over the
exodus of Christians from Jerusalem and the Holy Land. He
said that the “number of the faithful of Jesus has
diminished, and is still diminishing every day, from the land
which was sanctified by His preaching and His sacrifice.
This situation makes us wonder whether these majestic and
beautiful religious edifices, which evoke the events of the
life of Christ on the very spot where they have happened,
will not be deprived one day of the living presence of their
own ecclesial cornniunities.”

40. As reiterated yesterday by Mr. Tekoah, the Israeli
authorities claim that such projects were intended to
maintain-to keep-Jerusalem as a Jewish city. The fact is
that the intention is, instead, to create a Jewish city-to
transform it into a Jewish city-in short, to Judaize it. And
to Judaize it is to “de-Arabize” it, “deChristianize” and
“de-Islamize” it. It calls for voiding the City of its authentic
population-the Arab population-the population which has
lived in the shadowsof the Holy Placesfor 2,000 years. It is
the height of historical absurdity to state, as we heard
stated yesterday, that Jerusalem has never ceasedto be a
Jewish city except for only 19 years of Jordanian rule.
Such a claim is an insult to history, to civihzation, to
human intelligence itself, and must certainly not be
impressed upon the members of the Security Council as a
fact.

37. The measures taken by Israel and designed to change
the character of the Old City of Jerusalem and the
composition of its population have been fully expounded
upon by my Arab colleagues in this debate. Those measures
are in flagrant violation of the General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions, of the The Hague Convention
of 1907, and of the Geneva Conventions of 1949. The
Israeli representative cannot complain about those Conventions, which embody the principles of international law and
morality that are to be applied in cases of war and
occupation, and which postulate the principles and obligations that should govern the conduct of a Power in its
administration of an occupied territory. It is well known
that those Conventions were not adopted by majorities
friendly to the Arab States and unfriendly to Israel. Even
the shallow complaint voiced by Mr. Tekoah yesterday,
here in the Security Council, about the voting system in the
United Nations being favourable to the Arab States does
not hold ground. In the case which presently concerns us,
the Security Council adopted resolution 252 (1968) of 21
May 1968, and unanimously adopted resolution 267 (1969)
of 3 July 1969,

41. By its actions Israel is hurriedly creating a situation
which will enable it to lay claim to the Old City of
Jerusalem, to create an accomplished fact, to overtake all
diplomatic efforts tending to find a just solution to the
Middle East conflict.
42. Following the announcement of the peace initiative of
Mr. Rogers, the Israeli occupying authorities feverishly
acted to present the world with a new “‘defacto ” situation.
Such action is not conducive to peace, but rather is
detrimental to the hopes and efforts of all those who are
working towards a just and lasting settlement of the Middle
East crisis. And the fate of Jerusalem, becauseof the City’s
place in history, and because of its religious and ethnic
importance, constitutes one of the most tragic dilemmas
hindering the fulfilment of that peace. By strangulating the
City, by pressuring its population to leave, Israel is hatching
a problem which will become insuperable.

38. In fact, some nations that have diplomatic relations
with Israel and which are friendly to the Israeli Government
have criticized its policies on Jerusalem, Even the United
States, which has long been the main supporter of Israel,
has expressed its criticism upon several occasions. On 1 July
1969, during the debate in the Council on the question of
Jerusalem, when referring to the measures adopted by Israel
in occupied Jerusalem, Ambassador Charles Yost, the then
United States representative, stated the following:

43. Israel has long defied the United Nations and its
resolutions, Only yesterday we heard Mr. Tekoah launch
another of his habitual assaultson the dignity and authority
of the Council. Yet, it is our belief that the Council has a
primary duty to enhance its authority and to effect its
decisions, The question before us is clear: there has been an
occupation of the Old City of Jerusalem by Israeli forces;
there has been a decision by Israel to annex the City, and
measures have been taken to effect that annexation. And
there have been rejections, time and again, by the United
Nations of Israeli claims to the City. Although the Security
Council has called upon Israel to rescind all measurestaken
to consolidate th.e annexation and has requested that the
Israeli Government itself refrain from taking further measures, Israel confirms and reconfms its refusal to abide by
the Council’s decisions. As I stated previously, the Council

“The expropriation or confiscation of land, the construction of housing on such land, the demolition or
confiscation of buildings, including those having . . .
religious significance, and the application of Israeli law to
occupied portions of the city are detrimental to our
common interests in the city. The United States considers
that the part of Jerusalem that came under the control of
Israel in the June 1967 war, like the other areas occupied
by Israel, is occupied territory and hence subject to the
provisions of international law governing the rights and
obligations of an occupying Power.” f1483rd meeting,
pam. 97.1

39. Two years later, following the announcement by the
Israeli Minister of Construction of his Government’s plan to
5

cultural, ethnic, linguistic and historical sense, is not going
to switch its destiny to Israel simply because the Israeli
representative or the Zionist authorities state that Jerusalem is “the heart of Israel”. The Holy City is occupied
against its will through Israeli armed forces and is being
mutilated demographically, culturally and physically in
order to be integrated in an alien body. That is the obvious
fact. The swallowing by Israel of the occupied Holy City
must be stopped. That is the issue.

finds itself faced with a situation where it must assertitself
and enhance its authority. It must do so in order to
strengthen the trust placed in the United Nations by the
peoples of the world, and especially of those small
countries which have been the victims of aggression and
occupation.
44. In conclusion, the termination of the so-called annexation of the Old City of Jerusalem and the termination of its
occupation must be effected for the sake of humanity and
of peace in the Middle East and the world. Only the
liberation of Old Jerusalem from Israeli occupation can
restore its role and significance as a city where Judaism,
Christianity and Islam can flourish and endure in trust,
peace and co-operation.

49. The representative of Israel has tried throughout this
debate to picture in a very dramatic manner the benefits
that are alleged to have accrued to the Arabs of Jerusalem
as a result of the annexation of the Arab sector of the City
to Israel. While the facts in Jerusalem prove the contrary,
occupation will always remain an act of aggression, and
annexation by a unilateral measure ‘against the will of the
indigenous inhabitants will always be an act of usurpation
and expansion, The fact that a thief invests the stolen
treasure profitably-if
such is the case now-does not
absolve him of his crime.

45. The PRESIDENT: I have just received a letter dated
17 September from the representative of Tunisia [S/
10325/ in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the current discussion. In accordance with the usual
practice, and with the consent of the Council, I would
suggest that, in view of the limited seating at the Council
table, he be invited to take the place reservedfor him at the
side of the Council chamber, on the understanding that he
will
be invited to take a place at the Council table when it is
his turn to speak. If there is no objection, I shall take it that
the Council decides to invite the representative of Tunisia
to participate in the discussion without the right to vote.

50. But let us examine the “benevolence” of Israel in
occupied Jerusalem and the affection with which Israel has
embraced the “liberated” city.
51. When after the occupation the Israeli campaign of
terror and the subsequent free bus rides in Israeli buses to
the Jordan VaIley failed to induce a large-scale exodus, the
Israeli authorities resorted to new tactics in the Holy City.
These ranged from economic strangulation and political
oppression to the destruction of houses and imprisonment
and torture.

At the invitation of the Rvsident, Mr. A, Moussa (Tuniskz) took the place reserved for him in the Council chamber.

46. The PRESIDENT: The next name on the list of
speakers is that of the representative of Jordan, who wishes
to speak in exercise of the right of reply. I call on the
representative of Jordan.

52. To start with, the Israeli authorities did not accept the
Jordanian currency and forced the inhabitants to exchange
the Jordanian dinar to Israeli liras at a rate of 26 per cent
less than its real value. Israeli taxes and custom duties were
imposed on the Arab population of Jerusalem in an attempt
to force them to flee the city, Those who stayed were
forced to finance the Israeli war machine, which was
engaged in the daily killing of their brethren. This money
was also used to help finance the campaign to bring more
Jewish immigrants to occupy their homes and lands, The
cultural heritage and Arab educational system were either
replaced by or subjugated to the Israeli heritage and
educational system. Arab boys have to learn Hebrew and
declare that they are Israeli citizens. They now learn more
about Zionism than Arab culture and history. When the
Municipal Council of Arab Jerusalem refused to be subordinated to the wishes of Mr. Kollek, it was dissolved and its
Mayor deported to the east bank of Jordan and its property
confiscated. Deportation became a new Israeli policy to get
rid of the Arab leaders who opposed occupation and a
method to intimidate the rest of the population.

47. Mr. TOUKAN (Jordan): Mr. President, thank you very
much for giving me the opportunity to exercisemy right of
reply. The statement I made yesterday [1579th meeting]
on the continuing Israeli measures in occupied Jerusalem
contains a clear description of the situation and a specific
demand that the Security Council enforce its declared will
to protect the occupied city. My reply today is evoked by
the shocking distortion of the facts and history by the
Israeli representative yesterday [LWOth meeting]. The
slanderous tone and the crude demagogy of the Israeli
statement will not, however, cause my delegation to
descend to that same level in its statement. I shall address
myself only to facts and in the spirit appropriate to this
august body.
48. The Security Council is dealing with a specific issue
and has been making a specific demand of Israel. It is
dealing with Israel’s measures in occupied Jerusalem,
designed to annex Jerusalem, and it has been demanding
that Israel desist immediately from such actions and rescind
its measures. The task of the Council now is to enforce its
resolutions. It cannot be diverted from its task by the
Israeli representative’s wild and arbitrary assertions about
Israel’s “ownership” of Jerusalem on grounds of emotion
and sentimental associations. A city inhabited by an
overwhelming majority of Arabs for centuries, constituting
an integral part’ of a larger Arab homeland, in every social,

53. All these arbitrary measures carried out by the Israeli
authorities against the Arabs of Jerusalem are in utter
violation of the provisions of The Hague Conventions of
1907, the Geneva Conventions of 1949, the International
C@fenantS on human rights of 1966 (seeGeneralAssembly,
resoWiOn 2200 (XXI)], and have been the subject of many
complaints by my Government. Many of these violations
were brought to the attention of the different organs of the
6

United Nations and to the twenty-first Conference of the
Red Cross. The Israeli violations were established through
the official reports by delegates from the International
Conference of the Red Cross with accompanying pictorial
proofs and the report of the Special Committee to
investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of
the Population of the Occupied Territories.2 I shall not
take the time of the Security Council by repeating them,
54. These acts were committed by a State which boasted
centuries-old Judaic and humanist culture. Dr. Chaim Weizmann once stated: “I am certain that the world will judge
the Jewish State by what it will do to the Arabs”.
55. These are the “ecumenical habits of thought and
action” which were the subject of Mr. Eban’s letter to the
Secretary-General on 13 June 1967. This is the “bliss” that
Mr. Tekoah wanted to bring to Jerusalem,
56. Since the, Israeli aggression of June 1967, 53 different
resolutions and decisions by the United Nations and its
organs, and other international humanitarian organizations,
have been adopted to condemn the above-mentioned Israeli
violations against our brethren. Yet, Israel, true to its
accord, never hesitated to flout each and every one of
them. Such is the benevolence of the Israeli annexationist
pclicies in Jerusalem.
57. The Israeli representative, this time and on many
occasions before, tried to question the right of Jordan to
East Jerusalem and claimed that Jordan’s presence there
was an act of invasion and occupation. I wonder if
Mr, Tekoah really thinks that history could be distorted so
easily by just repeating the same distortions endlessly. Let
me explain first how West Jerusalem-not East Jerusalemwasseized by the Zionist forces in the earlier campaign of
expansion in 1947 to 1948, and how the eastern part of
Jerusalem was saved this fate until 1967 when it was
occupied by Israel.
58. I spent my early school years in Jerusalem. In 1947,
until two months before the end of the Mandate, I was
Consul-General for Transjordan in this Holy City. All that I
am going to say was shared by my colleagues, the Consuls
of a number of foreign countries, in particular, the United
States of America, France, Belgium and Yugoslavia. I used
to meet them daily to exchange views and information on
what was taking place in those dark days in the history of
this city, which was an integral part of the larger Arab
homeland, I have more intimate personal knowledge of the
situation than any newcomer from Shanghai.
59. As soon as the Partition Plan wasdecided upon in the
United Nations in November 1947, which provided among
other things a special status for Jerusalem, the Zionist
forces,with determined defiance of this resolution, started
their violent military activities to occupy more areas than
the territory allotted to the Jewish State. In the city of
Jerusalem, the Zionist forces were comprised then of the
Haganah and the Stern and Irgun terrorists-labelled as such
by the Mandatory authorities. According to the records of
the United Nations, after the assassination of Count
2 Document A/8089

(fina offset),

Bernadotte these terrorists began slowly and methodically
to invade and occupy the Arab quarters.
60. Several predominantly Arab residential areas, such as
Natamon, Upper and Lower Baqaa, Musrarah, Talbiyah,
Lifta, Jaffa Street, the Russian compound, Queen Mary
Street, Mamillsh, Shammah, the so-called Greek and German colonies, King David Street, Ailenby Street, and
several others, all in West Jerusalem, were forcibly conquered and their inhabitants forced by terror to evacuate.
The British forces desired to avoid the loss of British lives in
keeping Zionists and Arabs apart when they knew that a
few months later they were to leave.
61. As the defenceless Arabs of Jerusalem were fighting a
losing battle with the advancing Zionist forces, the Jordan
Government, directly and through me, received one appeal
after another from the Arab inhabitants for help and
protection. The Jordan army, however, could not respond
to these appeals before the end of the Mandate,
62. A month before the end of the Mandate, after heavy
attacks by the Zionist forces on what remalned of Arab
Jerusalem, the British High Commissioner, General Sir Alan
Cunningham, succeeded in arranging a truce. The day
before the last British were due to leave on 14 May the
Consuls General of the United States, France and Belgium
formed themselves into a Truce Committee, with the object
of securing the prolongation of the truce in the Holy City
after the end of the Mandate. The Jordan Government
made every effort to prevent fighting in the city in order to
avoid the destruction of any Holy Places,
63. An hour after the departure of the British High
Commissioner and with him the last British troops, from
Jerusalem on the morning of 14 May the Zionist forces
immediately slipped into the buildings and barracks in the
heart of the city, which had been occupied by British
personnel and the British army. Early on 15 May the Jewish
gangs started their advance in order to occupy the rest of
the city, inside which there were Arab irregulars with a
limited quantity of light arms defending it. Levin, the
Jewish writer who was in Jerusalem at the time, wrote in
his book JerusalemEmbattled that officers of the Haganah
drove through the streets in specially prepared vans fitted
with loud speakers, and urging everyone to fly from
Jerusalem before they were all killed and calling out in
Arabic: “Take pity on your wives and children and get out
of this blood bath. Surrender to us with your arms , . . Or
get out by the Jericho road, that is still open to you.“3
64. In those dark hours of the history of the Holy City the
Truce Committee, composed of the American, Belgian and
French Consuls, laboured in vain to stop the Zionist attack
on what remained of the Arab quarters of Jerusalem, The
Jewish Agency had refused responsibility for renewed
Zionist attacks which, it alleged, were being carried out by
dissident Jewish terrorist groups,
65. The Arab defenders of the Old City started to
collapse. The Zionist forces broke into the Old City and
3 Harry Levin, Jerusalem Embattled
p. 160.

(London, Gollancz, 1950),

compelling reasons for merging the Arab territory of
Palestine with the territory of Transjordan.“4

made contact with the Jewish Quarter in which the Jews
had already erected concrete roadblocks, concrete pillboxes, and machine-gun emplacements and trenches. Confronted by this state of affairs the Jordan Government on
18 May 1948 decided to come to the rescue of what
remained of Arab Jerusalem, complying with the repeated
appeals it had received from the Arab inhabitants. Fierce
battles were fought, The lanes of the centre of the Jewish
Quarter were dominated by the domes of two synagogues,
which overlooked all the streets and houses in the vicinity.
From these domes and from the Jewish ceme,tery overlooking the Old City, Zionist snipers fired constantly at the
surrounding quarters whenever an Arab showed himself.
The Jordanian troops attempted in vain for two days to
spare the synagogues and when fire was opened from them
they warned the Jews that they would be obliged to fire.
For ten days the Zionist forces in the OldCity resisted the
Arab Army, withdrawing gradually from house to house.
On 28 May the Zionist forces in East Jerusalem surrendered; most of them were Palmach or Haganah soldiers, not
residents of the Jewish Quarter. They had been sent in to
fight long before the end of the Mandate.

70. That is why the Jordan Government feels the decisive
responsibility to defend its citizens in Jerusalem against
occupation and the gross injustices inflicted upon them
every day by the occupying authorities.
71. With their new sense of security under Jordanian
constitutional government, the people of Jerusalem and
their Government proceeded to improve their city and to
ensure its special universal character. The Jordanian city
was one of the most prosperous, clean and thriving cities in
the Middle East. Education, cultural activity, construction
and economic prosperity were most clear and visible to any
observer before 1967. The many religious denominations
coexisted in freedom and co-operation. The freedom of
worship and religious tolerance existing is best represented
by the fact that it was a Moslem Arab family that
continued to hold the keys of the Holy Sepulchre that were
freely granted to it many generations ago by the Christian
Churches concerned to symbolize spiritual unity and
mutual respect. Millions of pilgrims from many denominations from all parts of the world came to visit and worship
in their own holy places.

66. That is how East Jerusalem was saved. But West
Jerusalem, with its large number of Arab quarters, remained
in the hands of the Zionist forces, and its Arab inhabitants
were forced to leave.

72. Now and again we hear from Mr. Tekoah and the
Israeli leaders the accusation .that since 1948 Jordan has
prohibited Jews from practising their religious worship in
the Old City of Jerusalem, denied them access for such
purposes and constantly ignored article VIII of the ArabIsraeli Armistice Agreement which made provision for such

67. While Count Folke Bernadotte, the United Nations
Mediator for Palestine, who was killed later by the Zionist
terrorists, was filing his report, Israel was moving towards
making the part of Jerusalem under its control an integral
part of the Jewish State.

rights.

68. In this connexion, may I add, that the so-called Jewish
Quarter in the Old City is 95 per cent Arab-owned and
governed by the regulations of the charitable and family
WC& The Jewish inhabitants in the pre-1948 period were
merely tenants. It was after those tenants that the quarter
was called Jewish, after it had been called the Sharaf
Quarter.

73, That accusation is unfounded and totally misleading.
The failure of the arrangements embodied in the Armistice
Agreements was caused by the repudiation by Israel of the
1949 declaration on Holy Places requested by the Palestine
Conciliation Commission together with its subsequent
rejection of all United Nations resolutions pertaining to the
problem of Palestine. The official records of the fourth
session of the General Assembly Ad Hoc Political Committee, annex to the summary records of meetings, volume I,
1949, page 32, show that while Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon
‘and Syria agreed, in response to an appeal by the Palestine
Conciliation Committee, “to guarantee the protection of,
and free accessto the Holy Places . . , in the territories . . ,
occupied by them”, Israel refused to do so in response to a
similar appeal. The reason why Israel adopted this attitude
needs no explanation. The occupation of all Jerusalem in
June 1967 offers the answer. That is how Israelis, not Jews,
became incapable of entering Jordanian Jerusalem before
1967.

69. The Jordanian Army which could not save the western
part of Jerusalem at least saved the eastern part and
maintained its unity with the Arabs of the west bank. The
Arabs of the west bank, including those in eastern
Jerusalem, immediately called for the constitutional unification of the Arabs on both sides of the river. The
Jordanian Government responded to the overwhelming
desire of the people of the two banks and to the right of
self-determination. In free, constitutional elections and
expressions of will, the unity of the two banks was effected
in 1949-1950. A new Constitution was drawn up based on
the equality of all citizens and equal representation in
Parliament and the Government for both banks. The people
of both banks, united by history, culture, geography and
aspirations were finally joined in a full constitutional union
based on democratic representation and full equality. Even
before the union, Count Bernadotte, the United Nations
representative, made a clear recommendation in his progress
report to the General Assembly that:

74. In this connexion it would be useful to mention that
in Jordan’s statement presented to Ambassador Gunnar
Jarring, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to the tiiddle East, on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 242 (1967) and published as an official
document of the Security Council, dated 26 January 1971
[S/10&%/, the Jordan Government with regard to Jerusalem reiterated its position as follows:

“In view of the historical connexion and common
interests of Transjordan and Palestine, there would be

4 Official Records of the General Assembly, Third
Supplement No. II, document
A/648, p. 18,
8

Sessim,

reunification of Jerusalem, as if Jerusalem needed military
force to be what it has always been, the Holy Place of three
great monotheistic religions. The faithful on the way to the
synagogue, the church or the mosque to meet with God
hardly need, indeed are repelled by, soldiers with machineguns. When we say the Israelization of Jerusalem, exactly
what are we referring to? Ever since the creation of the
State of Israel, ever since the United Nations and the major
Powers imposed the State of Israel on the Arab States,
Jerusalem has constituted a source of preoccupation for the
international community. But it must also be said that ever
since its creation the State of Israel has never ceased to use
alternatively war and trickery to seize Jerusalem.

“The Government of Jordan recognizes the religious
and cultural importance of the Arab city of Jerusalem to
all faiths. It will therefore guarantee free accessto all
religious and historical places to all concerned as well as
freedom of worship. Jordan stands ready to make all
necessary arrangements to this effect.”
75. The Israeli claim that now all religious groups can
freely have accessto the Holy Places in Jerusalem is false,
because the Israeli occupation has cut off more Moslems
and Christians from the Holy Places than the Israelis cut off
before the June war as a result of Israeli intransigence and
ils unwillingness to abide by all the provisions of the
Armistice Agreement. Since Israel’s annexation of Jerusalem, it has created a number of inspection and custom
pests all around Jerusalem, thus making it inaccessible even
to Arabs from the west bank of Jordan. Furthermore,
severa! millions of Christians in the Arab countries and
SOme 700 million Moslems in Arab and non-Arab countries
are, for practical reasons, denied accessto the Holy Places
in Jerusalem.

8 1. In the Trusteeship Council resolution dated 20 December 194.9[114 (S-Z)] we read:
“The Trusteeship Council,

“Co~zcerne~ at the removal to Jerusalem of certain
ministries and ckntral departments of the Government of
Israel,

76. The IsraeIi representative made several references to
internal difficulties and tragic events that occurred in
Jordan after 1967. We do not deny that we have had some
political, security and human problems in Jerusalem after
the occupation of 1967. All those difficulties were caused
by the occupation of the west bank of Jordan and other
Arab areas and the desperate condition in which many
Jordanian and other Arab citizens found themselves as a
result of the occupation. Hundreds of thousands of new
refugees were forced to flee to East Jordan. Several
emotional and social explosions resulted from the tragic
situation. My Government has tried to deal with these
problems with all its resources and in full understanding of
the causes. Most of the disturbance and unrest not only in
Jordan but in other Arab countries has resulted directly
from the Israeli waves of military incursion into the Arab
llomeland. Only the ending of Israeli occupation of our
territories, including Jerusalem, will normalize Arab n&
lional life and the life of the area and bring peace and
stability.

“Considering that such action ignores and is incompatible with the provisions of paragraph II of General
Assembly resolution 303 (IV) of 9 December 1949,
“1. Is of the opinion that the action of the Government of Israel is likely to render more difficult the
implementation of the statute of Jerusalem with which
the Council is entrusted by the General Assembly
resolution of 9 December 1949;
“2. Requests the President of the Trusteeship Council:
(a) To invite the Government of Israel to submit a
written statement on the matters covered by this resolution, to revoke these measures, and to abstain from any
action liable to hinder the implementation of the General
Assembly resolution of 9 December 1949;
(b) To keep closely in touch with the developments in
Jerusalem while the Council is not in session;

77. Mr. President, I request you to ask the Security
Council to focus its attention on the measures it must take
to save occupied Jerusalem and force Israel to end its
annexation. That is the real issue before the Council.

“3. Requests the Secretary-General to communicate
this resolution promptly to all Member States of the
United Nations.”

7X. The PRESIDENT:
The next name on the list of
speakers is that of the representative of Tunisia. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement,

82. That, in a sense, is the first condemnation of Israel by
the United Nations after Israel had committed one of its
first acts toward the Israeltiation of Jerusalem. It must be
said that that resolution wasindeed very indulgent.

79. Mr. MOUSSA (Tunisia) (interpretation ji’om French):
The Security Council met yesterday to consider a problem
of extreme gravity: the Israelization of Jerusalem-Jerusalem, which is one of the tragedies of the Middle East, from
which formerly, to use the terms’of our Foreign Minister in
the General Assembly last year,‘.arose the threefold message
of God appealing to men for peace and fraternity. The very
name of Jerusalem, I am convinced, holds us in awe,
regardless of our belief or philosophy.

83. What occurred directly after the six-day war? The
facts are clear. On 5 June there was an act of aggression
against Arab countries by an Israeli army of which the least
that can be said is that it waswell prepared to wage war and
to win.
84. There was, then, an act of aggression but also the
occupation of territory belonging to sovereign and independent States Members of the United Nations. Confronted
with that situation, the international community was
hesitant. It did not dare order Israel to evacuate in the

80. We have said the Israelization of Jerusalem, and yet we
read in the press and we hear statements here about the
9

Jerusalem and its environments into the State of Israel and
to absorb the Arab population of the Holy City into the
Israeli population. As if spending tens of millions of dollars
wassufficient to change the status of an entire people. That
is, after all, what is at issue.

immediate future the territories that it had just occupied by
military force. But there is an important point in ail this:
the question of Jerusalem. Israel also occupied Jerusalem,
which is Arab and Palestinian but also the hallowed ground
of three major religions. On 4 July 1967, the General
Assembly adopted resolution 2253 (ES-V) at its fifth
emergency special session, stating that it was deeply
concerned at the situation prevailing in Jerusalem as a result
of the measures taken by Israel to change the status of the
City and that it considered that these measures were
invalid, and calling on Israel to rescind all measures already
taken and to desist forthwith from taking any action which
would alter the status of Jerusalem.

88. Israel still wishes, by its policy of fait accompli, to
make Israelis out of the Arab inhabitants of Jerusalem. But
the inhabitants of Jerusalem are Palestinians, and they will
remain Palestinians. Their only aspiration is to recover their
native land and to live there in freedom and in dignity,
89. The policy of Tel Aviv represents a threat to the
security of the region and to world peace, and Tunisia and
its President Habib Bourguiba have always been preoccupied by and sympathetic to the tragedy of Jerusalem,
Recently, President Bourguiba sent the Minister for Foreign
Affairs to the Vatican to speak about this serious problem
with His Holiness Pope Paul VI. But the fundamental
problem-and Tunisia has always proclaimed it-is the
destiny of the Palestinian people, which today is fighting to
recover its country wrested from it by violence. No force in
the world can divert the Palestinian people from its
objective. No force in the world is capable of annihilating it
nor of liquidating the sacred cause for which it has wageda
relentless struggle. Sooner or later, justice will triumph.

85. Another resolution-resobtion
2254 (ES-Q-adopted
by the General Assembly ten days later, on 14 July 1967,
“Deplores the failure of Israel to implement
Assembly resolution 2253 (ES-V)”

General

and
UAeiterafes its call to Israel in that resolution to rescind
alI measIlrPs already taken and to desist forthwith froth
taking any action which would alter the status of
Jerusalem.”

86. Security Council resolution 242 (1967), concerning
the Middle East conflict as a whole, was adopted only
towards the end of 1967-on 22 November. It was followed
by other Security Council resolutions-resolutions
250(1968),
251(1968),
252 (1968), 267(1969)
and
271 (1969)-&l of which concern the question of Jerusalem, the last few going even so far as to address a strong
warning to Israel.

90. In a statement made to the General Assembly on 20
May 1968, the President of the Tunisian Republic, Habib
Bburguiba, speaking of the solution of the problem of the
Middle East, declared:

87. In contrast with this preoccupation of the international community was Israel’s preoccupation, going back to
the years 1948 and 1949. %omake of Jerusalem a city that
would be an integral part of Israel-something which, since
the creation of that State, it has not been able to bring
about and which; even after the occupation of Arab
Jerusalem in 1967 gave y&e to the objection and the
opposition of the intern ztiond
community and of countries
with which Israel has had the best of relations. So what was
to be done? Israel’s strategy is as diabolical as it is
disconcertingly simple. It consists in remaining faithful to
its intransigent policy on the entire question of the Middle
East but especially on certain of its aspects, among them
the problem of Jerusalem, by pursuing the most scandalous,
the most shocking and the most arrogant of policies, the
policy of the fait accompli. To do that, it had to flout the
Generpl Assembly and Security Council resolutions; to take
note, but not too seriously, of the reactions and the actions
of the Christian world, which is essentially the Western
world; to act as if ail the tumult about Jerusalem did not
exist; and to pursue a very clear objective: to modify the
status of Jerusalem by expropriating the lands and property
of the inhabitants; by proceeding to transfer entire populations; by carrying out so-called urbanization programmes,
the sole purpose of which was to drive out the Christian
and Moslem inhabitants of Jerusalem to make of this Holy
City of Jerusalem an exclusively Israeli city; by taking
measures the legal significance of which was to integrate

That was-and still is-our position on the problem of the
Middle East. This position flows from our commitment to
the Palestinian people and also from our analysis of the
situation and from our conviction that there is no point in
closing one’s eyes to the fundamental problem and avoiding it.

“In any case, and whatever that solution may be, it can
only be conceived with the participation and with the
agreement of the principal party concerned: the Palestinian people.“5

91. The Security Council has adopted a number of
resolutions on the question of Jerusalem and has deplored
many times that Israel has failed to implement them,
92. In its recent resolutions the Security Council decided
that in the event of a negative reply or the absence of a
reply from Israel it would meet without delay to consider
what further steps should be taken. Then the rising tide of
mutual recriminations came to an end.
93. Is it impossible for the Security Council to go any
further?
94. The members of the Security Council have a very great
responsibility, and on behalf of my country I would appeal
to them to assume that responsibility fully to put an end to
the stubbornness of Israel and its challenge to the international community.
5 ibid., iWenty-second Session, Plenary Meetings, 1658th meet-

ing, para. 15.
10

95, The PRESIDENT:
The next name on the list of
speakers is that of the representative of Israel, who wishes
to speak in exercise of the right of reply. I now call on him.
96, Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Whatever the Jordanian representative may wish to tell the Council, he cannot conceal
the fundamental truth about the situation in Jerusalem, He
cannot veil the fact that Jordan did destroy Jerusalem,
while Israel is building it; that Jordan profaned Holy Places
and barred access to them, while Israel is safeguarding their
sanctity, has ensured their administration and maintenance
by their respective religious communities and has guaranteed absolute freedom of accessto all.

infamous documents as the telegram dispatched in May
1948 to the United Nations on behalf of the Arab States,
including Jordan, announcing a campaign aimed at the
massacreof the Jewish population, a massacre“that would
be reminiscent of the Mongolian massacres”,
100. To speak, as the representatives of Morocco and
Lebanon have spoken, of mass deportation of Arab
inhabitants from Jerusalem at a time when the Arab
population of the City has increasedsince 1967, at a time
when 100,000 Arab tourists from Arab States have visited
Jerusalem only in the past two months, may make an
impression in the souks of Casablancain Morocco or Tripoli
in Lebanon, but not here.

97. The Jordanian representative cannot shroud the fact
that during the period of Jordanian occupation Jerusalem
was an amputated, bleeding city, while today it is united,
peaceful and prosperous: Whatever he may say cannot
change the truth that the Arab inhabitants of Jerusalem
fare much better than their brethren in Jordan today, and
that they are better off than they had been before 1967.

101. Yesterday I brought before the Council facts and
figures indicating the enormous decreasein the Christian
population in Jerusalem during the years of Jordanian
occupation: from 25,000 to 14,000. I also pointed out that
since 1967 the departure has ceasedexcept for the normal
movement in and out of the City. I can, of course,
understand the concern of Lebanon’s Christian representative for the emigration of Christians from the Middle East.
However, it is towards the Arab States that he should direct
his concern, for Christian emigration from the Arab
countries has been massive since the Second World War.
Approximately 150,000 members of the Greek Orthodox
Church left Egypt during that period, and, according to
some estimates, the number of Christian emigrants from
Lebanon has been so large that it has upset the delicate
demographic balance in that country,

98. The Jordanian complaint demands that progress,
development and construction stop, and that backwardness,
misery, division and hostility be restored to Jerusalem.
‘llrere is very little love for Jerusalem in this attitude. There
is even less consideration for its sanctity and welfare. In this
lies the basic difference between Israel and Jordan. The
Jordanian Government represents 19 years of agonizing
partition and devastation. Israel stands for 3,000 years of
Jerusalem’s history, its glory and its martyrdom, its
inspiration and its revival.

102. To allege that Israel is demolishing Jerusalem, as the
representative of Morocco alleged, when eventhe Jordanian
complaint is directed against the construction that is going
on in the City, may be suitable for the ignorant, but surely
not for enlightened world opinion.

99. If Jordanians had prayed as we Jews have during 2,000
years, every day, three times a day, for Jerusalem’s rebirth
in peace, the Jordanian Government would not be advocating the stagnation of Jerusalem and its return to the
torment of mutilation, If Jordanians would, as Jews do,
turn their thoughts to Jerusalem each time they sit down to
table and end every repast of theirs, as Jews do, by
imploring, “build Jerusalem speedily in your own days”,
the representative of Jordan would not have to try to
justify a complaint against the reconstruction of the City. If
Jordanians had died, as we Jews have, during several
thousand years, with Jerusalem’s name on our lips, we
would hear from Jordan’s representative words of greater
consideration for Jerusalem’s life and happiness. If it is
Jerusalem’s life and happiness that we are concerned with,
then surely the realities of the situation belie the statements
we heard from the representatives of Morocco, Lebanon,
Jordan and Tunisia. There is an old Hebrew saying that
Jerusalem is the city of truth. Mere respect for Jerusalem
would require consideration for the truth. To try to
r&write history and claim, as the Jordanian representative
did today, that Jordan’s attack, shelling, destruction and
carnage in Jerusalem in 1948 were a mission of mercy does
little justice to the documents of the United Nations of that
period, which, after all, are available to all-reports signed
by Mr. Toukan’s own colleagues in Jerusalem in the
Consular Commission of the city and by such United
Nations personalities as Mr. Ralph Bunche. Nor do they do
justice to the descriptions of overt aggression found in the
lnemoirs of Abdallah el-Tal, the Jordanian commander of
the invading forces, as quoted by me yesterday, or to such

103. To speak of the Judaization of Jerusalem, as the
representative of Lebanon again did today-a City which
has been inseparable from Jewish existence for 3,000 years,
a city with a Jewish majority for generations in modern
times-goes all too far in the resuscitation of Hitler’s
vocabulary and should not be permissible in our times in
the United Nations. We Jewsstill remember all too vividly
these expressions from the time of the Nazi holocaust to
have to listen to them again today here in the United
Nations.
104. To refer to statements made by a number of
Christian prelates, as the representative of Lebanon did,
without mentioning the fact that these are Arab clergymen
and that they live under the repressive boot of the
anti&!mistian regime of the Syrian Arab Republic does not
do justice to the cause of truth on Jerusalem. The
representative of Lebanon tried to bolster his arguments by
quoting these clergymen and by emphasizing in particular
the alleged attitude of the Eastern Christian churches. He
did not, of course, refer to the authorities that really speak
on behalf of these churches.Thus, for instance, on 12 April
1968 the Greek Orthodox Patriarch of Jerusalem, Benedittos, made the following declaration:
“It is true, and we would lie to stressit again, that the
Holy Places in general, monasteries and churches, were
11

and, more especially, untold human resources. Jerusalem
is now available to all faiths, and never before have the
Holy Places been so protected and maintained.

given full respect and protection by the Israelis before the
war, during the war and afterwards, and we hope that in
the future they will be respected as well and the status
quo which existed will be safeguarded.”

109. Dr. Robert Lindsay, a famous Christian biblical
scholar, who has lived in Jerusalem for thirty years and
heads the Institute of Biblical Studies, declared in a
television interview on ABC on 7 June 1970:

105. As witnessed not only by the Moslem inhabitants of
Jerusalem themselves but also by the 100,000 Arab visitors
who came to Jerusalem this summer from Lebanon-yes,
from Lebanon-Jordan, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and other
countries, as witnessed by Moslem leaders from various
continents, and also as documented in print by Arab
sources quoted by me yesterday, no change has occurred in
the status, administration and protection of the holy places
of Islam in Jerusalem. As before 1967, they remain under
the full jurisdiction of the Moslem authorities. TO the
statement cited by me yesterday, let me add the following.
The Qadi of Jerusalem and Jaffa issued on 1 January 1970
the following declaration:

“I think if we look through the long years of time we
find that there have been many administrations of the
City of Jerusalem. It seems to me that at this juncture in
history, as I said, at least for the last many, many years,
severalhundreds of years, the best administration we have
had is this one that we are now seeing.”
110. As I emphasized at the last meeting, Jerusalem is a
living city, and any discussion of it cannot ignore its
inhabitants. Though we heard yesterday, and to some
extent today, from certain Arab representatives that it is of
no consequence that the Arab inhabitants of Jerusalem are
better off now than before 1967, Israel is not ready to
brush aside the welfare of the City’s inhabitants, whether
Arab or Jewish. The Government of Israel considers that it
is of interest and of importance that the Arab residents of
Jerusalem are more prosperous than under Jordanian rule;
that they live in improved conditions of public health; that
they are being moved from slums to better housing; that
they enjoy freedom of movement, freedom of thought and
speech and freedom of the press.

‘<AS Qadi of Jerusalem and Jaffa . . . I have been paying
frequent visits to the city for both religious and secular
purposes. I derive great pleasure from my visits to the
El-Aqsa mosque on Fridays and particularly on religious
holidays, when I join the prayers of my brethren who live
in Jerusalem and the surrounding villages. I also join
Moslems from other towns throughout Israel who, since
Jerusalem’s unification, are now able for the first time
since being cut off from the city for 20 years to come to
this holy place for which they have been yearning for so
many years. At the same time, I reflect on how good it
would be if those who have heard unfounded rumours of
desecration and interference in the regular work in the
Mosque could come to witness the peace and tranquillity
which prevail in this holy place during the prayers that
are regularly held there.”

111. Despite the unfounded charges levelled by the
representative of Lebanon, it is to be noted that it is
precisely the Lebanese press that is rather outspoken on
this question. I shall confine myself to one example. The
Beirut daily AZ-Hawadess, which devotes much attention to
the Palestinian Arabs, quotes Arabs from Jerusalem on a
visit to Kuwait who spoke to that newspaper’s correspondent. They said, according to AZ-Hawadess of 27 April
1971:

106. Mr. Mahamat Rahama Saleh, the Moslem Minister of
Public Service of Chad, stated in a press interview on
8 September 1969, following his visit to Moslem and
non-Moslem Holy Places in Jerusalem and Nazareth:
“Thank God, I could visit them and find religious
communities-Moslems
among them-with whose members I spoke for a long time. I found out that they
enjoyed absolute freedom in the religious field. In
addition, they are receiving much help from the Government for the improvement and safeguarding of the Holy
Places.”

“We have lived for many years under the shadow of
Arab nationalism. We regret to say that we had to wait
for the Israeli occupation to feel that we are human
beings and citizens.”
112. If we were to examine here the question of Jerusalem
on its merits the Security Council would certainly ask itself
the question: if the Holy Places of all the three great
monotheistic religions enjoy full respect and protection of
their rights and privileges, and if the inhabitants of the City,
Arabs and Jews alike, live in peace, progress and prosperity,
then why should one take exception to such a situation?
Why should Member States have reservations regarding the
restoration of Jerusalem to its natural state of unity and
integrity? What tenet of law justifies Jordan’s complaint
that Israel terminated Jordan’s aggression against Jerusalem,
perpetrated in 1948 in violation of the Charter and of
United Nations resolutions? What is the principle of justice
and morality whereby the citizens of Jerusalem should be
denied the rights possessedby inhabitants of any other city
in the world and forced back into the misery which was
theirs during the nineteen years of unnatural division,
stagnation and bloodshed?

107. A distinguished African Moslem leader, the President
of Uganda, visited Jerusalem on 17 July of this year, and
then expressed to the press his admiration for Israel’s
attitude to the Holy Places of Islam and their protection.
108. As for the places holy to Christianity, the simple
statement issued only last week by the Executive Council
of the National Coalition of American Nuns is perhaps the
most persuasive summary of the situation. The statement of
10 September 1971 declares:
“Jews have always been in Jerusalem; it is their spiritual
home. And the daily prayer of the Jewish people voices
their enduring historic relation to the City. Further, Israel
has rebuilt .Jerusalem, pouring into it millions of dollars
12

113. May I suggest respectfully that if it were really the
interests of Jerusalem and its IIoly Places that this debate
were concerned with the Jordanian complaint would be
unequivocally dismissed as utterly baseless and irresponsible?

no matter how much sophistry Mr. Tekoah is capable of
using, remains that from 1967 up till now the General
Assembly and the Security CounciI have adopted five
resolutions concerning Jerusalemwhich constitute international legislation in which Israel was condemned in the
most categorical and clear terms, and was askedto rescind
all measurestaken in the occupied City of Jerusalem,and
to desistforthwith from further measures.

114, The PRESIDENT:
The next name on the list of
speakers is that of the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic who wishes to exercise the right of reply, and I
now call on him.

120. Now, very recently the International Court of Justice
submitted to the membersof the Security Council a very
important Advisory Opinion on which that Court ought to
be congratulated. The report is entitled Legal Consequences
for States of the Continued Presenceof South APica in
Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security
Council resolution 276 (1970). 6 That Advisory Opinion of
the International Court of Justice was submitted on 21
June 1971. There arethree paragraphsin that report-short
paragraphs but dealing in a rational rather than an
emo-tional way with the consequencesof illegality. I
repeat, this is from the Advisory Opinion on the consequencesof illegality. For we have two analogoussituations
here: the existence of South Africa in South West Africa
having been declaredillegal, and South Africa persistingin
its occupation of South WestAfrica. That is why I refer to
the Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice
on the consequencesof illegality, becausethe samesituation obtains here: there are five resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council, all of which have been
completely disregardedby Israel.

115. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): Mr. Tekoah’s
statement yesterday and his remarks in exercise of the right
of reply today are perfect illustrations that people have
created political mythologies, believed them and then
persisted in making other people believe their lies. These
creators of political mythologies-like
Zionism, the latest
one, and Nazism before-always follow the same pattern: to
rewrite history and to attribute to others what they
themselves have committed.
116. A former Secretary-General
wrote:

of the United Nations

“A successful lie is doubly a lie. An error which has to
be corrected is a heavier burden than truth. Only an
uncompromising
honesty can reach the bedrock of
decency which you should always expect to find even
under deep layers of evil.”
117. Such deep layers of evil have been accumulated since
the creation of Israel and since the inception of the political
mythology
on which Israel has been built: namely,
Zionism. I therefore beg your indulgence, Mr.President,
and that of the members of the Council to uncover those
deeper lies which cover the truth. That is indeed a very
difficult task,

121. I quote from the Advisory Opinion:

118. First of all, what is the real issue? The real issue was
defined yesterday by the Council itself in its adoption of a
provisional agenda which contained the letter of complaint
of the representative of 3ordan on the situation in
Jerusalem, and the reports of the Secretary-General-eight
in number-which
my delegation had requested be put on
the agenda. Therefore, after all the demagoguery and the
very base and undignified language in which Mr. Tekoah
indulges, and which, I must concede, I cannot really
emulate or attempt to imitate because it remains a privilege
of Zionism and its mythology, I shall not proceed with the
same sort of emotional appeal; I shall not pursue those
meaninglessthings which he has been repeatingyesterday
and today. If one refers, in fact, to the very first report of
the Secretary-General, which was submitted on 10 July
1967 [S/8052] and which embodieda letter communicated
by Mr. Tckoah to Secretary-GeneralU Thant, one will find
the samethings ashave been saidyesterday and today by
Mr. Tekoah; they .were stated to the Secretary-Generalas
Israel’s answerto the requestsput to Israel about implementation of the GeneralAssemblyresolutions.
119. Many speakers have referred to the resolutions
adopted by the Security Council and the GeneralAssembly-they are five in number-and have quoted paragraphs
from them; I shallnot repeat them. But the irreduciblefact.
13

“‘110. As to the legalbasisof the resolution, Article 24
of the Charter vestsin the Security Council the necessary
authority to take action such asthat taken in the present
case. The reference in paragraph2 of this Article to
specific powers of the Security Council under certain
chapters of the Charter doesnot exclude the existenceof
generalpowers to dischargethe responsibilitiesconferred
in paragraph1. Referencemay be madein this respectto
the Secretary-General’sStatement, presentedto the Security Council on 10 January I947 to the effect that ‘the
powers of the Council under Article 24 are not restricted
to the specific grants of authority contained in Chapters
VI, VII, VIII and XII . . . the Members of the United
Nations have conferred upon the Security Council powers
commensuratewith its responsibility for the maintenance
of peace and security. The only limitations are the
fundamental principles and purposesfound in Chapter I
of the Charter.’
“Ii 1. As to the effect to be attributed to the
declaration contained in paragraph2 of resolution
276 (1970), the Court considersthat the qualification of
a situation asillegal doesnot by itself put an end to it. It
can only be the first, necessarystep in an endeavour to
bring the illegal situation to an end.
“112. It would be an untenable interpretation to
maintain that, once such a declarationhad been madeby
the Security Council under Articlc 24 of the Charter, on
6 Advisory Opinion, I.C.J. Reports 1971, p, 16.

behalf of all Member States, those Members would be free
to act in disregard of such illegality, or &en to recognize
violations of law resulting from it. When confronted with
such an internationally unlawful situation, Members of
the United Nations would be expected to act in consequence of the declaration made on their behalf. The
question therefore arises as to the effect of this decision
of the Security Council for States Members of the United
Nations in accordance with Article 25 of the Charter.”
122. I contend that the same situation arises now; we are
facing it now: there are definite resolutions of the Security
Council which Israel has not respected.
123. What are the obligations of Member States? The
International Court of Justice, in the Advisory Opinion
from which I just read, stated very clearly that to declare a
situation illegal is only one step. But it is mandatory for
Member States to recognize the illegality of that same act.
124. That is why my delegation yesterday requested that
the reports of the Secretary-General be inscribed as
sub-item (b) when the agenda was adopted. Our move was
prompted by two considerations. The first is the fact that
the Secretary-General is entrusted by the Security Council
to report on the situation on Jerusalem in accordance with
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions. The
reports emanating from an objective source constitute a
valuable element in helping the Security Council to assistin
dealing with the situation arising from Israeli violations of
the legislation of the Security Council, namely, the consequences of an illegal situation. These reports constitute an
integral part of United Nations responsibilities and duties
towards Jerusalem.
125. The second consideration arises from the fact-a fact
reported by the Secretary-General himself in these reports-that Israel encroached also upon United Nations
premises in Government House and has therefore extended
its annexationist measures to the domain of the United
Nations itself. This has led to a legal situation whereby the
Secretary-General has’become unwillingly also a party in
the complaint against Israeli measures affecting the status
of Jerusalem and the United Nations.
126. What are the contents of the Secretary-General’s
reports on Jerusalem? A careful study of these reports
reveal the following facts. First, the Secretary-General, in
accordance with the mandate given to him by both the
General Assembly and the Security Council, has more than
six times attempted to obtain from the occupier information as to its willingness to implement United Nations
resoIutions on Jerusalem, namely, those paragraphs requesting Israel to rescind its annexationist measures and to desist
from obliterating the Arab character of the City. The
answersto his pIeas and requests remain since 10 July 1967
in line with the same stubborn rejection of all United
Nations decisions, whatever their contents. Even information on the master plan-denied by Mr. Tekoah in his
statement yesterday-the details of which were extensively
published in Israeli papers, has not been communicated to
the Secretary-General,
127. As to legislation, he had to resort to the official
journal of Israel in order to submit to the Security Council

the legislation passed by the Israeli Knesset to expropriate
Arab lands-and this is to be found in the reports of the
Secretary-General. But Israel does not even condescend to
answerthe Secretary-General’s notes directly. In document
S/10124 of 18 February 1971, in paragraph 4, the Secretary-General notes that the Acting Pennanent Representative of Israel did not answer the question raised by the
Secretary-General on Israeli measures and actions in Jerusalem, in violation of international law and United Nations
resolutioris. Instead, the then Acting Permanent Representative of Israel unabashedly “assures” the Secretary
General that the position of the Government of Israel
remains the same. I wonder whether there could be more
cynicism. Moreover, it appears from the reports of the
Secretary-General that Israel purposely evades replying to
the questions of the Secretary-General with regard to Israeli
policies in occupied Jerusalem.
128. The second element in these reports shows that
Israeli bulldozers have invaded United Nations premises to
erase the United Nations presence in Jerusalem in addition
to occupying illegally the premises of Government House
where the facilities of the United Nations are located. In
the same paragraph of the above-mentioned report, the
Secretary-General qualified Israeli aggression against the
no-man%-land where Government House is located ln the
following terms:
“This activity, which coincides with reports appearing
of a
project to erect housing units and other buildings in that
area, indicates a further and serious violation of the
inviolability of United Nations premises under the Charter of the United Nations and the Convention on
Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations.”
in the press about the immediate implementation

That is the context in which our deliberations must take
place.
129. Let me now go to some other layers of lies to
uncover the truth. I take the statement, consisting of 30
pages which lasted about 115 minutes yesterday, given by
Mr. Tekoah in very emotional terms. I refer to the passage
concerning the numbers of the population in Jerusalem-to
which he returned, in fact, today. I quote from his own
figures:
“In 1948 the number of Jews in Jerusalem was
100,000; the number of Christians, 25,000; the number
of Moslems, 45,000. In 1967 the number of Jews was
195,000 ;“-we have to thank Mr. Tekoah for acknowledging that in 1967 the number of Jewshas risen from
100,000 to 200,000-“the number of Christians dropped
from 25,000 in 1948 to 10,800 in 1967; the number of
Moslems increased to 54,963. In 1970 the number of
Jews was 2 15,000”-another increase-“the number of
Christians, 11,500; the number of Moslems, 6 1,600.”
(USOth meeting, pma. 63.1

These are figures which exist in the statement of
Mr. Tekoah. I was not reading a statement from another
place.
130. What is to be remarked concerning these figures and
statistics? I remember the story of General Smuts, at one

time the Prime Mini&r of South ‘Africa, standing in the
Parliament of South Africa and juggling with some statistics. Some of his colleagues were amazed. They asked:
“HOWdid you work out these figures? “, to which Smuts
replied, ‘Well, if there is anyone who can contradict me, let
him come forward.” This is only to say that it is very easy
to play with figures.
131. The first remark on these statistics is to take the first
year-1948. But what about 1947? What was the number
of the Arabs, Christians and Moslems in 1947? And what
were the numbers of the Jews in the City of Jerusalem or in
the district. of Jerusalem? What was the property of each?
132. Mr. Tekoah spoke about the rewriting of history. He
dwelt at great length on Jordan attacking the eastern
section of Jerusalem,
133. I wish to refer Mr. Tekoab to his own historians.
Some of them now occupy the posts of Deputy Prime
Ministers, Ministers, and so on. There is a book in Hebrew
called Sefer Hapalmuh, which means the book of the
Palmach-the Palmach being the shock troops of the
Haganah. For people to whom these terms might sound
strange, I must mention that the terrorist organizations that
existed prior to the rise of the State of Israel were: the
Palmach, the Haganah, the Irgun Zvai Leumi-to which
Mr. Tekoah belonged-and the Stern Gang. The Stern Gang
called itself the Stern Gang. Now, they refer to themselves
asterrorists.

“At the end of January, 1948, at a meeting of the
Command of the Irgun in which the Planning Section
participated, we outlined four strategic objectives: (1) Jerusalem; (2) Jaffa; (3) the Lydda-Ramleh plain; and
(4) the Triangle .”
Leaving aside the three other sections which were to be part
of the Arab State-to-be, Jerusalem was, on 29 October
1947, declared to be a corpus separahtm-not
only the city
of Jerusalem but the whole district of Jerusalem.
137. So here we have the first proof that long before the
Arabs attempted anything, the terrorists of that period, the
Irgun and the Haganab and the Palmach, were aiming at
Jerusalem. Now what happened between 1947 and 1948?
Again, I draw on Menachem Begitis book. He speaks about
the massacre of Dir Yassin, the village just before Jerusalem. Dir Yassin was necessary in ojrder to build a secret air
strip to help in the conquest of Jerusalem. Mr. Begin tells us
on page 163 that the Commander of the Waganah sent the
following order to him:
“I learn that you plan an attack on Dir Yassin. I wish to
point out that the capture of Dir Yassin and holding it is
one stage in our general plan. I have no objection to your
carrying out the operation provided you are able to hold
the village. If you are unable to do so I warn you against
blowing up the village which will result in its inhabitants
abandoning it and its ruins and deserted houses being
occupied by foreign forces. This situation will increase
our difficulties in the general struggle. A second conquest
of the place will involve us in heavy sacrifices. Furthermore, if foreign forces enter the place this will upset the
plan . . .”

134. This is not an invention of the Arabs. Here, for
instance, is a book by one of the great leaders of the war of
liberation of Israel. It is entitled The Revolt, Stovy of the
Igun,
and it was written by Menachem Begin. Menachem
Begin, leader of the Herut Party, hero pf Dir Yassin, wasa
member of the coalition government up to a few months
ago, when he resigned his post because he is a believer in
Eretz Yisrael-in other words, he believes that the conquest
has not yet been completed.

138. The place was occupied; Dir Yassin was captured;
250 Arabs-men, women and children-were killed; and
that is a famous story. But the important thing, which
brings us back to the figure, is this commentary by
Mr. Begin himself on the following page:

135. He refers to the illegal immigration in 1945, 1946
and 1947, and tells how the Irgun and the Haganah helped
the illegal immigration to Palestine at that time, and how
boats and ships carrying Jewish immigrants from Europe
were actually dynamited and sunk by these terrorists
themselves. On page 35 of this remarkable book we read:
“Jewish ‘terrorists’ placed a bomb to prevent its departure--that is, the departure of the Patria, which wasto sail
back with illegal immigrants. Mr. Begin continues: “The
bomb exploded and more than 200 Jews were killed or
drowned. The British authorities noted the fact that this
was not an Irgun Zvai Leumi operation; it wasthe Haganab
which had placed the bomb,” So one can see that the
followers of political mythologies like nazism and fascism
do not stop at any crime, even killing their own people, in
order to further their purposes.

“Arabs throughout the country, induced to believe wild
tales of ‘Irgun butchery’, were seized with limitless panic
and started to flee for their lives. This mass flight soon
developed into a maddened uncontrollable stampede. Of
the about 800,000 Arabs who lived on the present
territory of the State of Israel, only 165,000 are still
there.”
Therefore, if Mr. Tekoah was really objective or had any
respect for the truth, he would have started his statistics by
mentioning the number of the Arabs in 1947. But already
we are told by Mr. Begin that of the 800,000 Arabs, only
165,000 remained.
139. Further proof comes from the then Mandatory
Power, the United Kingdom. The United Kingdom, when it
submitted the problem of Palestine to the United Nations
in 1947, submitted a report.8 There were many appendices
to that report. I am referring to appendix VI. It speaks of

136. Now we come back to Jerusalem and to the figures.
Again, I draw on Mr. Begin, On page 348 of this remarkable
book we read the following, indicating the designs of the
Israelis on Jerusalem, before any Arab attack:

8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Second Session, Ad
on the Palestinian
Question,
Hoc Committee
document
A/AC.14/32.

7 New York, Henry Schuman, 195 1.

15

raise this figure to 600,000 and that by 2010 the
population would be 900,000.”

the Jerusalem district, then Hebron, then Jerusalem, and
the Arab ownership and the Jewish ownership in $he
district of Jerusalem, Here are the figures: Arab ownership,
1,326,571 dunams. For the information of the members of
the Council, one dunam equals 1,000 square metres. Jewish
ownership, 33,401 dunams. Then there is “Public”, which
is not owned by the Arabs or by the Jews. According to
Moslem law, “Public” is the ownership of the people. For
‘CPublic”, we have 146,36 1 dunams. The total is 1,570,785
dunams. Those figures pertain to the city of Jerusalem.

143, That proves beyond any doubt that there is a definite
office dedicated to carrying out the master plan they are
speaking about. Mr. Tekoah with his usual habit and in the
classical tradition of political mythologists, spoke of
nazism. It seemed as though he was implying that we the
Arabs have to pay for the crimes of the nazisa I do not
know what logic or legality justifies such an implication,
But what was condemned in the Ntiremberg trial wasnot
Arab civilization. The first Hebrew grammar waswritten in
the Arabic language. I must say that unfortunately Western
civilization gave rise to a mad man called Hitler and to a
mad doctrine called nazism, and for the victims of nazism
to become nazis themselves-but under a different guise,
called Zionism-is a sad aspect of history for which we the
Arabs are paying the price, and no one else.

140. For the whole District of Jerusalem the figures are as
follows: Arab ownership, 3,993,OOl; Jewish ownership,
39,679-but of a total of 4,333,534. Thus Arab ownership,
according to this report submitted by the Mandatory Power
itself-a document of the United Nations, which anybody
can check-is exactly 82 per cent of both the City of
Jerusalem and the District of Jerusalem.
141. There was another paragraph in the statement of
Mr. Tekoah denying the existence of a master plan. He said:

144. To prove my point that the doctrine of Zionism is
basically a racist doctrine, I invite attention to the
following. On 7 July 1968 a newspaper reported General
Dayan, the Minister of Defence, ashaving said that:

“It is to be observed that housing construction is
pursued largely on the basis of plans elaborated by the
British administration during the Mandate period and
suspended after the Jordanian invasion of 1948. However,
contrary to the Jordanian allegations, there is no master
plan. Construction is carried on in the conviction that
following the termination of Jordan’s invasion the development of Jerusalem must once more proceed on its
normal course, interrupted by war and the subsequent
bisection of the city,” [l58Oth meeting, para. 34.1

“for a century the nation has been constructing a
country by receiving Jewish immigrants and implanting
colonies with the aim of enlarging our frontiers. Let no
one say that we have already fulfilled our programme; let
no one say that we are nearing the desired goal! ”
145. In the official publication of the Rabbinate of the
Israeli Army the following, dated April 1969 appeared:
“The Arabs, who are elements foreign to the essence
and destiny of this country, must be considered from
every point of view like the ancient foreign elements. Our
war with them was just as inevitable as were our wars
with the nations who ruled the country during our
ancient colonisation. To live here with the Arabs is
impossible, because the Arab turns to Mecca to say his
prayer whereas we turn towards Jerusalem. Only he who
turns towards Jerusalem is the true son of this country.

142. There is a slight confusion in this paragraph. Who is
the invader and who is the invaded? According to
Mr. Tekoah the invader is Jordan-although it is not now in
Jerusalem at all-and the invaded is Israel. That is the logic
of people who follow political mythology because every
thing becomes mythological and we have to believe them,
Here again I shall cite an objective authority, In June of this
year, two articles appeared in London under the title “The
theft of a sacred city “. The second of those articles deals
with the plan. It is entitled ‘“The plan”, I quote:

“The conclusion is simple: either the Arab will ceaseto
honour the ideals of Mecca and will honour those of Zion
and Jerusalem or he will return to the country of Mecca
and leave the sons of Zion to fulfil their destiny without
bothering them. The Bible is the sole and unique basis of
development for this country, it is its very essence.All
our stepsmust be inspired by it.”

“In 1964 the Jewish municipality of Jerusalem, the
Israeli Lands Authority, the Israeli Ministry of Housing
and the Prime Minister’s Office, initiated a master plan
for the development of that part of Jerusalem in Israel
and to that end established a Master Plan Office. After
the Six-Day War of 1967, during which the Isaeli Forces
occupied the Eastern or Arab part of Jerusalem and in
which the Old City lies, the phanning office immediately
began to reconstruct their plan to incorporate the whole
city.”

146. NOW this doctrine is based on mythology and the
racist belief that the Jews are the chosen people of God.
How can they allow themselves to make such pronounccments and issue such directives? A great many Jews dissent
from the Zionist State of Israel. I invite the attention of the
members of this Council to an appeal that appeared in T/ie
New York Times today and that was written by Jews.It is
entitled “Pogrom in Jerusalem”. I will not tax the patience
of the members of the Council by reading it. I hope that
every one of them will read this appeal made by some
Orthodox Jews here in the city of New York.

The article continues-and this shows the dimensions and
the magnitude of the problem with which the Arabs are
faced and I request my colleagues to pay attention to these
figures:
“The scheme was based on computerized calculation of
population trends from which it emerged that the
266,000 population would have swollen to 400,000 by
1985, but the plan envisaged that other factors might

147. With regard to desecration, I submit to the Council
this picture of a chapel just outside the Saint Saviour
16

Armenian Church on Mount Zion, which was thoroughly
ransacked, with crosspieces removed from its wall and left
in shambles. That is after the Israeli occupation. And then a
picture of a bulldozing operation at the South Wall of the
Haram al Sharif. The Dome is that of Al Aqsa Mosque.
Archaeological diggings continue on the South Wall of the
Haram al Sharif area. Israelis claim that they are’seeking the
southern entrance which in olden times led directly into the
middle of the Temple area.

nothing good in the past, nor will it do so in the future. It
represents darkness, reaction and imprisonment
for 500
million human beings,”
155. Any student of history-not merely general human
and world history, but even Jewish history-knows, to give
just One instance, that the greatest theologian of Judaism,
Maimonides in Latin, whose Hebrew and Arabic name is
Moses hen Maimun, lived in Tunisia, Cairo and DAMASCUS,
and wrote “Guide to the Perplexed” in Hebrew letters, but
when it is read it is read in Arabic, The Jews say about
Maimonides, “From Moses to Moses, there is nobody like
Moses. He represents one of the climaxes of Jewish
renaissanceliving under the Arabs,

148. In HaoZam Uazeh of 10 August 1971, Mr.Dayan
said:
“Al1 the rest of the sites (i.e. Christian and Moslem
shrines) could be photographed and eliminated because
they are concealing and preventing us from seeing the
perfect picture.”

156. And may I ask Mr. Tekoah: why is it that when
Spain was regained by the Christians the Jewspreferred to
migrate with the Arabs and live in North Africa-their
descendants live there to the present time-rather than live
in Christian Spain? Pleasedo not believe that I am Moslem
or that I am speaking because of religious feelings, It so
happens that I am a Christian from the Christian community of Syria, which, according to Mr. Tekoah, is a persecuted community in Syria. Why is it that for the last six
years I have had the misfortune, or the fortune, to face
Mr. Tekoah acrossthis horseshoetable if what he has said is
correct? It is not correct. Why is it that there have been
Christian Prime Ministers of Syria, which is 90 per cent
Moslem, as well as ministers, deputy prime ministers and
vice-presidents, We boast of tolerance-genuine tolerance,
not fabricated mythological tolerance.

149, And here is a picture of Israeli army boots trampling
the places of worship. Al Aqsa Mosque, the third holiest
shrine of Islam, was burned in such an outrage.
150. Here is a picture of the Reparatrice Convent in
Jerusalem, destroyed by the Israeli occupiers.
151. Here is a picture of a mosque at Qibya, destroyed by
Israeli armed forces.
152. Here is a picture of the Church of Saint Anne in
Jerusalem, a victim of Israeli shelling.
1.53, But I want to put on record that this follows the
pattern of Israeli behaviour in Palestine towards the Arabs.
Among the mosques destroyed are those of Birweh,
Ghabsiya, Kabri and Kuweikat. Among the churches
destroyed are those of Damoun, Sihmata and Kafr Bir’im.
The Mosque of Nabi Daoud in Israeli-held Jerusalem was
converted into a synagogue. The Mamillah Cemetery in
Jerusalem, an area of about 20 acres containing the remains
of a large number of Moslem religious dignitaries was
seized. Residential and commercial quarters were established in the cemetery. On Good Friday of 1954, the
Christian Cemetery in Haifa was desecrated and 73 holy
crosses were smashed. A large demonstration of the leaders
of the Christian community and Christian citizens of Haifa
on 2 May 1954 protested against this act. On 26 February
1953 Monseigneur George Hakim, Archbishop of the Greek
Catholic Community
in Israel, told the Hebrew daily

1.57. Israel is an international law-breaker. This is a fact
that must be recognized, and sooner or later a law-breaker,
whether national or international, no matter what the
forces are behind him, must be brought to court.
Mr. Tekoah, who lectured us yesterday and today about
respect for the rule of law, is answeredby the following
statement of his Minister of Defence, Mr. Dayan, which
sheds light not only on the situation in Jerusalem but on
the situation in all the occupied areas, that is, the Golan
Heights, the west bank of the Jordan, the Sinai and Gaza.
This is what Defence Minister Moshe Dayan said, asquoted
by the Jewish Telegraphic Agency on 20 August 197 1:
“Defence Minister Moshe Dayan declared today that
Israel must regard herself as the permanent regime in the
occupied Arab territories, and must carry out necessary
projects
there without waiting for the day of peace since
it may be very late in coming.”

Ma ‘ariv:

“Many church properties are still illegally seized, priests
are not allowed permanent residence in Israel, and
religious students are prevented from reaching theological
schools. For these and other matters, we received good
promises, mostly unfulfilled, as are still unfulfilled many
promises given through us to members of the Catholic
Church.”

158. That statement of Mr. Dayan at that time made
headlines h tile American press. The Christian Science
Monitor and The New York Times of 21 August both

the fact that the correct English translation of
Dayan’s statement should read “permanent and establishment government”.

empha&ed

154. This stems from a very basic inherent hatred of the
Arabs, be they Christians or Moslems. Mark the following.
Dr, Azriel, formerly Chief Editor of the newspaperMabrivy
wrote in that paper on 1 October 1955:

159. We find this in The Christian Science Monitor of 21

August 1971:
“The

central

and

most

contrOVerSid

pOht

hl

Mr. Dayan’s addresswasthat Israel should regard itd
aS
the permanent
government of the occupied territories.

“Islam is the enemy of all fruitful thought, all genuine
initiative
and all productive ideas. It has produced
17

(An official English translation issued by the government
press office rendered his words as established government,
but a more precise equivalent of memshelet ked’--w~ch
is Hebrew-“is
permanent government+)”
160. The New York Times, on the same date, commented
as follows:
“The word kevuah used by Mr. Dayan to describe the
kind of government he wants means both permanent and
established, and his statement is being interpreted both
ways here.”
Commenting on this, 7”/reNew York Times stated that even
the State Department “took sharp issue with the Israeli
Defense Minister”.
16 1. There is, so I am told, a passage in the Talmud-and
the Talmud is a collection of the writings of the wise men
of Judaism-which
says that ancient Jerusalem was destroyed because its inhabitants “stuck to the strict letter of
the law, and did not advance equity”. My colleagues here
do not need any lessons illustrating the frequent disparity
between equity and the letter of the law. Indeed, that
disparity is why the Security Council is meeting to discuss
the problem of Jerusalem. But the Jewish wise man who
wrote what I have quoted from the Talmud was certainly
inspired by the Hebrew prophet Habbakuk, who said: “Woe
unto him who builds his house on blood and his city on
inequity”.
162. The PRESIDENT: The next name on the list of
speakers is that of the representative of Saudi Arabia. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
163. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): The hour is late, and
I do not want to abuse the human rights of the individual
members of the Council. By a freak of fate I seem always to
speak at a late hour. I canassure
you, Mr. President,that if
the Council should decideto schedulea meeting soontomorrow or perhapsMonday-I shalldelay the bulk of my
statement until then.
164. However, having taken the floor I wish to remind
Sir, that in my last statementI saidthat I would be
more explicit about this question of Jerusalemwhen I
spoke again. In order not to contradict what I have just
said, I ahall take only a little time to refute what
Mr. Tekoah saidthis afternoon.I know that what I saywill
not be reported by the world presswhich, to a large extent,
is controlled by the Zionists,However, it is enough for a
few honest earsto hearwhat I haveto say, and I hope that
the substanceof my statementwill be disseminatedwhere
consciences are still alive. This will not be a detailed
you,

statement.
165. Mr. Tekoah saidthat my colleaguefrom Jordan had
concealed the fundamentaltruth, that Jordan had destroyed Jerusalemand that Jerusalemis now united and
prosperous underthe Israeliflag.
166. Mr. President, I happento have a good American
colleague sitting next to me and, throughyou, sir, I would

askhim this: if Manhattan and many parts of the United
States were still on the lips of the Red Indians-who no
doubt worshippedin this vast land before the white ‘man
conqueredit-would the Security Council considerrestituting to the Red IndiansManhattan or parts of the United
Statessacredto them? No. Becausepower is exercisedby
the white man who conqueredthis country and constituted
himself into a State. Therefore, why should not the
Palestiniansbe like the Red Indians? There are 110 million
Arabs and 600 million Moslemswho do not concedethat
the representativesof a couple of million people who claim
to be Zionists shouldhave suzerainty over Jerusalem.That
is the fact as it obtains. That should be the realistic
approachof the Council-not the approach of juridical or
political solution. There is a fait accompli by force now
facing the Moslems-not to speakof the Christians,because
half of them have beenbrain-washed.I am speakingnot of
the Christiansof the East, but of the Christianselsewhere,
But there are 600 or 700 million Moslemswho will not
acceptthe fait accompli. Let this Council heed what I say,
because,asI saidyesterday, it will go round in circlesand
get nowhereif it doesnot accept this fact.
167. Mr. Tekoah mentioned Lebanon and said that the
LebaneseChristianshad been emigrating.Before they were
Christians,Lebanesehad been emigrating, becausethey
were sailors during the days when they were called
Phoenicians.If they had not emigrated, they would not
have built the Templeof Solomon.Solomonwasthe sonof
David, and David wasa shepherdwho did not know how tc
do anything. They lived in tents, as someof USstill dc in
Arabia. There is nothing wrong with that. However, the
Jewsof ancient times did not know how to build a wall.
They had to ask the Lebaneseto come and build the
Temple of Jerusalemwith cedar. But why talk about the
Lebanesegoing to Jerusalemto build a temple for Ring
Solomon? They had travelled around Africa centuries
before Christ when the Egyptians were not yet Semitizedthey were Hamites-which goesto show that Semitismisa
culture and a languageand not predicated necessarilyon a
religion. Take the Christian communities before Protestantism. Religion wasnot a unifying factor. Catholicskilled
one another, and then Protestantismcame, and they also
began to kill one another. Mr. Tekoah wants to createa
people from a religion, and I tell him it cannot be done,
The Lebaneseare still emigrating,like any other people.At
least when they went to Cornwall, six or seven centuries
before Christ, and what today is Ireland and mined tin,
they did not colonize what today is the United Kingdom or
Ireland. They establishedMarseilles.They could not have
done so if they only cultivated vineyards and olive trees.
What about the Jews? They have been emigrating everywhere too. It is no argument to say that the Lebanese
Christians are leaving because they are oppressed.My
colleaguefrom Syria has just mentioned that he comes
from one of the most ancient families in Syria. He is a
Christianand is sitting now representinga State which is 9.5
per cent Moslem, I happento be from the Christian branch
of the Baroodys. About 50 per cent of us areMoslemsand
50 per cent are Christians. I represent the State that
happensto be the custodianof Meccaand Medina. Whereis
the discrimination and the intolerance? I mention this to
refute these seditiouswords that are spoken in order to
drive a wedge and in order to fan religious discrimination

and intolerance in our part of the world-as if we do not
have enough of it now that Israel has usurped our part of
the world. When I speak about Israel I am not thinking of
the ancient Israelis, who are at one with us. I am talking
about those Khazars from Europe who use religion-a noble
religion: Judaism-as a motivation for their economic and
poIiticd ends. They mentioned Uganda, and possibly next
time they will mention other parts of Africa which seem to
send emissaries-we know who pays their fare-to Israel. We
also have some Lebanese and Syrians there who are
emigrants, and they tell us certain things about what goes
on, I should like to remind Mr. Tekoah that I know that in
the sixties $19 million was siphoned by certain States-and
I do not want to mention them lest I embarrass them-to
Israel so that it might spend that money for propaganda in
Africa and send experts there. They have many there. They
have Europeans there. They have doctors and engineers.
For what? As a by-product, as in the days of colonialism.
The colonial people benefited from the colonial Powers,
but the colonial Powers were there primarily for their own
interests. And that is what is going on now. Israeli engineers
and doctors are going there to say that Israel is the
promised land and the Arabs are barbarians. I will not
accept such an argument and let it go unanswered before
this Council lest by repetition it may be believed.
168. How can it be expected that the Arabs can trust the
Israelis in our midst when only today one can read an
advertisement in l7re New York Times entitled “Pogrom in
Jerusalem”? The advertisement has been inserted by none
other than the Neturei Karta of U.S.A.-the “keepers of the
gate”, ln other words. They are not all Sephardic Jews;
some of them are Ashkenazim. I shall read out this
advertisement:
‘<The brutal pogrom, staged on Saturday, August 7th
by the Israeli police in Jerusalem against innocent Jewish
men, women and children, must not be forgotten. Steps
must be taken to assure that there will be no repetition.”
That is the first paragraph. I will now read part of the main
paragraph, It says:
‘“rhe Jewish victims, who had no warning at all, did not
resist but the merciless beatings continued until there was
a large number of wounded which included scores of
American tourists, American students and an American
rabbi, Fifteen Americans were among the many hauled
off to jail where the shocking mistreatment was relentlessly kept up. The staging of the ‘show’ included a
peculiar detail: some policemen systematically forced a
number of young boys to throw stones in order to
provide suitable ‘action picture’ for the cameras.”

i

legitimacy of the Zionist state. The Zionist fraud and
deception is increased by its usurpation of the name of
Israel and by the Zionist pretense of representing the
Jewish people. Actually, the existence of the Jewish
people is based solely on one fundamental principle: the
observance of the commandments as specified in the
written and oral law of the Torah. Anyone denying this
principle excludes himself automatically from the Jewish
community.”
And they appeal to us at the United Nations
something about those Jews who reside in Israel.

to do

170. Mr. Tekoah had the temerity to talk about the
brutality of the Arabs, Jordanians or non-Jordanians, and
about the paradise which they have been trying to establish
in Jerusalem and occupied Palestine.
171. Since Mr. Tekoah is so confident, as he has declared
from this table, that everything that Israel has done in
Jerusalem is-to use an American idiom-fine and dandy,
why does not Israel accept a United Nations-appointed
commission to go to Jerusalem and other parts of occupied
Palestine to ascertain whether the Arab population, Christian or Moslem, is satisfied under the alleged Israeli golden
rule? Why, if they have nothing to fear?
172. I promised that I would not be long but, before
reserving the right-with
the permission of the members of
the Council-to take the floor the next time this Council
convenes, I must mention something that may apear a littie
novel, if not creative, so as to get us out of this impasse.
173. Political Zionism, as interpreted and as it is being
fulfilled by the usurping Zionist State, is predicated on the
ingathering of all the Jews, including those in the Soviet
Union-3 million of them. That is why there is such a
campaign against the Soviet Union to let 3 million Jews go
to Israel. And they are chiding the American Jews for not
going to Israel. There are a couple of million of them in
New York City and some 6 million in the United States.
They are trying to brainwash them as to the necessity of
going to Israel.
174. The other day I quoted just one line from what was
said by Rabbi Kahane, who has been pestering everyone
here who does not see eye to eye with him. Also I had to go
once to see Ambassador Ma& I thought they were living in
a fortress. I asked: Vhat’s wrong? ” They said: “Kahane,
Kahane and his men.” “Kahane”, we are aware, is from
in Arabic“cohen” originally; and “cohen”-‘Lcal~en”
means rabbi. He does not have to put a prefm to his name
and say “Rabbi Kahane”. If a man of religion does that
what has he left to the secular?

169. And then comes, from the mouths of Jews who are
at loggerheads with the Zionists, another quotation from
the same advertisement:

175. I am now going to read from the Paris Herald
Dibune of 7 September 1971, which I picked up on the
day I came back from my expIoratory trip abroad. It says:

“First came the establishment of the Zionist state in the
Holy Land, although the Torah forbids any Jewish state
before the coming of the Messiah. Now the Zionists
continue in the same direction by persecuting those who
still uphold the sovereign rule of the Torah among the
Jews and who steadfastly have refused to recognize the

“AS Rabbi Kahane approached the platform he received
a warm round of applause.“-From
whom? From Israeli
Jews; by American Jews whom he is trying-to brainwash.
“He told the delegates that the Zionist body, by giving
him the platform, ‘shows it understands a traditional
concept of Jewish life-freedom of expression’.

I
19

time and again, the economic and political motivations, I
will, with your permission, Mr. President, and that of the
other members of the Council, give you my appraisal of the
plans of political Zionism which will make each one of you
pause and think whether it is not high time that the Council
should act with dispatch.

“Regarding emigration to Israel, he said! ‘It is not just a
question that Jews should go, but they must go.’ “-What
Jews? He means the Jews of the United States. He was
addressing them, “He said the American Jewish community was confronted with the possibility of ‘another
holocaust’ because of what he said were deteriorating
conditions in American society.

181. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Israel, who has asked to speak in exercise of his right of
reply.

“ ‘The Jew is not liked in America,’ Rabbi Kahane said,
‘In times of prosperity those who dislike him are quiet
haters, But when life becomes hard-as it has today-they
become active haters.’ ”

182. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Mr. President, I beg your
indulgence and that of members of the Security Council; I
assureyou that I would not have asked for the floor at this
late hour-especially not after the lecture we have just
heard on the Protocols of the Elders of Zion-were it not
for the fact that the Syrian representative has treated us to
his usual concoction of falsehoods attired in a series of
distorted quotations, They do not deserve a full reply, but
should not, at the same time, be left in Security Council
records without some reaction.

176. There must be many other Kahanes-not so vociferous-in other countries; I do not know about Western
European countries. No doubt, they may also try to be
vociferous in the Soviet Union with regard to the duty of
every Jew to go to Israel. That is the philosophy of political
Zionism: the ingathering of all the Jews in Palestine.
177. What shall we do about it? The Jews, like the
Lebanese and Syrians and other Arabs, are dispersed all
over the world. I know, for one thing, that there is no
doubt but that there are many American Jews who are very
loyal citizens of this United States; there are French Jews
who are very loyal French citizens. But the Zionists do not
want to leave them alone. How do you expect us Arabs not
to harbour fears in the face of this campaign of ingathering
of the Jews? And how can the international community
expect us not to be apprehensive that Zionism is an
expansionist movement-or that Israel’s dream of occupying the territory between the Nile and the Tigris might
by force become a nightmare for us? We will resist, but
such a nightmare might push this world into the holocaust
of a third world war.

183. Of the Syrian representative, I should simply like to
ask: if Hitler, as he says, was a madman, and nazism a mad
doctrine, why does Syria continue to print, in Arabic,
Hitler’s Mein Kampf? Why did it distribute it to the Syrian
armies in the Golan Heights, which for years rained fine and
death on Israeli towns and villages . . ,
184. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic, who wishes to speak on a point of
order.
185. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): In every part of
my statements I have adhered to the item on the agenda as
adopted unanimously by the Security Council: namely, the
complaint of Jordan on the situation in Jerusalem, and the
reports of the Secretary-General. I submit that the situation
in Syria, or any allusion to Syria, is outside the subject we
are discussing, Therefore, I respectfully request that the
representative of Israel be called to order.

178. Well, what is my idea for putting an end to this? I
submit that Jews over 2 1-that is the age of majority in my
part of the world; here, incidentally, they have lowered it in
order to take mep into the army; it is at 18 now, I think,
that they are given the vote; but in my part of the world
the age of majority is still 21; if you want to make it 18,
that is all right-but I say that Jews 21 years of age and
above, all over the world, should be asked, by the
instrumentality of plebiscites, under the auspices of the
United Nations, whether they consider their capital to be
Jerusalem or the capitals of their own respective countries.
Then we Arabs would know where we stand, because the
political Zionists will leave no stone unturned until they
bring pressure on Jews everywhere to emigrate to Palestine.

186. The PRESIDENT: Once again I appeal to representatives to restrict themselves to our agreed agenda.
187. I call on the representative of Israel.
188. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I submit most respectfully
that these debates should be conducted in accordance with
the Charter. We are all Members of one Organization, one
of the basic principles of which is the sovereign equality of
sll States, If the Syrian representative dares to accuse Jews
and the Jewish State of nazism, I have the right to reply to
that very same point. That is why I ask: why is Syria one of
the few countries in the world that continue to print and
sell in public Hitler’s Mein KampJ and why does Syria
continue to employ former Nazis-

179. Think, Sir, with your colleagues, about this project
of having a plebiscite. In that way the Jews who are loyal to
the countries of which they are nationals, or whose
nationality they have adopted, will be counted; and the
Jews who would like to emigrate to Palestine will be
counted. Then we Arabs will know where we stand. But so
long as the philosophy of Zionism is that all Jews are in
duty bound to go to Israel there will be no peace.

189. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic who wishes to speak on a point of
order.

180. My next statement will revolve around why, in my
opinion, from 52 years’ experience grappling with this
question, this Zionist movement was initiated, and what has
become of it since the First World War. Since I mention,

190. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): I respectfully
request a ruling from the President on whether the points
20

raised by the Israeli representative are in order or out of
order.

“Like the Muezzin of Horns, he calls the people to
Prayer, but he himself goesto his work.”

191. The PRESIDENT: I would ask the representative of
Israel to limit his observations strictly to the item on the
agenda.

The work of the Syrian representative and his Government
is known to all. It is the labour of persistent oppression of
Jewish and Christian minorities, of a policy aiming overtly
at the destruction of a Member State of the United Nations,
of continued warfare againstthat State and refusal to make
peace with it, of rejection of all the fundamental principles
of international law, the Charter of the United Nations and
United Nations resolutions in relation to that State.

192. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): The Syrian representative’s
regard for fact is almost proverbial in the United Nations.
He has engaged us, for instance, in a long analysis of the
figures I gave at the previous meeting regarding Jerusalem’s
population. He challenged me to disprove his allegations. I
will very simply. I speak and spoke yesterday of the
population of the city of Jerusalem, which has had a Jewish
majority for generations. I would suggest that the Syrian
representative refrain from juggling with figures by giving
the statistics of the population of the district of Jerusalem
during the British mandatory period which included many
Arab towns and villages.
193. Secondly, the Syrian representative challenged the
figures submitted by me by charging that I should have
given not those of 1948, as I did yesterday, but those of
1947. Indeed, I am ready to go even further than he
suggested and provide him with statistics of 1944. According to statistics published by the British Mandatory
Government and submitted in December 1945 and January
1946 to the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry, the
population of Jerusalem as divided between Jews and
Moslems in 1944 was as follows: Jews, 97,000; Moslems,
30,630.

197. The work to which the Syrian representative and his
Government turn, after having preached to us respect for
United Nations resolutions, is the brazen rejection of this
Security Council’s resolution 242 (1967), the basis for all
United Nations peace efforts in the Middle East, and the
refusal to participate in those efforts, May I say very
frankly that Syria and its document-loving but distorting
representative are more of a problem to the Security
Council on which Syria sits, despite its brazen repudiation
of its Charter obligations, than to us-Israel,
198. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): Let me first of
all deal with the question of figures submitted by the
representative of Israel. He said that according to the
statistics of the Mandatory Power the number of Jewsin
the City of Jerusalem was 97,000 and that of Moslems
30,000.

194, The figures I gave yesterday come very close to that.
What I said was that in 1948 there were 100,000 Jews in
Jerusalem; in other words, an increase of about 3,000 as
compared with the British figures; and that there were
U,OOO Moslems; in other words, an increase of almost
lS,OOOMoslems in Jerusalem during that same period.
195. On the Syrian representative’s charges regarding
damage to churches and to mosques, I shall at this very late
hour limit myself to one example of his distortions. The
Syrian representative produced here a picture of the
Armenian Church and alleged that it was destroyed bY the
Israelis. It so happens that the church to which he refers
was situated for 19 years in the area between the lines in
Jerusalem, a no-man’s land, that most of the damage done
resulted from the continous aggressive shooting by the
Jordanian forces on the Israeli civilian citizens of the City,
and that after the reunification of Jerusalem Israel was
finally able to assist the Armenian Patriarchate in repairing
the damage. I shall briefly read one paragraph from a letter
sent on this matter on 8 April 1969 by the Armenian
Patriarch of Jerusalem to the Minister of Justice of Israel:

199. There are two observations on those figures. First,
gerrymandering, becauseultimatelY we have to put exactly
the number of the population within the limits about which
we are talking. Secondly, he omitted the Christian Arabs,
because it is difficult for the mind of a Zionist to.imagine
that there are Christian Arabs-and this stems from his basic
political mythology that, starting from the premise that all
Jews must be Zionists, there cannot be Jews who are
non-Zionists. But we submit that being a Christian is not an
international concept of law. A Christian can be French,
Italian, Spanish, Syrian, Lebanese, Egyptian-he is defined
by his nationality, not by his religion.
200. Then he referred to my quotations as distortions.
The verbatim record of the Security Council will appear
tomorrow. Every quotation is given with its source and
page, But those quotations must have hurt Mr. Tekoah for
him to go to the extent of calling them distortions. I can
understand his dissatisfaction, to the saythe least, although
I cannot, as I said, use the samebase language that he uses
and stoop as low as he does in insulting other people’s
intelligence. I am much more respectful of the Council, and
I stand by what I said. The record, as I say, will appear
tomorrow or on Monday, and I invite my colleagues to
check very carefully the quotations I have made. If anyone
finds a distortion, I am ready to be judged. If not, the
accuseralleging distortions is himself a distorter.

“In this connexion I also present my deep thanks to
Your Excellency for your willingness to render us every
help in order to restore our monastery of the Holy
Saviour and cemetery situated on the front lines since 20
years.”

20 1, Again, I go back to the fact that we are here looking
into the question of Jerusalem. Every other issue is
extraneous. The fact remains that from 1967 to this day,
the General Assembly, the Security Council, the Committees and commissions on human rights, WHO and UNESCO
have adopted 53 resolutions, 14 of which condemn Israel

196. I shall end by quoting to the representative of Syria
an old Syrian proverb which says:
21

for violations of human rights and of internationaI law, and
19 of which either deplore or strongly deplore Israel’s acts
of banditry. That record speaks for itself. That is the record
of Israel and not of Syria.

208. The French were the Mandatory Power over Syria

and Lebanon. They discharged their mandatory duties and
they did not create a problem. I mentioned during my last
statement-and I repeat again for the benefit of Mr. Tekoah
or those behind him-that the Jewish State was planted
amongst us by the British, who hoped that by doing so they
would guarantee the route of the British Empire. I remind
the Council of what the late Mr. Churchill said: “I wasnot
appointed His Majesty’s Prime Minister to preside over the
liquidation of the British Empire”.

202. As to the morbid obsession of the Israeli representative with Syria’s membership of the Security Council, that
membership, fortunately, was decided by a majority vote of
104 Members of the United Nations and not by Israel. That
in itself should make Mr. Tekoah at least aware of his
morbid and moribund obsession with the issue of the
membership of Syria in the Security Council, to which he
returns time and again.

209. Where is the British Empire now? Where will any ’
empire be that supports injustice? It will go down the
drain, as other empires have done, including Arab empires
when they become tyrannical. Let us have the courage to
say, as we say in Arabic: “Anything that is built on an evil
and corrupt basis is evil and corrupt”. A whole people was
sold down the Thames and the Potomac-in 1917; and later
at Versailles; and still later, in 1947. And those who
connived at selling that people down those two rivers are
surely morally responsible. There will be no peace aslong as
this injustice is done unto a people-whether Arab, nonArab, African, Asian and of whatever colour. But we are
here to establish peace in the United Nations.

203. ThFPRESIDENT: Icall on the representative of Saudi
Arabia, who wishes to speak in exercise of his right of
reply.
204. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I would like to point
to the fact that one should not cite figures with regard to
1944 and 1948. I am sure that Mr. Tekoah will not answer
what I am going to say, but I want to bring to the attention
of the Council some facts with regard to figures.
205. In 19 19, after the end of the First World War, the
Jewish population of Palestine was only 6 per cent, and the
Arab population, including Christians and some of our
Jewish sephardic brothers, was 93 per cent. There was a
margin of 1 per cent consisting of pilgrims who had settled
there, in monasteries, from abroad, mostly Christian foreigners.

210. Again, I say that my heart goes out to the now
Zionist Jews because the writing is on the wall. If the
Zionists do not stop pushing them into this new ideology,
they may become the scapegoats, and wrongly so, of
intolerance wherever it may be found,

206. Then I must bring it to the attention of the Council
that the United Kingdom was the Mandatory Power, and
the League of Nations entrusted the United Kingdom with
that Mandate so as to prepare the indigenous population-in
other words, the 93 or 94 per cent-for ultimate selfdetermination and independence. Why cite figures for
1944, or after 1939, when the British were fighting Hitler
and they needed the Jews? They admitted Jews. They
admitted Jews after 1922, in large numbers, to curry favour
with them, for political reasons. Why not mention the 94
per cent or 93 per cent, the indigenous people of Palestine,
that were non-Jewish? And what did the United Kingdom
do? A perfidious colonial policy of selling out the people
whom they were supposed to prepare for self-determination
and independence.

211. The PRESIDENT: The Council has heard a number
of statements by those representatives who have asked to
participate in the discussion. It is my understanding that
the members of the Council would like to have time to
study the statements they have heard and to consult among
themselves. I therefore propose to adjourn this meeting and
to determine the date of the next meeting, which may take
place sometime early next week, after consultations with
the members of this Council.
212. I have just received a message from the represent*
tives of Jordan and Lebanon stating that they wish to
reserve their right of reply for a later meeting of the
Council.

207. If one mentions figures, then let one mention figures
in their own perspective and not for a given year that suits

the speaker, whether he be a Jew or an Arab.

The meeting rose at 7.35 p.m.

22
Litho

in United Nations, New York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

82080-August

1973-2,050
