A/65/PV.100

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fifth session

100th plenary meeting
Friday, 17 June 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items

plenary meeting, and to proceed immediately to its
consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 23 (continued)

The President: Before proceeding, I wish to
inform members that the Assembly will first take up
sub-item (a) of agenda item 23, in order to transmit its
decision urgently to the United Nations Development
Programme Board.

Groups of countries in special situations

I invite the attention of the General Assembly to
document A/65/L.75, circulated under sub-item (a) of
agenda item 23, “Fourth United Nations Conference on
the Least Developed Countries”. Members will recall
that the Assembly concluded its consideration of this
sub-item at its 69th plenary meeting, on 20 December
2010. It will therefore be necessary to reopen
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 23.

The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Argentina, speaking on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, to introduce draft resolution
A/65/L.75.

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of sub-item (a) of
agenda item 23?
It was so decided.
The President: Members will also recall that at
its 2nd plenary meeting, on 17 September 2010, the
General Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 23
and its sub-items to the Second Committee. In order
for the Assembly to take action expeditiously on the
draft resolution, may I take it that the Assembly wishes
to consider sub-item (a) of agenda item 23 directly in

(a) Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries
Draft resolution (A/65/L.75)

Mr. Suárez Salvia (Argentina): I have the honour
to introduce, on behalf of the Group of 77 (G-77) and
China, the draft resolution on the Programme of Action
for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade
2011-2020, contained in document A/65/L.75, under
agenda item 23 (a).
The Group would like to express its profound
gratitude to the Government and people of the
Republic of Turkey for hosting the Fourth United
Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries
in Istanbul from 9 to 13 May 2011, and for providing
all the support necessary to the meeting’s successful
conclusion.
The G-77 would very much appreciate the
General Assembly’s endorsement of the Istanbul
Declaration (A/CONF.219/L.1) and the Programme of

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-37747 (E)

*1137747*

A/65/PV.100

Action for the Least Developed Countries for the
Decade 2011-2020 (A/CONF.219/3), adopted by the
Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries with the goal of reducing poverty
and promoting growth and sustainable development.

for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade
2011-2020”, I wish to put on record the following
statement of financial implications on behalf of the
Secretary-General, in accordance with rule 153 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly.

We would also like to call on all the relevant
stakeholders to commit to implementing the
Programme of Action. It is particularly important to
highlight the crucial role of developed countries as
development partners in implementing the Istanbul
Programme, investing in physical and human capital.
We also call on the United Nations system, including
the Bretton Woods and other multilateral institutions
and regional development banks, to support the least
developed countries (LDCs) in these efforts.

Under the terms of paragraph 2 of draft resolution
A/65/L.75, the General Assembly would

We must bear in mind that the success of the new
Programme of Action is greatly dependent on the
LDCs’ taking ownership and a leadership role in
making and effectively implementing the relevant
policy choices, each according to its own conditions
and requirements, with the enhanced, predictable,
definite and targeted support of their development
partners.
Guided by the principle of common but
differentiated responsibilities of developing and
developed countries, and by the spirit of solidarity, we,
as developing countries, feel proud to be able to
support this Programme of Action through South-South
cooperation. In that context, we would like to highlight
the united efforts of developing countries to support
one another, despite their own social and economic
difficulties.
The Group reiterates once more its strong support
for the LDCs and hopes that the Istanbul Programme of
Action will usher in a strengthened partnership aimed
at overcoming the multiple development challenges
faced by LDCs, and at supporting them in eradicating
poverty and becoming beneficially integrated into the
global economy. For those reasons the G-77 and China
hope that this draft resolution will be adopted at this
meeting.
The President: In connection with draft
resolution A/65/L.75, I give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department of General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with draft
resolution A/65/L.75, entitled “Programme of Action

2

“Endorse … the Istanbul Declaration and
the Programme of Action for the Least Developed
Countries for the Decade 2011-2020 adopted by
the Fourth United Nations Conference on the
Least Developed Countries, and call … upon all
the relevant stakeholders to commit to
implementing the Programme of Action.”
The General Assembly, in paragraph 20 of
resolution 65/171, requested that the Secretary-General
submit to the Assembly at its sixty-sixth session a
report on the outcome of the Fourth United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries, which
was held in Istanbul from 9 to 13 May 2011.
The financial implications arising from the
activities required to facilitate the implementation of
the Istanbul Programme of Action will be determined
at the time of consideration of the report of the
Secretary-General by the General Assembly. At
present, the scope and modalities of the activities to
facilitate the Istanbul Programme of Action are still
under consideration. It is therefore not possible at the
present time to estimate the full potential financial
implications. The Secretary-General would submit
such requirements, if any, in accordance with
established procedures at the time of consideration of
the report of the Secretary-General by the General
Assembly.
The President: We shall now take action on draft
resolution A/65/L.75, entitled “Programme of Action
for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade
2011-2020”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution A/65/L.75?
Draft resolution A/65/L.75
(resolution 65/280).

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10

11-37747

A/65/PV.100

minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.

of 77 and China throughout the negotiations on the
Programme of Action.

Mr. Bairagi (Nepal): I speak on behalf of the
least developed countries (LDCs). We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting
and for your dynamic leadership.

We sincerely thank the people and Government of
Turkey for hosting the Fourth United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries and for
its successful outcome. We thank the Secretary-General
for mobilizing the United Nations system in support,
and the Under-Secretary-General in charge of the
Conference, His Excellency Mr. Cheick Sidi Diarra,
and his team in various other areas, for their
dedication, commitment and support, which led to the
Conference’s successful outcome. We also thank all the
relevant agencies of the United Nations system, which
were deeply engaged in the preparatory process as well
as in the conference.

The unanimous endorsement by the Assembly of
the Istanbul Declaration (A/CONF.219/L.1) and
Programme of Action for the Least Developed
Countries for the Decade 2011-2020 (A/CONF.219/3)
adopted by the Fourth United Nations Conference on
the Least Developed Countries, held in Istanbul from
9 to 13 May, is an important achievement for the
international community. The Assembly’s decision
represents the collective commitment on the part of all
Members of the United Nations to give priority to the
development issues of LDCs through full and effective
implementation of the Istanbul Programme of Action.
The least developed countries welcome this as a
genuine gesture of international solidarity and support
for their special development needs and challenges.
The overarching goal of the new Programme of
Action is to overcome the structural challenges that
LDCs face in order to enable them to eradicate poverty,
achieve internationally agreed development goals and
graduate from the least-developed-country category.
The Programme of Action is based on commitments,
accountability and partnerships between the least
developed countries and their development partners
aimed at taking concrete measures in a number of
interrelated areas.
The most important task ahead of us is the full
and timely implementation of the Programme of Action
in a spirit of renewed global partnership, with a view to
bringing about visible and qualitative change in the
living standards of millions living in dehumanizing
conditions of poverty and hunger.
We sincerely thank all the development partners
helping us in our development efforts, and we look
forward to receiving an enhanced flow of resources in
order to address our multiple development challenges.
We also thank them for their commitments and support
as expressed in the Istanbul Programme of Action.
We thank all the Members of the United Nations
for their continued solidarity with, and support for,
LDCs. In that context, the least developed countries
recognize the valuable support extended by the Group

11-37747

Mr. Çorman (Turkey): On behalf of the host
country of the Fourth United Nations Conference on
the Least Developed Countries, I would like to extend
our sincere thanks to all Member States for the
adoption of resolution 65/280 by consensus.
I take this opportunity also to extend our sincere
thanks to you, Mr. President; the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Ban Ki-moon; the staff of the
Secretariat; and the Under-Secretary-General and High
Representative for the Least Developed Countries,
Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island
Developing States, His Excellency Mr. Cheick Sidi
Diarra; and his team for their dedication and hard work
in making this conference a success. The vision and
leadership of the United Nations were critical in this
regard.
The Istanbul Declaration (A/CONF.219/L.1) and
Programme of Action (A/CONF.219/3) will guide
international development cooperation efforts in the
next decade for the least developed countries.
We would like to thank all Member States that
played an active part in the negotiations for their
tireless and determined efforts to reach consensus on a
strong, comprehensive and ambitious outcome.
Parliaments, the private sector and civil society also
contributed
greatly
to
our
work
on
the
intergovernmental track. Our thanks also go to
Ambassador Acharya as the Chair of the Group of
Least Developed Countries, Ambassador Viinanen of
Finland for his able leadership as chair of the
intergovernmental
preparatory
process,
and
Ambassador Bame of Ethiopia.

3

A/65/PV.100

The effective follow-up and monitoring of the
Istanbul Programme of Action will be crucial to its
successful implementation. Turkey is committed to
supporting this process. We will contribute to the
implementation of the Istanbul Programme of Action
through our development assistance process for the
least developed countries and will allocate the sum of
$5 million for the monitoring of its implementation.
We are also ready to host the mid-term review
conference of the Programme of Action in Istanbul.
Turkey will continue to fully support the
renewed, strengthened global partnership for the
development of the least developed countries. We will
continue to work with the United Nations system, the
least developed countries and all development partners
to carry this process forward.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 23?
It was so decided.
Agenda items 13 and 115 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic,
social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/65/L.78*)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held a debate on agenda item 13
jointly with agenda items 115 and 120, “Strengthening
of the United Nations system”, at the 52nd plenary
meeting on 23 November 2010. Members will also
recall that, under agenda items 13 and 115, the
Assembly adopted resolution 65/7 at its 41st plenary
meeting on 29 October 2010.
On the basis of the mandate given to us by the
Assembly, the co-facilitators have engaged in a very
intensive and inclusive process of formal and informal
consultations, which culminated in the draft resolution
(A/65/L.78*) I am presenting to the Assembly today
for adoption.

4

Today’s meeting is the conclusion of a
coordinated process between Geneva and New York.
Once the Human Rights Council adopted its outcome
without a vote on 25 March, the process here in New
York gained traction. From the beginning, my aim was
to replicate the consensus achieved in Geneva and to
do my utmost to bring together different views and
sensitivities.
In this regard, I would like to express my
appreciation to my two co-facilitators and colleagues,
Ambassador Mohammed Loulichki of Morocco and
Ambassador Christian Wenaweser of Liechtenstein,
who shared this goal and chaired the process with skill
and commitment. With a lot of patience and creativity,
they explored every possible option to accommodate
the different aspirations and concerns, and I am very
grateful to them for their enormous effort throughout
the process.
My appreciation and gratitude also go to
Ambassador Sihasak Phuangketkeow of Thailand,
President of the Human Rights Council, whose
leadership in steering the process to a successful
conclusion in Geneva and in coordinating the efforts of
the Council with our process was exemplary. Since
Ambassador Phuangketkeow is ending his tenure as
President of the Human Rights Council on Monday, I
would at this point in time also like to congratulate him
on the impressive achievements he secured throughout
his presidency.
Last but not least, I would like to thank all the
delegations that were actively engaged throughout the
process of the review and showed a great deal of
flexibility and cooperation. I am aware that some
representatives have played a particularly active role in
support of the process, including up until today at
noon, and I would like to thank them also very much
for their efforts, which I appreciate greatly.
We have now reached a decisive moment. I am
encouraged by the very broad support that has emerged
during the past few days for the draft text before the
Assembly. I strongly believe that this text is as close as
possible to a broad consensus. I am fully aware that
some members would have liked a more ambitious
outcome, while others would have wished for a purely
procedural draft resolution. No Member State got
everything it argued for. For many delegations,
adopting the draft resolution today also means

11-37747

A/65/PV.100

compromising on issues they have felt and still feel
strongly about.
While the draft resolution clearly reaffirms
resolution 60/251, adopted in 2006 by this Assembly, it
contains a number of technical improvements that
members felt was necessary on the basis of the
practical experience we have gained over the five years
of the Human Rights Council’s existence.
The draft resolution proposes to align the cycle of
the membership of the Council with the calendar year.
It recognizes the role of the President of the Human
Rights Council. It institutionalizes the ad hoc
arrangement on the allocation of the report of the
Council to both the plenary and the Third Committee,
and it recognizes the need to provide adequate
financing to fund unforeseen and extraordinary
expenses arising from resolutions adopted by the
Human Rights Council. Furthermore, through this draft
resolution, we would adopt the Geneva outcome of the
review.
The technical nature of the improvements
underlines the fact that the great majority of Member
States perceives the Human Rights Council as a strong
and largely well-functioning organ, and that a major
institutional overhaul was neither required nor
desirable at this stage.
When taking their decision on whether or not
they want to adopt this text, I urge representatives to
look at the text for what it is. The review of the Human
Rights Council is an ongoing process. The Council will
keep improving its own work and functioning over the
coming years, while the General Assembly will
conduct another review of the status in 10 to 15 years.
Today is an opportunity to send a strong signal of
support to the Human Rights Council and to underline
our shared commitment to human rights as one of the
three main pillars of the Organization. I regret that a
recorded vote has been requested on the draft
resolution. This text is an honest attempt to reach
common ground, and I call on all Member States to
support the text as it is.
In connection with draft resolution A/65/L.78*, I
give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with draft
resolution A/65/L.78*, entitled “Review of the Human
Rights Council”, I wish to put on record the following

11-37747

statement on financial implications on behalf of the
Secretary-General, in accordance with rule 153 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraphs 7, 8, 9 and 10 of
the draft resolution, the General Assembly would
decide that the annual report of the Human Rights
Council shall cover the period from 1 October to
30 September, including its regular September session;
decide to consider through its Fifth Committee all
financial implications emanating from the resolutions
and decisions contained in the annual report, including
those emanating from its September session; recognize
the need to provide adequate financing to fund
unforeseen and extraordinary expenses arising from
resolutions and decisions of the Human Rights Council
and, in this regard, request the Secretary-General to
present a report with options for consideration by the
Fifth Committee at the main part of the sixty-sixth
session of the General Assembly, taking into account
the relevant conclusions and recommendations of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions; and adopt the text entitled “Outcome of the
Review of the work and functioning of the Human
Rights Council” annexed to the present draft
resolution.
The Secretariat has reviewed the terms of draft
resolution A/65/L.78* and wishes to inform the
General Assembly that it submitted a number of oral
statements of programme budget implications to the
Human Rights Council, in accordance with rule 153 of
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, during
its sixteenth and seventeenth sessions on the question
of the review of the work and functioning of the
Human Rights Council.
The Secretariat has informed the Human Rights
Council on the programme budget implications of its
draft
resolution
A/HRC/l7/L.7/Rev.1
on
the
establishment of the Office of the President of the
Human Rights Council. The Council has also been
informed orally of the programme budget implications
of paragraph 11 of the annex to draft resolution
A/65/L.78* on the extension of the duration of the
consideration of each country by the working Group on
the Universal Periodic Review, since there was
insufficient time to finalize and circulate an oral
statement on the financial implications to the Council
when the decision was adopted.

5

A/65/PV.100

With respect to paragraph 8 of draft resolution
A/65/L.78*, the attention of the General Assembly is
drawn to the concern regarding the timely preparation
of the Secretary-General’s annual report on the revised
estimates resulting from resolutions and decisions
adopted by the Human Rights Council if it is to include
the resolutions and decisions of the Human Rights
Council September session. The terms of the draft
resolution imply a change, as the report would have to
be processed within a shorter time frame if it were to
be submitted to the sixty-sixth session and in the
future, as compared with current practice, and could
result in the Secretariat not meeting the required sixweek rule for the issuance of reports to the Member
States. This issue is brought to the attention of the
General Assembly in line with its resolutions 33/56 and
49/221.
The attention of the General Assembly is also
drawn top the fact that the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions is currently
reviewing the Secretary-General’s proposals for the
programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013 and the
total additional resource requirements that would arise
from the adoption of draft resolution A/65/L.78*,
which may impact the level of resources that would be
required under the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2012-2013.
The Secretariat will be able to make a
determination only at the time of the preparation of the
Secretary-General’s annual report to the General
Assembly on the revised estimates report resulting
from resolutions and decisions adopted by the Council
in 2011 on the extent of additional resources it should
seek in order to implement the mandates of the Human
Rights Council that give rise to additional requirements
in 2011 and that cannot be met from available
resources under the programme budget for the
biennium 2010-2011 or the resources proposed under
the proposed programme budget for the biennium
2012-2013. The report to the sixty-sixth session of the
General Assembly is intended to cover decisions taken
at the sixteenth and seventeenth sessions of the Council
and possibly its special sessions held in 2011.
With regard to operative paragraph 9, the
Assembly is hereby informed that, as indicated in
paragraph 24.15 of the 2012-2013 proposed
programme budget (A/66/6 (Sect. 24)), the issue will
be addressed in a report to be submitted to the main
part of the sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly

6

with regard to the question of providing adequate
financing to fund unforeseen and extraordinary
expenses arising from resolutions and decisions of the
Human Rights Council.
Should the General Assembly adopt draft
resolution A/65/L.78*, additional resources expected to
arise, over and above those approved at the main part
of the sixty-fifth session, will be reported to the
General Assembly in several reports mentioned
previously, namely, first, the annual report of the
Secretary-General on the revised estimates resulting
from resolutions and decisions adopted by the Human
Rights Council to be reported to the sixty-sixth session
of the General Assembly, in accordance with
established procedures on the requirements for the
programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 and the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 20122013; and secondly, a report to be submitted for
consideration by the Fifth Committee in the main part
of the sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly on
the question of provision of adequate financing to fund
unforeseen and extraordinary expenses arising from
resolutions and decisions of the Human Rights
Council.
The President: The Assembly will now take
action on draft resolution A/65/L.78*, entitled “Review
of the Human Rights Council”. A recorded vote has
been requested.
I call on the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic on a point of order.
Mr.
Ja′afari
(Syrian
Arab
Republic):
Mr. President, I heard you say that a delegation asked
to put the whole process to the vote. Would you please
say publicly which delegation asked to put the whole
process to a vote?
The President: The vote has been requested by
the delegation of Israel.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cameroon, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba,

11-37747

A/65/PV.100

Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland,
Italy,
Jamaica,
Japan,
Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, Palau, United States of America
Draft resolution A/65/L.78* was adopted by 154
votes to 4 (resolution 65/281).
The President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote on the resolution just
adopted, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Waxman (Israel): The Human Rights
Council was created five years ago, replacing the
notorious Commission on Human Rights. Former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan said at the time that
“the Commission’s capacity to perform its tasks
has been increasingly undermined by its declining
credibility and professionalism … which casts a

11-37747

shadow on the reputation of the United Nations
system as a whole” (A/59/2005, para. 182).
Israel was involved in the negotiations five years
ago that strove to create a viable, professional and
responsible Human Rights Council –a body that would
renew public confidence and earn the legitimacy and
credibility that had been lost by its predecessor.
Unfortunately, five years down the road, the Human
Rights Council still suffers from substantial
shortcomings, much like the Commission on Human
Rights.
Resolution 60/251, the founding resolution of the
Human Rights Council, states clearly in paragraph 4
that “the work of the Council shall be guided by the
principles of universality, impartiality, objectivity and
non-selectivity”. Creating, as part of the institutionbuilding package of the Human Rights Council, one
agenda item that addresses human rights situations
throughout the world and a separate agenda item
targeting Israel alone does anything but fulfil the
principle of the founding resolution of the Council.
With profound regret, we witness the continued
distortion of the United Nations ideals in the
Organization’s central body for human rights. Like any
other country in this Hall, Israel should be subject to
review and criticism on a fair and impartial basis.
However, time and again, instead of equality,
universality
and
non-selectivity,
we
find
discrimination, exclusion and institutional bias. That
should come as no surprise, considering that some of
the world’s worst human rights violators sit on the
Council and all too often dictate its proceedings.
When the review process of the Human Rights
Council began in Geneva a year ago, we approached
this exercise with an open mind, in the hope that the
Council would take the opportunity for self-reflection
and in good faith accept that it is has failed to adhere to
its mandate under resolution 60/251. Regrettably, the
Council refused to remove item 7 from its permanent
agenda. The Geneva outcome of the review continues
to perpetuate the inherent flaws created in the
institution-building package of the Council.
When the process continued in New York, we
expressed our hope that the appropriate way would be
found here in the General Assembly to rectify the
continued discrimination against Israel in the Human
Rights Council. Sadly, that has not been the case.
Furthermore, during the New York part of the review,

7

A/65/PV.100

Israel repeatedly advocated in favour of the promotion
and better implementation of paragraphs 8 and 9 of
resolution 60/251. We truly believe that members
elected to the Council should uphold the highest
standard in the promotion and protection of human
rights in every corner of the world.
Sadly, the outcome before us does not reflect any
change in this regard. Agenda item 7 targets Israel
alone, casting a dark shadow on the United Nations
system as a whole. Therefore, Israel was regrettably
compelled to call for a vote on this resolution and
voted against it.
Before concluding, however, I would like to
extend our appreciation to the co-facilitators for their
professional work during the course of the New York
chapter of the Human Rights Council review process.
The co-facilitators acted with integrity and genuine
will to conduct a transparent and inclusive process. We
regret that the end result did not enable us to vote in
favour of the final outcome.
Mr. Kim Soo Gwon (Republic of Korea): Today,
my delegation voted in favour of resolution 65/281, as
we believe that, since the beginning of the
negotiations, we have been working hard to make the
Human Rights Council more relevant, credible and
effective in responding to various human rights issues
around the globe. However, we are concerned that
some important issues, which we believe to be very
relevant to the review of the status of the Human
Rights Council, have not been duly reflected in the
final outcome. Those issues include constructive
proposals to better operationalize paragraphs 8 and 9 of
resolution 60/251. The omission of the proposals does
not mean that they are unimportant.
In addition, we believe that these discussions
have been significant in that they have raised
awareness of the importance of this matter. My
delegation would like to take this opportunity to
express its appreciation for the effort, patience and
leadership of the two co-facilitators.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): Egypt aligns its
statement with those to be delivered on behalf of the
Group of African States, the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and the Arab Group.
At this time, we welcome the adoption of
resolution 65/281 by a large majority. However, Egypt
regrets that the General Assembly was forced to vote

8

on this important resolution and that the call for its
adoption by consensus was not heeded by some
Member States, which continue to politicize the
Human Rights Council and its work in order to achieve
narrow national political gains, even though some of
them did not even engage in any way during the long
and arduous negotiation process in Geneva and New
York.
Although the resolution we have just adopted
does not fully reflect my delegation’s proposed
amendment, Egypt voted in favour, as the text
represents a delicate compromise in which all Member
States and negotiating groups made concessions while
pursuing a consensus that would reflect the unity of the
international community. We regret the fact that this
unity was broken yet again by those few who persist in
criticizing the Human Rights Council, five years after
they more or less broke consensus on its establishment
in 2006.
Egypt’s positive vote reaffirms our full support
for the Human Rights Council and rests on our
conviction that, as a responsible Member State, we
must render the needed support to the Council as it
carries out its work in accordance with its mandate, as
defined in resolution 60/251.
As one of the subsidiary organs of the General
Assembly, the Human Rights Council has taken several
steps to improve its functioning and work, in particular
through the adoption of its institution-building package
in its resolutions 5/1 and 5/2. Those resolutions were
endorsed by the General Assembly in resolution
62/219, and should have been reaffirmed in the first
paragraph of today’s resolution.
The establishing resolution and the institutionbuilding package resolution are together part and
parcel of the foundation upon which the Human Rights
Council depends and operates. The lack of reference to
resolution 62/219 in the operative part of resolution
65/281 should not be construed as diminishing its
importance to the efficient functioning of the Human
Rights Council.
Regarding the annual report of the Human Rights
Council, Egypt reaffirms that the Council, as a
subsidiary organ, should not be accorded any
preferential treatment as compared with any other
subsidiary organ of the General Assembly, and that, in
accordance with the rules of procedure, the Council’s
annual report shall be dealt with in the Third

11-37747

A/65/PV.100

Committee — the Main Committee of the General
Assembly in charge of all human rights issues.
Egypt’s understanding of paragraphs 8 and 9 of
resolution 65/281 is that the financial implications
arising from all resolutions and decisions of the
Council, including any unforeseen expenses, are to be
considered by the Fifth Committee, in accordance with
the rules of procedure and taking into account General
Assembly resolution 63/263.
Finally, Egypt reiterates its position that the
report of the Human Rights Council entitled “Outcome
of the review of the work and functioning of the
Human Rights Council” (resolution 65/281, annex)
should have been endorsed by the General Assembly.
The adoption of that important document, as stipulated
in paragraph 10 of resolution 65/281, sends a weaker
signal of support and appreciation for the work done by
our delegations in Geneva. It wrongly indicates that the
General Assembly is not fully supportive of the
Council, particularly in view of the fact that the
resolution was adopted by a vote, which thereby
entrenched that erroneous assumption.
Mr. Rodríguez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Permanent
Representatives of Liechtenstein and Morocco for their
leadership, tireless work and dedication in
co-facilitating the important review process that
culminated in the adoption of resolution 65/281. Peru
associates itself with the statement to be delivered by
the Permanent Representative of the Maldives on
behalf of the cross-regional group, of which it is a
member.
Peru’s vote in favour of the resolution reflects the
importance my country attaches to the review process,
the objective of which is to improve the functioning of
the Human Rights Council in its key role as a major
body of the United Nations responsible for promoting
respect for and protection of the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of all people.
My delegation’s participation in and dedication to
the review process is also emblematic of Peru’s
ongoing commitment to working constructively and
always towards building consensus within the
Organization. Nevertheless, I must point out that Peru
would have preferred that the resolution adopted today
contain elements that would enhance the Council’s
central role in promoting and protecting human rights.
In that regard, we hope that the provisions of

11-37747

paragraph 9 will ensure sufficient funding for the
Council, in particular for unforeseen and extraordinary
circumstances arising from any urgent decisions and
resolutions it may adopt.
In regard to paragraph 6, we believe that the
interactive dialogue between the President of the
Human Rights Council and experts of the Third
Committee will serve to bolster the relationship
between the two entities. At the same time, however,
we should affirm that the Human Rights Council is a
subsidiary body of the General Assembly, as expressly
stated in paragraph 3 of the resolution we have just
adopted.
Peru will continue to support any process aimed
at enhancing the work and functioning of the Human
Rights Council in its important work of defending the
human rights for all without distinction.
Mr. Ja′afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I am honoured to speak today on behalf of the
members of the Group of Arab States.
At the outset, and on behalf of the Arab Group, I
am pleased to extend our warmest thanks to the two cofacilitators, Ambassador Mohammed Loulichki of
Morocco and Ambassador Christian Wenaweser of
Liechtenstein, for their strenuous efforts over the
course of the past few months in facilitating the
negotiations, as well as for their ongoing attempts until
today to create common ground on which we could
form consensus. These efforts were crowned by the
adoption of the text before us today.
In this connection, the Arab Group welcomes the
adoption of resolution 65/281, entitled “Review of the
Human Rights Council”. The Group emphasizes its full
support for the functioning of the Council. Time and
again, the Group has expressed its resolve to cooperate
fruitfully and constructively with the Council to
facilitate its addressing of human rights issues without
distinction, independent of any political agenda and
unaffected by selectivity or confrontation.
If all of us agree on the interdependence of
human rights, by the same token we must all ensure
that the international community deals with human
rights issues comprehensively, fairly, equally and
without distinction, and independent of politicization
and double standards.
The Arab Group voted in favour of the resolution
based on its full belief in the fundamental importance

9

A/65/PV.100

of the review of the Human Rights Council, in
accordance with our mandate to review its status and
improve its working methods. Since the start of the
review process, the Arab Group has been involved
transparently and constructively in the negotiations and
expressed its full and serious support for a consensual
final document. It is our deep conviction that today’s
work is another step towards improving the Council’s
work.
The Arab Group has always valued consensus as
part of the process, as it is important to all of us. That
requires all parties to make equal concessions and
avoid controversial issues that could create useless
confrontation among members. In that regard, the
Group regrets the break in the consensus by the same
members that voted against the Council’s establishment
more than five years ago in Geneva, despite the
numerous concessions made by the Arab and other
groups which enabled us to achieve a text that meets
our minimum expectations. However, we regret that
the resolution does not incorporate numerous
fundamental concerns.
The Arab Group endorsed and supported the
outcome document of the review of the work and
functioning of the Human Right Council, which was
adopted by consensus in Geneva. In view of the fact
that paragraph 10 of the resolution does not explicitly
contain the word “endorse”, the Arab Group considers
that it does not convey the positive message needed by
the Council or reflect the General Assembly’s
appreciation of the efforts made by the President of the
Council and its two co-facilitators in Geneva.
The outcome document reflects the successful
implementation of the mechanism agreed in paragraph
16 of resolution 60/251 to “review its work and
functioning five years after its establishment and report
to the General Assembly”. This in no way implies an
adverse effect on the Council’s institutional structure.
The main objective was to review the Council’s
performance and functioning with a view to improving
its work. But that does not include reform, because,
like other members of the international community, we
believe that the Human Rights Council in itself
represents a reformed Commission on Human Rights.
In addition, the concerns of the Arab Group
remain the same regarding the need for Member States
to adopt or endorse the recommendations, decisions
and resolutions of the Human Rights Council

10

unanimously, while avoiding politicization of the work
of the Council, as well as those of the Third
Committee, which is the main body tasked by the
General
Assembly
to
consider
and
make
recommendations on all matters relating to human
rights.
In conclusion, the Arab Group firmly believes in
the importance of the resolution adopted by the
Assembly today. We are confident that the text will
contribute to the effective functioning of the Human
Rights Council and to the sustainable promotion of the
noble objectives for which it was created and the
entrenched principles of impartiality, objectivity and
mutual respect. Those members that voted against the
resolution are to be held responsible for their
individual deviation from the consensus of the
international unanimity.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let me
join others in expressing my appreciation to the two
co-facilitators, the Ambassadors of Morocco and
Liechtenstein, for their strenuous efforts to build
consensus among various positions and trends during
the review process in a transparent, balanced and allinclusive manner. In my view, today’s outcome is the
result of full dedication, which would not have been
possible without the professionalism and diplomatic
skills of the two co-facilitators. We all should respect
their collective work and wisdom in this regard.
My delegation would also like to align itself with
the statements of the cross-regional group and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, which will be
delivered later on in this regard.
My delegation voted in favour of resolution
65/281, entitled “Review of the Human Rights
Council”, although it does not reflect all of our
priorities and concerns. For the sake of consensus, we
supported the resolution because we believe that the
Human Rights Council, its work and procedures should
be a forum for dialogue, understanding and cooperation
to achieve the universal realization of human rights.
The Human Rights Council is the focal point for
hope and participation on which all can rely in
addressing global human rights challenges. In this
regard, the principles of non-selectivity, nonpoliticization, the absence of double standards,
impartiality and objectivity should be respected by all.
We also regret that a few countries tried to disrupt the
integrity and objectivity of the resolution.

11-37747

A/65/PV.100

Ms. Li Xiaomei (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation supports the statement to be made
by the Russian representative on behalf of the crossregional group.

Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): Since
I am speaking on behalf of Iceland, New Zealand and
Norway as well as my own delegation, I will speak in
English.

China maintains the view that the United Nations
should make parallel efforts to strengthen and promote
human rights and to encourage countries to choose
their own paths in the promotion and protection of
human rights in light of their relevant national
conditions. The Chinese Government has always
championed international cooperation in the field of
human rights and has supported the settlement of
human rights disputes through dialogue and
cooperation based on equality and mutual respect. We
oppose politicizing human rights issues or exercising a
double standard.

(spoke in English)

The Human Rights Council was established in
order to improve United Nations mechanisms for
protecting human rights and to eliminate the chronic
politicization and double standards of the Council’s
predecessor, the Human Rights Commission. Since the
Council’s establishment, five years ago, it has
generally operated smoothly and played a positive role
in promoting and protecting human rights. China is of
the view that the Council’s current status, composition
and institutional arrangements can meet the
requirements of its mandate. The most urgently needed
improvement continues to be the elimination of
politicization and a double standard.
It is regrettable that the resolution on the
Council’s review (resolution 65/281) fails to reflect the
consensus on this issue expressed by many developing
countries, including China. Nevertheless, China
believes that the resolution does to some extent reflect
the consensus and demonstrates the political wisdom of
all parties. China supports its adoption by the
Assembly. We would like to express our appreciation
for the outstanding leadership demonstrated by the
President of the General Assembly and the two
coordinators, namely, the Permanent Representatives
of Morocco and Liechtenstein.
China views the completion of the Human Rights
Council review as an opportunity to work together with
all parties to push for the Council to adhere to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and to perform its duties in an objective,
impartial and non-selective manner in order to
contribute to international human rights endeavours.

11-37747

Iceland, New Zealand, Norway and Switzerland
would like to thank the co-facilitators, the Permanent
Representatives of Liechtenstein and Morocco, as well
as their staff, for their dedicated efforts to achieve
consensus. While that eluded us, we recognize that the
review process as a whole, in both the Geneva and
New York tracks, has achieved some improvements in
the work and functioning of the Council. The Geneva
outcomes include improvements to the universal
periodic review process and aligning the Council’s
cycle with the calendar year, as well as ensuring
improved access to Council meetings for people with
disabilities. We also welcome the fact that the principle
of a future review of the Council’s status has been
agreed.
In spite of these positive achievements, we are
disappointed that our modest ambitions for the review
did not translate into more tangible improvements.
Iceland, New Zealand, Norway and Switzerland have
consistently advocated that recommendations by the
Council to the General Assembly should be considered
individually and on their merits. We are disappointed
that such a clarification of the current ad hoc
arrangements could not be included in the text of
resolution 65/281. We should strive to make the work
of the Council and its parent body, the Assembly, as
transparent and accountable as possible. By adopting
the Council’s recommendations collectively, we fail to
make clear which ones we support, which we oppose
and why we hold those positions. For that reason, we
have been forced in the past to abstain on reports from
the Human Rights Council, despite strong support for
its work.
We are also disappointed that the Assembly was
unable to agree on a long-term funding mechanism for
unforeseen and extraordinary expenses arising from
urgent decisions taken by the Council. At present,
urgent decisions are sometimes funded by using funds
from the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights that have been allocated for other tasks. This
could potentially undermine the work of the Council
and of the Office of the High Commissioner.

11

A/65/PV.100

While this review has had a modest outcome in
spite of the time and effort invested, we recognize that
the Human Rights Council is increasingly acting in a
timely and decisive manner and is making good
decisions for the promotion and protection of human
rights.
Mr. Gálvez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, Sir, Chile would like to thank you as President of
the General Assembly for implementing the provisions
of resolution 60/251, including the five-year review of
the Human Rights Council. We also wish to commend
the co-facilitators of the review process — namely,
Ambassador
Christian
Wenaweser,
Permanent
Representative of Liechtenstein, and Ambassador
Mohammed Loulichki, Permanent Representative of
Morocco — as well as their respective teams for their
efforts to carry out the process successfully.
Chile associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Maldives on behalf
of the cross-regional group, of which Chile is a
member.
Chile participated actively from the start of the
review process, in the sincere desire to reach
compromise among the general membership in order to
help strengthen the Human Rights Council within the
framework established by resolution 60/251. Although
resolution 65/281 was put to the vote, it is obvious that
there was broad consensus on it.
From the outset, Chile has spoken in favour of
the need to conduct a second review, on the status of
the Human Rights Council. The formula set out in
paragraph 3 of resolution 65/281 is a good
compromise. Chile would like to reiterate its position
that the Council should be a principal organ of the
United Nations and hopes that the time will come when
one of the Organization’s three pillars — human
rights — will be the subject of a principal organ, just as
the other two pillars are.
Chile recognizes the progress reflected in
paragraph 6, namely, that the President of the Council
will present the Council’s annual report. With regard to
paragraph 9, Chile hopes that the recommendations and
options submitted by the Secretary-General, and the
decisions taken by the General Assembly through the
Fifth Committee and the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, will make it
possible to assign and provide appropriate funding on
an urgent basis as necessary to provide for the cost of

12

the resolutions and decisions involved in human rights
crisis situations.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): In 2005,
the international community recognized that there was
a need to improve the way human rights were
addressed by establishing a new body designed to
strengthen the efforts of the United Nations to promote
and protect human rights around the world, which
would replace the previous Commission. Since 2006
the Human Rights Council has been carrying out its
important mandate, and it continues to work and to
broaden its efforts to make a genuine impact on
millions of people’s lives.
Mexico has always understood that the purpose
of the review process was not to renew or modify the
Council’s mandate, but rather to strengthen its
functioning and introduce some changes needed to
harmonize relationships between it and the General
Assembly. Equally significant was the goal of adopting
resolution 65/281 by consensus, given the important
political message it conveyed for the cause of human
rights.
Throughout the review process, Mexico
consistently encouraged proposals and ideas that would
bring all States’ positions closer together. We believe
that the text presented by the President of the Assembly
comes as close as possible to consensus, or the greatest
possible degree of agreement. We also commend the
work done by the Permanent Representatives of
Liechtenstein and Morocco as the co-facilitators of the
review process at Headquarters.
We would have liked some issues to have been
reflected differently, in particular in paragraph 6, so
that the Council’s report would be submitted
exclusively to the plenary of the General Assembly.
However, we understand that progress was made in
that the President of the Council would present the
Council’s report in that very capacity. An interactive
dialogue between the President of the Council and the
Third Committee could certainly help to improve
coordination between the two bodies.
We should not forget that the strengthening of the
Council is an ongoing process that occurs when
delegations find new forms of understanding, when
concrete results on a wide range of issues are achieved
and when a dialogue that respects differences takes
place among all States, but with an unwavering
commitment to promoting and protecting human rights

11-37747

A/65/PV.100

in all regions of the world. We know well that this is
essential in the current international circumstances.
Mexico will continue to work with all States to achieve
that goal.
Mr. Perazza (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay voted in favour of resolution 65/281, entitled
“Review of the Human Rights Council”, as proof of
my country’s support, from the very beginning, for the
important work done by the Council in the promotion
and protection of human rights, one of the three
fundamental pillars of the United Nations system. My
delegation wishes to express its appreciation for the
work of the two co-facilitators in that process.
We participated actively and constructively in the
negotiations, while reaffirming the important work of
the Human Rights Council, proposing alternative
formulas for those points on which there were
differences and adapting our initial positions on areas
of great importance to our country in order to reach a
consensus. Uruguay hoped that the resolution we have
just adopted would have established elements and
proposals that would have even further strengthened
the work of the Human Rights Council within the
multilateral system. In that regard, it seems to us
beneficial to underscore that paragraph 3 envisages the
possibility of carrying out a new review of the
Council’s status in the next 10 years.
During the negotiations, we noted that not all
proposals showed the same degree of flexibility in
seeking compromise formulas. As has been made clear
on many occasions, Uruguay originally advocated the
establishment of the Council as a principal organ
within the structure of United Nations. Uruguay always
maintained that position throughout the negotiations.
Nevertheless, we understood that the conditions to
enhance the status of the Council did not yet exist. We
therefore adapted our initial position and accepted the
present status of the Council as a subsidiary body of
the General Assembly.
My delegation expresses its deep concern about
the fact that no agreement was reached on paragraph 6.
We would have preferred that the report and the
recommendations of the Council be considered
exclusively in the plenary of the General Assembly. We
have set out our reasons for that position on many
occasions. My delegation regrets that instead of having
worked on a compromise formula in the negotiations,

11-37747

we opted for one of the two proposed positions on that
issue.
In our delegation’s view, the current wording of
paragraph 6 changes the original addressee of the
report to be submitted by the Council — the General
Assembly — as provided for in subparagraph 5 (j) of
resolution 60/251. We also understand that the wording
of paragraph 6 of the text institutionalizes a decision of
the General Committee that was never intended to
establish a precedent and that in no way can be
considered a reinterpretation of resolution 60/251.
Finally, having voted in favour of resolution
65/281, my delegation will continue to support the
work of the Human Rights Council in order to
ultimately enhance its importance within the structure
of the Organization.
Mr. Goddard (Barbados): I have the honour to
speak today on behalf of the States members of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
At the outset, CARICOM would like to
acknowledge the efforts of the co-facilitators of the
New York chapter of the review of the Human Rights
Council — the Permanent Representatives of Morocco
and Liechtenstein — for their skilful guidance and
leadership throughout the process.
CARICOM countries, the majority of which are
not represented in Geneva, have welcomed the
opportunity to contribute to the discussions on the
review of the status of the Council in New York. To
that end, we have engaged constructively in the
discussions on that mandated review. We have also
continuously stressed the importance of concluding
that process through the adoption of the outcome by
consensus.
We are aware that resolution 65/281 is the result
of intense negotiations over the course of a few
months. Nevertheless, we would like to underscore the
importance of broad, open and transparent negotiations
to allow for a full discussion among Member States, as
is customary in multilateral processes.
As has been expressed by other speakers,
CARICOM had an interest in other elements that have
unfortunately not been reflected in the text that has
been adopted today. Notwithstanding that position, in
the interests of flexibility and compromise CARICOM
accepted the text provided by the President in
document A/65/L.78*.

13

A/65/PV.100

Although CARICOM is of the view that the
recently established Council has executed its mandate
relatively well as a subsidiary organ and that any future
exercise of the review should focus on the remaining
challenges for the Council to optimize its functioning,
we agreed to lend our support to the idea of a future
review on whether to maintain the status, to be held at
an appropriate moment but no sooner than 10 years and
no later than 15 years from the adoption of resolution
65/281.
Furthermore, CARICOM is pleased to note that,
with the adoption of this resolution, the General
Assembly would institutionalize the ad hoc
arrangements that have been in place since the
establishment of the Council relating to the allocation
of the agenda item both to the plenary of the General
Assembly and to the Third Committee. The additional
interactive dialogue with the President of the Council
in the Third Committee will provide an opportunity to
all Member States, in particular those with limited or
no representation in Geneva, to meaningfully
participate in the debate regarding the work of the
Council.
As the Human Rights Council forges ahead, we
must build on the positive experiences of the past years
and ensure that it continues to execute its mandate,
duly taking into account the principles of universality,
objectivity and non-selectivity in the consideration of
human rights issues, as well as the elimination of
double standards, as enshrined in resolution 60/251,
which established it. CARICOM countries reiterate
their unwavering commitment to the promotion and
protection of all human rights for all. We pledge to
continue to follow the work of the Council to the best
of our abilities.
In conclusion, CARICOM regrets that it was
necessary to adopt resolution 65/281 by a vote.
Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
made shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Maldives on behalf of the cross-regional group of likeminded States.
Costa Rica voted for resolution 65/281 as a sign
of support for the vital work of the Human Rights
Council in the promotion and protection of human
rights and in support of a process of improvements that
should be continuous. Five years since its
establishment, the Council has made progress in using

14

the various tools available to it so as to have a real
impact on the promotion and protection of human
rights in the world.
Together with a broad group of countries, Costa
Rica has been strongly committed to the review
process. We have worked constructively by submitting
various proposals seeking a consensus that would help
improve the work and the effectiveness of the Council
in both Geneva and New York. We thank the
co-facilitators of the New York chapter for their firm
commitment to that process and for the constructive
way in which the negotiations took place with a view
to our coming as close as possible to consensus.
The text we have adopted contains some positive
elements, but the changes that have been introduced
fall far short of bringing about substantial changes in
the Council. In that regard, we still have significant
debts towards the billions of human beings throughout
the world whose rights and dignity are the raison d’être
of the Council.
In the interests of time, I will mention only one
aspiration of my country that is shared with others and
is not reflected in the text. I refer to explicitly
establishing that the Human Rights Council’s report
mentioned in paragraph 6 be presented only to the
plenary of the General Assembly. Such a solution
would have been more in keeping with subparagraph
5 (j) of resolution 60/251, in accordance with which
the Council submits its report to the Assembly, as well
as with the actual text of the rest of paragraph 6 of the
resolution that we adopted today.
Paragraph 6 reiterates the agreement in decision
65/503, in that the Assembly will meet in plenary
meeting to consider the annual report of the Council on
the year’s activities and that the Third Committee will
consider all recommendations of the Human Rights
Council. It would therefore have been most logical and
consistent for the report to be presented only to the
plenary. That would thus have been explicitly
established.
In any case, my delegation believes that there
should be a clear distinction between submitting the
report, its presentation and its review or consideration.
For Costa Rica, the most important thing is that, as a
result of an agreement on this issue, it has been
reiterated that the review or consideration of the report
will take place in the plenary. We hope that all States
will honour that compromise solution, and that we will

11-37747

A/65/PV.100

act accordingly at the next session of the General
Assembly.
Allow me to reiterate to you, Mr. President, and
to all Member States my country’s commitment to an
ongoing dialogue with a view to continuing to seek
mechanisms that would allow the Council to respond
more effectively to the challenges that we face in
promoting and protecting human rights. We are also
committed to working seriously within the Council so
as to cooperate effectively on its tasks.
Mr. Rutilo (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina wishes to express its gratitude to you,
Mr. President, as well as to the co-facilitators for the
review of the Human Rights Council — the Permanent
Representatives of Liechtenstein and Morocco — for
the presentation of resolution 65/281, which we have
just adopted. The co-facilitators led the negotiations in
an inclusive, open and transparent way and in constant
consultation with all States. We participated in that
process with the clear purpose always in mind of
strengthening the most important body in the universal
system for the promotion and protection of human
rights.
My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
reiterate its hope that the Council becomes a principal
organ, in accordance with the fundamental position of
human rights in the United Nations system. We
welcome keeping open the possibility of discussing
this issue in the future.
At the same time, while we would have preferred
that both the Council’s report and its recommendations
be assigned to the plenary, we understand that
reaffirming the agreement of the General Committee
contained in decision 65/503 institutionalizes the
practice by which the former will be considered by the
plenary and the latter by the Third Committee.
Finally, we believe it imperative that the Human
Rights Council has adequate funding in order to meet
unforeseen and extraordinary expenses arising from its
resolutions and decisions, and that such considerations
guide both the proposals of the Secretary-General
requested in paragraph 9 and the discussions of
Member States in corresponding areas.
Mr. Sammis (United States of America): In
Geneva and New York, the United States has
repeatedly urged our fellow members to join us in
conducting a thorough and comprehensive review of

11-37747

the Human Rights Council that would significantly
improve its ability to meet its core mission, namely,
promoting and protecting human rights.
Unfortunately, the Geneva process failed to yield
even minimally positive results, forcing us to
dissociate ourselves from the outcome. We appreciate
the work that the co-facilitators have done in New York
over the past months, but the final resolution 65/281
also fails to address the core problems that still plague
the Human Rights Council. We deeply regret that this
opportunity has been missed. The United States
therefore voted no on the resolution.
In recent weeks, the Council has had many
significant achievements, including a historic
resolution highlighting the human rights abuses faced
by lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons
around the world, a special session on Syria, the
commission of inquiry in Libya and the historic
creation of a Special Rapporteur to investigate human
rights violations in Iran. However, the Council’s
effectiveness and legitimacy will always be
compromised as long as one country in the world is
unfairly and uniquely singled out, while others,
including chronic human rights abusers, escape
scrutiny.
The gravest of the Council’s structural problems
remains its politicized standing agenda item 7, on
Israel. During this review, no Member State has been
able to explain how item 7 is consistent with the
principles clearly outlined in resolution 60/251, which
established the Human Rights Council, namely,
impartiality, non-selectiveness and balance. This
review should have eliminated this unfair and
unbalanced agenda item and instead ensured that all
Member States, including Israel, are treated on an
equal and impartial basis. The review is over, but this
struggle is not. My Government will continue to fight
to remove this item and the biased and unfair
resolutions that flow from it.
This review also failed to tackle another
fundamental issue, namely, Council membership. The
Council discredits, dishonours and diminishes itself
when the worst violators of human rights have a seat at
its table. During the review in New York, the United
States put forward a proposal to ensure that General
Assembly members have real choices in Human Rights
Council elections, by calling on all regional groups,
including our own, to run competitive slates. This was

15

A/65/PV.100

rejected out of hand. We were also dismayed that
another much more modest proposal, which simply
called on candidate States to hold an interactive
dialogue about their human rights records with
Member States and civil society groups, was also
blocked.
These failures to address the critical problem of
membership do a serious disservice to the Council and
to the brave men and women around the world standing
up for their universal rights. Let there be no doubt:
membership on the Human Rights Council should be
earned through respect for human rights, not accorded
to those who abuse them.
When the United States ran for a seat on the
Council in 2009, we made clear that we did so
precisely to strengthen the Council from within,
through direct and sustained engagement. That is what
we have done and that is what we will continue to do.
Sadly, today’s resolution marks a major missed
opportunity for the Council to right historic wrongs.
The resolution we voted on today does nothing to
address the Council’s failures or move it any closer to
the founding values of the United Nations Charter and
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
The United States remains firmly committed to
working to reform the Human Rights Council and
change it for the better. We will continue to work with
fellow Member States, session by session and
resolution by resolution, to advance respect for the
rights we hold dear. But we will not acquiesce in
perpetuating a failed status quo that we all know leaves
this institution performing well below its potential. At
a time when people around the world are risking their
lives for freedom in dramatic numbers and especially
dangerous circumstances, those who share a
commitment to the universal rights of all men and
women can do no less.
At the same time, we hope that one day soon we
will be able to act together to redress the fundamental
flaws of the Council and fulfil its commitment to
promote universal respect for the protection of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
without distinction of any kind and in a fair and equal
manner.
Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Because I will be speaking on behalf of the
cross-regional group, I will deliver my statement in
English.

16

(spoke in English)
In keeping with the constant appeal of the two
co-facilitators — Ambassadors Loulichki of Morocco
and Wenaweser of Liechtenstein — to be focused and
to the point and not to repeat well-known positions, I
will attempt to do just that.
I have the honour to take the floor on behalf of
the cross-regional group of States that consists of
Algeria, Belarus, Bolivia, China, Cuba, Iran,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Syria, Venezuela, Viet Nam,
Yemen and my own country, the Russian Federation.
The cross-regional group is pleased to support
resolution 65/281. We pay tribute to all delegations that
engaged constructively in the negotiation process that
led to the adoption of this important text. Today’s
outcome would not have been possible without the
dedication, professionalism, hard work, diplomatic
skills and tireless efforts of the two co-facilitators.
Given the difficult circumstances of the exercise and
the extremely divergent views and positions of the
various delegations and groups, the task before them
seemed at times to be impossible to accomplish; yet
they succeeded. We are truly grateful to them. Our
words of gratitude equally extend to those who assisted
the co-facilitators, both from their missions and from
the Office of the President of the General Assembly.
From the very beginning the cross-regional group
was committed to reaching a consensus outcome on
this very important issue, and we were confident that
such a result was not only desirable but possible. We
were a responsible negotiating party. At the request of
the co-facilitators, we engaged throughout the process
in consultations with other partners in a serious and
genuine effort aimed at bridging the existing gaps and
consolidating certain key positions.
We are therefore truly satisfied that certain very
important provisions of the text just adopted are based
on the language and approach of the cross-regional
group and our negotiating partners. Unfortunately, not
all of our proposals were reflected in the final text,
although all our suggestions were made in good faith.
As a responsible negotiating party, the group
demonstrated flexibility and readiness to compromise.
Finally, we have always stressed that a potential
consensus outcome was possible only if the text
reflected proposals of a non-confrontational nature to
which no significant group objected.

11-37747

A/65/PV.100

Given the comments by certain delegations
criticizing the resolution just adopted, and specifically
referring to elements not included in the text, the crossregional group would like to state the following.
Our group, like others, would have preferred to
have certain ideas reflected in the documents submitted
by the co-facilitators. In the end, in the spirit of
compromise, we made the decision not to insist on
them, although all of them were based on the mandate
of the review as outlined in resolution 60/251. That is
not true, however, of proposals by some delegations
and groups on the so-called membership issues. The
same goes for ideas on “operationalizing” the
provisions of resolution 60/251 dealing with the
presentation of voluntary pledges and commitments.
The importance of the resolution just adopted can
hardly be overestimated. We believe that it will
undoubtedly contribute to the effective functioning of
the Human Rights Council and the entire United
Nations human rights machinery. We are equally
confident that the text will serve the aim of
strengthening the purpose of the Council as a forum for
maintaining a constructive dialogue among States and
other interested parties based on mutual respect,
objectivity and impartiality. Human rights should be a
unifying factor in international relations, and not
something that is used to fuel confrontation and satisfy
political considerations.
Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Group of African
States.
Despite the strong contentions continually voiced
about some substantive issues, the African Group voted
in favour of resolution 65/281, on the review of the
Human Rights Council. We did so to demonstrate our
commitment to that important subsidiary body of the
General Assembly. By voting in favour, we also wanted
to reiterate our strong support for the work of the
Council in implementing its mandate as set out in
resolution 60/251. Nonetheless, we cannot but deplore
the lack of consensus about the text we have just
adopted. We also regret that no reference was made to
resolution 62/219, which approved the institutional
measures of the Council.
Since we have just decided that the Council must
maintain its status as a subsidiary body, our Group
believes, first, that the Council, like the other
subsidiary bodies of the General Assembly, should

11-37747

present its report to the appropriate Main Committee.
In that regard, the annual report of the Council should
be taken up by the Third Committee.
Secondly, all of the financial implications
stemming from the decisions and resolutions of the
Council, including unforeseen expenses, should be
examined by the Fifth Committee, in keeping with the
relevant rules of procedure.
Finally, the annual report of the President of the
Human Rights Council should also cover the
September session. We believe that the decision to
align the mandates of the members, as well as the
timing of reports in the next year, could significantly
contribute to strengthening the effectiveness of the
Council’s work. Despite the omission of some of our
priorities, including several proposals made by the
African Group in Geneva during the discussion on the
document, we would like to reaffirm our endorsement
of the work of the Geneva group on the document
entitled, “Outcome of the review of the work and
functioning of the Human Rights Council”.
In conclusion, I would like to sincerely thank and
congratulate the co-facilitators of the review process,
namely, Ambassador Mohammed Loulichki of
Morocco and Ambassador Christian Wenaweser of
Liechtenstein. Their efforts significantly contributed to
the drafting of the text that we have just adopted.
Mr. Morrill (Canada): Canada believes that
resolution 65/281 does not adequately address issues
that we believe are truly important to improving the
work and functioning of the Human Rights Council. In
particular, the current resolution and the Geneva
outcome that it incorporates do nothing to improve
upon the Council’s ability to address urgent situations,
universal periodic review implementation by Member
States or cooperation of States with special procedures.
Nor does it take any steps towards improving the
Council’s membership. Throughout the New York
portion of the review, Canada clearly stated that any
review of the Council’s status must include a reflection
on those elements relevant to the Council’s status at the
time of its establishment, including its composition and
criteria for membership.
Because membership on the Council remains
limited, it is all the more important that those who
serve on the Council live up to the criteria set out in
resolution 60/251. That is why, throughout this review
process, Canada advocated for the inclusion of

17

A/65/PV.100

measures intended to better illustrate the efforts of
candidates to meet the membership criteria set out in
resolution 60/251, namely, the contribution of
candidates to the promotion and protection of human
rights and their voluntary pledges and commitments
made thereto as well as the need for Council members
to uphold the highest standards in the promotion and
protection of human rights and to fully cooperate with
the Council.
Canada is disappointed that despite cross-regional
support from a number of countries, the resolution
contains no reference to the holding of an interactive
dialogue among candidates and Member States and
civil society, the inclusion of measurable commitments
such as clear responses to special procedure requests to
visit, or follow-up reports by candidates on the
implementation of their pledges and commitments.
As for the results of this review process more
generally, Canada once more raises its concern for the
Council’s disproportionate focus on the situation in the
Middle East. We had hoped that this review would
result in the elimination of item 7 from the Council’s
agenda; but sadly, that did not happen.
As we stated during our intervention in Geneva at
the Open-ended Intergovernmental Working Group,
Canada believes that agenda item 7 undermines the
Human Rights Council’s goal of ensuring universality,
objectivity and non-selectivity in the consideration of
human rights issues, and the elimination of doublestandards and politicization. Canada has concerns
about the increasingly unbalanced language found in
resolutions actioned under agenda item 7. In particular,
some of the language in those resolutions continues to
be divisive, at a time when the goal should be to bring
the parties back to negotiations. Canada will continue
to encourage the Assembly to focus its attention on
assisting the parties in their efforts towards a
comprehensive, negotiated two-State solution to the
Israel-Palestine conflict, rather than contribute to their
further polarization.
For all of those reasons, Canada voted no on the
resolution.
Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): I take the floor on
behalf of the cross-regional group of 16 countries
composed of Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Chile,
Croatia, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Iceland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Maldives, Mexico,

18

Montenegro, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Serbia and
Switzerland.
Let me begin by first thanking the Permanent
Representatives of Morocco and Liechtenstein for their
concerted efforts to encourage consensus amid the
myriad concerns and views put forward during the
review. Our group came together in an effort to
reconcile the different views; we regret that our efforts
did not result in a widely supported solution.
The countries represented in our group all voted
in favour of resolution 65/281. However, we are
disappointed that we could not achieve consensus on
addressing the underrepresentation of small and
developing States on the Council through an inclusive
and equitable platform for candidate presentations of
their voluntary pledges and commitments to the
promotion and protection of human rights. Our priority
to constructively contribute to the consensus-building
effort continues to guide our actions, including our
decision to join the wider membership today in support
of the resolution.
The Human Rights Council plays a central role in
the promotion and protection of human rights. We will
continue to actively support the work of the Council.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Australia would like to
again thank the President of the Human Rights Council
for his own unwavering commitment to the Council’s
review and for his guidance through what was a very
difficult process. We also again thank the review
co-facilitators, Ambassadors Loulichki and Wenaweser,
for their indefatigable efforts and the contributions
they personally made throughout the process.
Australia voted to support resolution 65/281.
From the outset, we welcomed the review process and
we joined others in seeking genuine improvements to
enable the Council to better carry out its substantial
mandate. The Council should, of course, be one of the
most translucent pillars of the United Nations system.
But we have been disappointed by the inability of the
review working group to overcome the divisions
among Member States on certain issues.
The outcome’s document does not really do
justice to the many hundreds of good suggestions for
positive change, nor to the time and effort that
members of the review working group put into the
review process. We are also disappointed by the
retention of item 7 on the Council’s standing agenda.

11-37747

A/65/PV.100

There are other important issues that we would
have liked to have seen addressed, such as resolving to
use all of the tools at the Council’s disposal to address
the most serious, urgent or emerging situations of
human rights violations, wherever they occur;
increasing the participation of national human rights
institutions and non-governmental organizations across
the Council’s work programme, including the universal
periodic review process and by better using their
expertise in panel discussions, briefing sessions and
interactive dialogues; and holding members of the
Council to the highest standards of human rights
promotion and protection, including by ensuring their
full cooperation with the Council’s special procedures.
The document does not respond to these calls, and we
think that this is a missed opportunity to make real
improvements to the Council.
Notwithstanding those misgivings, Australia of
course remains a very strong supporter of the Human
Rights Council. For that reason, we decided to vote in
favour of the resolution.
Mr. Ruiz (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia attaches great importance to the Human
Rights Council in its capacity as the highest body for
defending and protecting human rights within the
United Nations system. Colombia greatly values the
progress made by the Council during the first stage of
its functioning, including the implementation of the
universal periodic review.

obligations in this area in the framework of an open
and respectful dialogue on all human rights issues.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): My delegation would like
to thank the two co-facilitators, the Permanent
Representatives of Morocco and Liechtenstein, for
their steadfast and indomitable efforts in guiding the
review process of the Human Rights Council in order
to reach a consensual resolution if at all possible. The
General Assembly has today adopted resolution
65/281, although not by consensus. My delegation
nevertheless believes that this would not have been
possible without their invaluable contributions.
The Japanese Government has made great efforts
to strengthen the work and the functioning of the
Human Rights Council since its establishment, in 2006.
For this reason, we place particular importance on this
review of the Council in the General Assembly and
have participated actively in the negotiations. As a
result of difficult negotiations, an outcome was reached
that contained a few improvements to the Council,
although not all we had hoped for. It was from this
viewpoint that my delegation voted in favour of the
resolution.

Colombia regrets that, despite the dedication and
determination of the co-facilitators, we have put in
question the status of the Human Rights Council as a
subsidiary organ to the General Assembly by
establishing a rule, in accordance with the status quo,
that the Council must also report to the Third
Committee. Resolution 65/281, which has just been
adopted, also contains a clear contradiction between
what it established in paragraph 3 and what is agreed in
paragraph 6.

Through the active participation of its
membership since its establishment, the Council has
accumulated various practices to enhance its
effectiveness. We expected that the Council would
undergo a review based on those experiences and that,
at such a time, we could agree to concrete and practical
measures, including the improvement of the election
process, with the ultimate goal of strengthening the
implementation of resolution 60/251, which established
the Council. However, we are disappointed that we
could not agree to such an outcome. For example,
although Japan expected a substantial review to be
conducted again some time in the near future, we find
it regrettable that the wording of the resolution
adopted, which provides for a future review, is
ambiguous.

Nevertheless, Colombia supported the adoption
of resolution 65/281 and voted in favour of it. We did
so because we believe that the new phase that is
beginning thanks to the Human Rights Council review
process and the upcoming cycle of the universal
periodic review present a valuable opportunity to put
greater emphasis on cooperation and technical
assistance, so as to recognize the progress achieved by
all countries in implementing their international

On the other hand, some of the problems that the
Council has faced since its establishment were
addressed by this review process in New York. For
example, an appropriate way to align the Council’s
work with its membership and the reporting cycle was
agreed to. With regard to the financial issue, the
resolution requests the Secretary-General to present a
report with options for the Fifth Committee to consider
ways to implement urgent mandates decided by the

11-37747

19

A/65/PV.100

Council. For our part, Japan will contribute to the
discussion in the Fifth Committee by trying to find a
flexible way to overcome the current difficulties while
respecting the existing budget framework.
The Human Rights Council was established in
order to strengthen the linkages between peace and
security, development and human rights as the three
pillars of the United Nations and to achieve the
mainstreaming of human rights, that is, to integrate a
human rights perspective into all the activities of the
United Nations. We believe now, as we believed then,
that it strengthens all the functions of the United
Nations as a whole. We must not forget this original
aspiration of the Council, as it was expressed here in
New York at its establishment.
In the future, it should be possible to review
again the work and functioning of the Council in order
to achieve that goal. If the Member States agree,
therefore, we hope that the Council itself will continue
to review its own work, and that the General Assembly
would review it as well in the near future.
Mr. Noziri (Tajikistan): I take the floor on behalf
of the member States of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference (OIC), in Tajikistan’s capacity as Chair of
the OIC Group, in explanation of vote after the voting
on resolution 65/281, entitled “Review of the Human
Rights Council”.
At the outset, I would like to express our sincere
appreciation to the Permanent Representative of
Morocco and the Permanent Representative of
Liechtenstein for their enormous efforts to build
consensus among the different positions during the
review process in their capacity as co-facilitators of the
review of the status of the Human Rights Council in
New York. I would also like to express our sincere
appreciation to all our partners in the various groups
for their cooperative and constructive approach.
The OIC member States voted in favour of the
resolution despite their disappointment that it does not
reflect all of the Group’s priorities and concerns. The
OIC Group has tried hard to reach consensus on the
outcome document of the Human Rights Council
review by engaging constructively and positively in the
review process and showing a lot of flexibility and
compromise.
The Group is disappointed that the same
constructive approach was not displayed by some other

20

members, forcing a vote on a text that could have been
adopted without one. We regret that, despite the
compromises made by all members on the resolution,
consensus was not achieved and we had to vote on the
resolution.
The OIC Group supported the resolution to
reaffirm its commitment to the work of the Human
Rights Council as one of the subsidiary bodies of the
General Assembly and to reiterate its support to the
efforts of the Council in carrying out its mandate,
contained in resolution 60/251.
The OIC Group supported the resolution despite
the fact that it falls short of reaffirming important
principles pertaining to the status of the Council as a
subsidiary body of the General Assembly. The
resolution has ignored the Council’s efforts to improve
its functioning and work by omitting references to
resolution 62/219, which endorses the institutionbuilding package of the Council. The systematic
omission of references to such an important resolution
in the operative part of this document only serves the
attempts to institutionalize the Council as a principal
organ without taking the necessary de jure steps to
legally establish such a status.
As the General Assembly has decided to maintain
the status of the Council as one of its subsidiary
organs, the Group reaffirms the following positions and
understandings.
In practice, the Council is not to be accorded
preferential treatment as compared with all other
subsidiary organs of the General Assembly, which
present their reports to the concerned Main Committee.
The Council’s annual report shall therefore be
considered by the Third Committee, as the main
technical body of the General Assembly mandated to
consider all human rights issues.
All financial implications emanating from all
resolutions and decisions of the Council, including any
unforeseen expenses, will be considered by the Fifth
Committee in accordance with the rules of procedure.
The possible alternatives for providing for such
expenses will take into account the endorsed
recommendations and conclusions of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, in particular the provision for such expenses
in the regular budget.

11-37747

A/65/PV.100

The Group considers that the current
arrangements for the alignment of the membership and
reporting cycles do not provide for an effective way of
dealing with the reporting problem, and that the
President of the Human Rights Council, in accordance
with such arrangements, will be presenting a report that
may not account for all activities of the Council during
his or her presidency.
Finally, the Group reiterates that it has supported
the adoption of the report of the Council on the review
of its functioning and work, as contained in the
document entitled “Outcome of the review and
functioning of the Human Rights Council”, despite the
fact that it does not reflect the main priorities for the
member States of the Group, including on the
relationship between the Council and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and special mechanisms and procedures, among other
things.
Despite the considerations I have mentioned, the
member States of the Group voted in favour of the
resolution in order to ensure that the General Assembly
sends a constructive message of encouragement and
recognition to the Council.
Mr. Butt (Pakistan): Pakistan aligns itself with
the statement just delivered by the representative of
Tajikistan on behalf of the members of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference Group, as well
as with the statement delivered earlier by the
representative of Maldives on behalf of the crossregional group.
We welcome the adoption of the important
resolution 65/281, which reaffirms the confidence of
the wider United Nations membership in the mandate,
work and functioning of the Human Rights Council.
We believe that the Council’s ongoing work of
promoting and protecting all human rights for all in an
impartial, objective and non-selective manner will be
strengthened by the adoption of this resolution.
Today’s resolution expresses the collective desire
of virtually the entire membership that the Human
Rights Council, being an important body dealing with
human rights issues, should have the status of a
subsidiary body of the General Assembly.
We have also fixed some technical issues
pertaining to the Council — such as reporting, the
membership cycle and financial aspects — that will

11-37747

help to enhance the Council’s work and functioning.
Most important, we have been able to extend almost
universal support and adopt the outcome of the Geneva
chapter of the review, which demonstrates the
satisfaction of the membership with the Council’s
agenda, work and performance.
We regret the call for a vote on this balanced and
important text, which was made purely on political
grounds. Nevertheless, we also hope that this political
bickering will be put to rest today and that all of us
will be able to work collectively to implement what we
have agreed to as a whole.
Much has been said about the contents of the text
that has been adopted. We acknowledge and respect the
diversity of views, which is a reality. But we also agree
on certain universal fundamentals. Pakistan therefore
believes that everyone in the Hall stands to gain from
the text that we have adopted today.
In our view, the co-facilitators have done a
wonderful job in presenting a text that broadly reflects
the views of the overwhelming majority of the United
Nations membership. We would like to recognize and
put on record our appreciation for their tireless efforts
and outstanding work in guiding the review process
and producing a balanced and strong text on the review
of the status of the Human Rights Council.
Lastly, Pakistan would also like to recognize the
constructive spirit that prevailed throughout the
negotiations on the resolution. We extend our
appreciation to all Member States that, despite their
strong positions on various aspects of the review, were
willing to make compromises with the sole aim of
sending a unified and strong message of support for the
work and mandate of the Council. Pakistan is proud to
be a part of that process and will continue to do its best
to further this spirit of compromise and the decent
exchange of views in other areas of our work in this
body.
Mr. De Séllos (Brazil): Brazil voted in full
support of resolution 65/281, which was submitted by
you, Sir, and wishes to commend the remarkable work
of the co-facilitators. With this vote, Brazil wants to
express its full and constant support for the work of the
Human Rights Council. Although Brazil is aware of
certain limitations in the resolution adopted today, it is
convinced that it was the best possible outcome of a
process conducted in all good faith.

21

A/65/PV.100

Mr. Ri Tong Il (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea): Let me also join others in expressing
appreciation to the Permanent Representatives of
Morocco and Liechtenstein as co-facilitators. Although
it was, unfortunately, not adopted unanimously, today’s
text is the result of the hard work of the co-facilitators
and the participants. While there were different views,
compromises were made and there was a possibility of
narrowing the differences.
Concerning the position of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, we voted in favour. But
that does not mean that we are happy with the way that
the Human Rights Council is working. Five years ago,
a new Council appeared in response to demands for
improvement. The old and defunct Commission on
Human Rights was full of flaws concerning selectivity,
politicization, double standards and discrimination. A
new mechanism was indeed established five years ago,
but the problems persist.
A few countries are being singled out, targeted
and attacked. Looking at the nature of the situation,
one could say that it reflects the political purposes of a
few different countries. Their handling of their own
issues shows that they have the worst human rights
records themselves. So there is no justification at all
for this.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea once
again reiterates its position that, in the future, we
should try to continue to improve the Human Rights
Council.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for the trust you have placed
in me. It has been a pleasure to work with you and your
excellent team. Most important, I would like to thank
my colleague and friend Ambassador Loulichki of
Morocco for his excellent cooperation in this complex
and intense exercise. We have both benefited from the
outstanding coordination of our work with our
colleagues in Geneva, under the able leadership of the
President of the Human Rights Council, Ambassador
Sihasak Phuangketkeow of Thailand.
As co-facilitators, we have worked in good faith
and in a transparent and inclusive manner to reconcile
the diverging views of Member States on the different
aspects of the review. Even if the views of Member
States seemed far apart for a long time, we have always
been able to count on their constructive and active
engagement in our discussions. That is indeed an

22

indispensable prerequisite for successful multilateral
work.
We defined consensus as one of our main goals in
carrying out our mandate. We consistently made it
clear that we were working on the understanding that
consensus should be the aim of the review exercise, as
that would send the important signal that the Human
Rights Council as an institution has the backing of the
membership notwithstanding all the substantive
differences of opinion on human rights issues. Until
very late in our negotiations, we were confident that
such consensus was within reach. It is therefore
disappointing to us that this was not possible in the
end, in particular as it was not the result of
disagreement on the text that we negotiated here in
New York but rather with the outcome adopted quite
some time ago in Geneva. Of course, we would have
expected such disagreement to be voiced at the
appropriate time and place.
We are grateful that States were able to rally
behind your text, Mr. President, which, under the
circumstances, enjoys the broadest possible political
support.
From a more personal perspective, I believe that
there is a positive note to the fact that the outcome we
have just adopted is a modest one. At least one element
of the explanation of the limited scope of this review is
that the Council is perceived as becoming better at
doing its work. But there is also another side, which
has prevented us from making more meaningful
changes in the framework of this review, namely, there
is a high degree of discomfort in making any changes
even of a practical and pragmatic nature and even
where they are clearly warranted.
This review was the appropriate opportunity to
make a decision on the funding of unforeseen costs
arising from special sessions — a decision that we
hope the General Assembly can adopt in the fall — and
to institutionalize, once and for all, all and not just
most aspects of the ways in which the Assembly and
the Third Committee consider the report of the
Council. Even in these modest goals, we were only
partially successful.
Finally, I believe that the membership would
benefit from a different way of dealing with
candidatures, indeed not just for the Human Rights
Council but for other bodies such as the Security

11-37747

A/65/PV.100

Council and some of the highest offices within the
United Nations system.
We did not decide anything within the framework
of this review, but perhaps this exercise has planted the
seeds of discussions which can continue, ideally in a
broader and more channelled context.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
express my gratitude to all the delegations that have
expressed their appreciation for our work as
co-facilitators.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Adopted by near unanimity, resolution 65/281, entitled
“Review of the Human Rights Council”, is the result of
two processes, launched successively in Geneva and
New York and completed thanks to sustained efforts on
the part of many to ensure that the two chapters were
effective and mutually reinforcing. The success of this
coordination owes a great deal to the perseverance of
Ambassador Sihasak Phuangketkeow, President of the
Human Rights Council, who made a personal
commitment to creating the best conditions for
harmonious and effective interactions between Geneva
and New York.
On behalf of Ambassador Christian Wenaweser as
well as on my own behalf, I wish to express our
gratitude to you, Mr. President, for the confidence you
placed in us, for your encouragement and for your
decisive action, up to the very last moment before the
convening of this meeting, in order to secure the best
possible result and establish the best possible
conditions for the adoption of this resolution.
We thank all the delegations that participated in
our joint efforts for their commitment, flexibility and
sense of responsibility, which made possible the
progressive modification and finalization of the
successive compromises comprising this resolution.
Finally, I would like to express our gratitude to
the
High
Commissioner
and
Deputy
High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their availability
and their prompt responses to our questions on the
technical and organizational aspects of the Council, as
well as for their continued invaluable service to ensure
the smooth running of the Council.
The process of negotiating this resolution was
carried out in such a way as to give an opportunity to
all delegations and groups that so wished to participate,
negotiate and influence the final result. The

11-37747

co-facilitators worked in good faith, through informal
meetings and numerous bilateral exchanges, to take
into account everything that was said. The
co-facilitators were not able to take into consideration
what was not said.
The process was transparent, inclusive and fair to
all. It should have led to a consensus result. Consensus
was reached and accepted by all of us. It was necessary
for the outcome to be consensual, given the importance
that we all openly attach to the Human Rights Council
and its effectiveness. The momentum towards that goal
was unfortunately halted at the last minute. We regret
this and we express our frustration at this opposition.
Let us make no mistake: the text of the resolution
we have adopted has neither the ambition nor the
pretension to resolve the contentious issues postponed
at the establishment of the Human Rights Council. Its
objective is not to reform the Council, but simply to
submit five years of this body’s functioning to review,
with a view to adopting practical measures aimed at
improving its functioning and working methods.
Moreover, making such improvements is a work in
progress, enriched every day by the best practices of
the Council and the sincere resolve of all the members
of the Council to work together as partners to protect
and promote human rights the world over.
We must recognize that the Council is already
showing, through its regular and special sessions and
its evaluation mechanisms, that a new culture for the
protection of human rights is slowly but surely being
established — a culture of cooperation, not confrontation,
and accountability, not antagonism.
Human rights are universal. We are all
stakeholders in the Human Rights Council, despite its
limited composition. It is therefore up to us to embrace
the resolution just adopted during its implementation
phase so as to make the most out of it and use it as an
instrument to build on the achievements of the Council
and continuously improve its effectiveness and its
impact on the ground.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.
I now give the floor to the observer of the
European Union, who will make a statement after the
adoption of resolution 65/281.
Mr. Serrano (European Union): I speak on
behalf of the member States of the European Union.

23

A/65/PV.100

The review of the Human Rights Council,
decided when the Council itself was established, was
meant to provide an opportunity for assessing the
performance and results of the Council. Today’s
adoption of the outcome of the review processes,
conducted in both Geneva and New York, marks the
end of the Council’s founding stage.
The European Union would like to express
disappointment over the outcome. Almost two years of
hard work in Geneva and New York have produced
little beyond the confirmation of the Council’s existing
regulatory framework.
On 24 February in Geneva, the European Union
expressed its position regarding the meagre outcome of
the review of the Council’s work and functioning. We
missed an opportunity to increase the Council’s
capacity to have an impact on the ground and deal with
situations of concern and emergency situations. None
of the results produced in areas such as the Council’s
calendar, the system of special procedures or the
universal period review represent a meaningful
increase in the Council’s capacity to take practical
action to promote and uphold human rights in a way
that has an impact on the ground or enables it to
respond more effectively to urgent situations. We also
regret that no efforts were made to consider removing
agenda item 7 of the Council which, in a
discriminatory manner, singles out one particular
country situation as a separate standing item.
Throughout the negotiations conducted in New
York, the European Union promoted a more effective
implementation of certain key provisions of the
Council’s founding resolution 60/251. In particular, we
wanted to ensure that Council members fulfil the
requirement to uphold the highest standards in the
promotion and protection of human rights, both as a
condition for election and in the course of their
membership. We also regret that it was impossible to
encourage regional groups through the text to present
competitive slates for Human Rights Council elections.
The European Union will continue to encourage
regional groups to do so.
The text just adopted maintains the current status
of the Council as a subsidiary body of the General
Assembly and approves the Geneva outcome. While
the European Union is happy to see that the regular
September session of the Council will henceforth be
included in the annual report to the General Assembly,

24

we continue to believe that paragraph 6 does not fully
recognize and reflect the status of the Council, which is
subsidiary only to the General Assembly, and not the
Third Committee.
In the light of these shortcomings, the European
Union member States decided to support the text just
adopted only as it became clear that a better result
could not be achieved. The European Union continues
to believe that much can and indeed must be done to
enable the Council to fulfil the commitments
undertaken and to live up to the expectations that the
world at large places on it.
The full and earnest commitment of the Council’s
members to the promotion and protection of human
rights is the sole basis for such positive change. The
European Union and its members that are elected
members of the Council will continue to actively work
towards the realization of that objective.
At the same time, the European Union is very
pleased to note that the Council is taking a leading role
in responding to recent events in the Middle East and
elsewhere and has produced a swift and effective
response. In particular, the action taken by the Council
to address a number of urgent country situations is an
example of the Council functioning as it is intended to.
The European Union hopes that this positive trend will
continue and remains committed to the objective that
candidates and members of the Human Rights Council
follow the letter and spirit of resolution 60/251 in a
responsible and, above all, exemplary manner.
The Human Rights Council is a central
component of the United Nations human rights
protection system. The special procedures and other
instruments and mechanisms of the Council act as its
eyes and ears, and thus help the Council to fulfil its
tasks. The unique system of treaty-based bodies keeps
track of the implementation of human rights norms and
standards by States parties to these conventions. Also,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights has a comprehensive mandate to
promote and protect all human rights. The European
Union remains committed to the independence and
integrity of the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights.
Finally, we take this opportunity to extend our
sincere thanks to the New York co-facilitators,
Ambassador Loulichki of Morocco and Ambassador
Wenaweser of Liechtenstein, for all their efforts and,

11-37747

A/65/PV.100

most of all, the patience shown throughout this
process.
The President: I would like to join all
participants who have expressed their sincere thanks to
His Excellency Mr. Christian Wenaweser, Permanent
Representative of Liechtenstein, and to His Excellency
Mr. Mohammed Loulichki, Permanent Representative
of Morocco, who have so ably and patiently conducted
the discussions and complex negotiations in the
informal consultations and brought them to a
successful conclusion.
I now give the floor to the representative of Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines on a point of order.
Mr. Gonsalves (Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines): I apologize for taking the floor at this late
hour, but I feel compelled to do so on a point of order,
and hopefully for some procedural clarification.
When the Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
wished to speak earlier on this matter, we were told
that the only statements being allowed were
explanations of vote after the voting. CARICOM’s
general statement was therefore converted into an
explanation of vote after the voting to accommodate
that procedural restriction.
We are all aware that the European Union would
not be able to speak after the voting since it has no
vote. So speaking after the voting would not be
allowable.
You, Mr. President, correctly ended the
statements after the voting and then gave the floor to
the observer of the European Union to make a general
statement not related to the voting, which is precisely
what CARICOM was prohibited from doing at the
outset. I would like to indicate that I did not interrupt
because I was very interested in hearing the European
Union statement, given its traditional leading role in
matters of human rights.

However, we do have a resolution that governs
the manner in which the European Union may interact
with the General Assembly (resolution 65/276). While
I do not wish to challenge your discretion in this
matter, Mr. President, it was clear that the limitations
set forth by resolution 65/276 were at the absolute
outer limit of what was permitted to the Union in its
interactions with the General Assembly.
I would just like to indicate that Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines would not like to see this
occurrence be used as a precedent whereby Member
States are disallowed from making general statements
while observer entities are indeed allowed to make the
same statements that are unavailable to Member States.
I just wanted to place that on the record. I apologize
once again for interrupting the meeting.
The President: I take note of the statement by
the representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on a point of order.
Ms. Méndez Romero (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We do not want to draw
out this meeting, but we simply wish to state that the
delegation of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
supports the comments just made by the representative
of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
The President: I would now like to conclude by
thanking the Assembly for having adopted with a clear
vote the resolution that I had the honour to present to it
(resolution 65/281). For me, one of the most important
goals of the sixty-fifth session of the General Assembly
was to carry out the review of the Human Rights
Council. I am glad that we could do it the last day
before the new members start their work in Geneva
next Monday.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda items 13 and 115.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

11-37747

25
