UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COUNCIL
RECORDS
U>NLI.BR.~
b’”

THIRTY-FOURTH

YEAR

2137”

MEETING:

NEW

MAY2 8 1982

26 MARCH

u!N/Q4
C;oLLkCTi

1979

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2137)

Adoption

of the agenda

Page
1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . .

1

Complaint
by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 16 March 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/13176) .

1

’

WV.2137

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Oficial Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is
given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Derisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2137th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 26 March 1979, at 3.30 p.m.
Besidenf: Mr. Leslie 0. HARRIMAN

(Nigeria).

(United RenubIic of Tanzania), Mr. Ha Van Lau (Viet Nam)
and Mr. K~matina”(YugosIavia) took the places reservedfor
them at the side of the Council chamber.

Presenz: The ‘representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

2. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2132nd meeting, I invite the representative of
the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO) to
take a place at the Council table.

Provi5donal agenda (S/Agenda/2137)

At the Invitation of the President, Mr. Muyongo (South
West Africa Peopie’s Organization) took apIace at the Council table.

1. Adoption of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the representative of the German Democratic Republic. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

2. Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter &ted 16 March 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13176)
_,

4. Mr. FLORIN
pretationfrom

The meeting was caBed to order at 5.05 p.m.

(German Democratic Republic) (interRussian): On 19 February 1979, the General

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken by the Council at previous meetings [213Oth, 2132nd
2Z33rd and 2135th meetings], I invited the representative of
Angola to take a place at the Council table, and the representatives of Algeria, Benin, Botswana, Bulgaria, the
Congo, Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, the German Democratic
Republic, Ghana, Guinea, Guyana, India, Liberia, Madagascar, Mozambique, Romania, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sri
Lanka, the Sudan, Togo, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Viet Nam and Yugoslavia to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

Secretary of the Central Committee of the Socialist Unity
Party of Germany and Chairman of the Council of State of
the German Democratic Republic, Mr. Erich Honecker,
and the President of MPLA [Movimento PopuIar de Liberta@ de Angola] and President of the People’s Republic of
Angola, Mr. Agostinho Neto, signed at Luanda a State
treaty of friendship and cooperation between the German
Democratic Republic and the People’s Republic of Angola.
Fully determined to provide mutual support for the cause of
the creation of conditions for the strengthening and development of revolutionary social and economic conquests
and achievements of both peoples, and loyal to the ideals of
the struggle for national independence and social progress
and against imperialism, colonialism, neo-colonialism and
racism, in all its forms and manifestations, the German
Democratic Republic and the People’s Republic of Angola
decided to conclude that treaty. In accordance with the
treaty, the delegation of the German Democratic Republic
has asked to- be allowed to speak today and we are grateful
to the members of the Security Council for affording us this
opportunity to set forth our views on the question on the
agenda.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola) took a place at the Council table and Mr. BouayadAgha (Algeria), Mr. Houngavou (Benin). Mr. TIou (Botswana), Mr. Yankov (Bulgaria), Mr. Mon@o (Congo),
Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. AbdeI Meguid (Egypt),
Mr. Worku (Ethiopia), Mr. Florin (German Democratic
Republic). Mr. Sekyi (Ghana), Mr. Yansank (Guinea),
Mr. Sinclair (Guyana), Mr. Jaipal (India), Mr. Tubman
(Liberia), Mr. Rabetajika
(Madagascar),
Mr. Honwona
(Mozambique), Mr. Marinescu (Romania), Mr. Gelaga-King
(Sierra Leone). Mr. Hussen (SomaIia), Mr. Rodrigo (Sri
Lanka). Mr. SahIouI (Sudan), Mr. KoGovi (Togo), Mr. ChaIe

5. On 6 May last year, the Security Council strongly condemned, in resolution 428 (1978), the armed invasion perpetrated on 4 May by the South African racist regime against
the People’s Republic of Angola, which constituted a flagrant violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Angola. It condemned also the utilization of the intemational Territory of Namibia as a spring-board for armed
invasions of the People’s Republic of Angola. It decided to
meet again in the event of further acts of violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s Republic
of Angola by the South African racist regime in order to
consider the adoption of more effective measures, in actor-

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Complaint by Angola agabst Sooth Africa:
Letter dated 16 March 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security .Council (S/13176)

1

duty ofmam&ning solidarity with the struggling peoples of.
Africa. In the course of hi stay at Luanda, the General
Secretary of the Central Committee of the Socialist Unity
Party of Germany and Chairman of the Council of State of
the German Democratic Republic, Mr. Erich Honecker,
assured the President of MPLA and the President of the
People’s Republic of Angola, Mr. Agostinho Neto, of the
firm support of the people, party and Government of the
German Democratic Republic for the people of Angola in
defending its national sovereignty and integrity of its frontiers. Mr. Honecker stressed the right of the People’s
Republic of Angola to insure the defence of its territory
against aggression from the racist regime by all possible
means, including the use of international solidarity.

dance with the appropnate provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations, including Chapter VII thereof. And now
the time has come for the Council to demonstrate that it is
true to its word.
6. The facts are known to all. Over the past few weeks
aircraft of the Pretoria regime have repeatedly bombed
peaceful Angolan villages and the camps of Namibian refugeeswho were forced to flee from the terror of the racists in
illegal occupation of the Territory and who found refuge in
the People’s Republic of Angola. Napalm bombs have been
used. Furthermore, on 11 March, squads of infantry, sup
ported by six helicopters crossed the Angolan frontier. On
13 March tank and infantry units penetrated into the territory of the People’s Republic of Angola to a depth of 17
kilometres. According to a’ report of 21 March from the
Ministry of Defence of Angola, during 10 days of this
month alone the South African Army carried out 70 attacks
on the People’s Republic of Angola, in the course of which
six aircraft of the South African Air Force-of the Mirage
and Canberra types-were shot down. Official reports from
Pretoria confirm these repeated armed penetrations into
Angolan territory. So it is quite obvious that the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola
have been violated by the South African racist regime in a
deliberate and planned fashion.

10. There are certain circles that constantly harp upon a
so-called peaceful settlement, saying that they intend to use
their influence to incline the racist regime towards renouncing its barbarous policy. However, the racists, in flagrant
violation of United Nations decisions, have secretly been
supplied with oil, arms and, as was demonstrated at the
United Nations Seminar on Nuclear Collaboration with
South Africa [see S/Z3157 of 9 March 19793 South Africa
has been furnished with technology permitting it to produce
an atomic weapon. Economic and other relations with
South Africa not only continue but are even being expanded.
There is the idea of making the puppet Governments of the
racists acceptable so that they can be recognized later. That
is shown by the various so-called observation missions coming from capitalist countries for theelectoral farce to be held
in Zimbabwe this April.

7. The delegation of the German Democratic Republic
shares the view of the African Group in the United Nations,
which, in its important statement of 8March [S/Z3ZSQ1,
that is, immediately after the bombing raids on Angola by
Pretoria and even before tanks had actually penetrated into
the territory, called upon the Security Council to take all
possible effective measures to put an end to South Africa’s
acts of aggression against Angola. In this regard, the African Group referred to resolution 428 (1978). Clearly, the
present situation requires that the arrogant defiance by the
ruling circles of South Africa should be met with the-use of
the sanctions provided for under the Charter of the United
Nations. South Africa should be forced to make retribution
for the damage done to the People’s Republic of Angola.
8. The question whether to use effective measures with
regard to the acts of aggression committed by Pretoria, in
violation of international law, or to confine ourselves to
mere condemnations accompanied by a possible threatthat is, to adopt one more resolution on the lines of resolution 428 (1978)-has in actual practice become one of the
most important issues of war or peace in South Africa. Any
delay by the Council can only provide encouragement for
the commission of new crimes by the unbridled racists of
South Africa. Without any doubt, the policy of the ruling
circles of Pretoria has become a serious danger to the cause
of peace and security in southern Africa. I would assert that
Pretoria bears the responsibility also for the air raids undertaken by the Ian Smith racists against the People’s Republic
of Mozambique-an
air raid reported by Maputo. However, anyone who thinks that armed invasions can exert
pressure on the African States that have been subjected to
colonial domination is seriously mistaken. The communique issued on 4 March by the summit conference of the
so-called front-line States [see S/23141] demonstrates that
the intentions of the racists have been identified. The world
community will not leave these States without support.

11. Whoever wants peace and a peaceful settlement of the
problems of southern Africa should support the disarming
and weakening of the aggressor and the strengthening of
those forces that are striving to ensure for their peoples a
dignified existence, free from colonialism and foreign enslavement and exploitation. These are the Governments of
the so-called front-line States and the national liberation
movements such as the Patriotic Front in Zimbabwe and
SWAP0 in Namibia.
12. As concerns Namibia, it should be pointed out that
that Territory, which is illegally occupied by South Africa,
is being used to attack peaceful neighbouring States. At the
same time Pretoria is continuing its policy of setting up a
puppet regime at Windhoek in order to prevent the people
of Namibia from. exercising their right to selfdetermination.
Such a regime would allow Pretoria to go on lording it over
Namibia. .However, the interests of peace in Africa require
the liberation of Namibia from all kinds of colonialism and
its being admitted, at an appropriate time, to membership
in the United Nations as an independent State whose people
freely determine their own future.
13. But here again we are faced with all kinds of manaeuvres by Western circles to try to fend off the inevitable. It is
difficult to rid oneself of the impression that the imperialist
States are trying to use the participation of the United
Nations in resolving the Namibian problem to disguise the
electoral farce staged by the racists.
14. The only author&d representative of the people of
Namibia recognized by the United Nations is the SWAP0
liberation movement, and it has sufficiently demonstrated
its readiness to strive for mutual understanding towards the

9. Like many other States, the German Democratic
Republic will in any case, to the fullest extent possible, do its
2

:

of the People’s Republic of Angola and SWAP0 and, of
late, Zambia are yet further testimony to the aggressive
nature of the racist regime. We abhor and condemn in no
uncertain terms such acts of atrocity and destruction so
systematically and repeatedly perpetrated by the Pretoria
r&me. The United Republic of Tanzania will continue to
deplore such cowardly acts and endeavour jointly with
other members of the Organization to see to the proper
implementation of the Secretary-General’s plan, in accordance with Council resolution 435 (1978), for the achievement of a peaceful transition of Namibia to independence
under United Nations supervision and control during the
electoral process.

earliest possible solution to the Namibian question. However, if any concessions are required, we should address
ourselves to the right quarter and not, by referring to a
certain kind of so-called objectivity, place the enslaver and
the enslaved on the same footing. We should never forget
who is the future master of Namibia. It is the people of
Namibia and not the soldiery of South Africa.
15. ExDerience of struaalina against the shameful racist
r&me of South Africa hii sh&&r that we should not count
on the honest goodwill and co-operation of the monopolistic circles of Western States. It is obvious that they need the
racist regime as a source of profits running into the millions,
as a constant threat to free Africa, and for military bases in
the South Atlantic and the Indian Ocean.

22. Although repeated acts of aggression against the
front-line States have recently become quite fashionable
among the racist rkgime of Pretoria and Salisbury, the
recent attacks on Angola, SWAP0 and Zambia cannot
be considered only as part of the general plan of “striking
deep” into those territories. It is of particular significance
that the attacks have escalated when there has been intensification of the consultations by both SWAP0 and the
front-line States to secure the implementation
of the
relevant Security Council decisions regarding Namibia.
It is also by no means an accident that such callous
attacks, which resulted in the destruction of property and
the wanton killing and wounding of innocent civilians
and children, should come at the crucial stage of the
initiative of the Secretary-General to effect a ceasetire
and to pave the way for the assumption by the United
Nations Transition Assistance Group of its duties in
Namibia. It is rather a premeditated attack designed to
forestall the peace process and an attempt to frustrate the
efforts of the international community. We denounce
such a display of arrogance and of total contempt for
international opinion manifested through such blatant
and naked acts of violence and aggression as those
unleashed by the racist regime against the People’s Republic of Angola, SWAP0 and Zambia.

16. One point is really noteworthy. Certain imperialistic
States are refusing the racists neither considerable credit nor
political support or even the very latest type of weapons.
Nor are they stopped by the fact that the domination of the
racist regime is being accompanied by the most flagrant
violations of human rights. It is understandable that the
African States are expressing mistrust towards the various
plans that are being propagated on all hands by imperialistic circles.
17. The basis of the work of our Organization is the
resolutions of the Security Council and the General Assembly. Their purpose is the final elimination of colonialism,
and that includes its last remaining bastion in South Africa.
To abide by those resolutions means to ensure peace and
international security. The delegation of the German
Democratic Republic has the honour to appeal to the Security Council to do just that.
18. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the United Republic of Tanzania. I invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to make a statement.
19. Mr. CHALE (United Republic of Tanzania): Sir,
allow me to take this opportunity to associate myself with
those delegations which have extended to you their sincere
and warm congratulations on your accession to the presidency of the Security Council for this month. Indeed, at so
crucial a stage in the work of the Council on the delicate
issues on the agenda, your assumption of the presidency
could not be more timely and opportune. Nigeria, a country
closely associated with the liberation process in southern
Africa, has made an immense contribution to the struggle.
Besides,. your personal qualities of devotion, tact, diplomatic skill, experience and courage are well known. Therefore, having you in the chair gives us renewed hope and
expectation. My delegation looks forward to an atmosphere
of greater co-operation as your able guidance has always
been a source of strong inspiration.

23. Also, the latest attacks on Angola came at the
height of South Africa’s rejection of some of the vital
components of the plan for a peaceful transition to Namibian independence in accordance with resolution 435
(1978). The obstinacy of the racist regime and the subsequent military raids are attempts to dislodge the
SWAP0 forces and to destabilize the rear bases of the
liberation struggle, thus reducing almost to nothing the
chances of a peaceful negotiated settlement. We consider
these contemptuous acts of aggression a clear manifestation of the South African campaign to frustrate the
efforts of front-line States like Angola which have
embarked on the process of construction and reconstruction after the war of aggression perpetrated by the racist
regime.

20. At this juncture I wish also to express my deep appreciation and gratitude to you and, through you, to the other
Council members for affording our delegation the opportunity to take part in the present debate.

24. We wish equally to assure South Africa that this will
not alter our unwavering commitment to the liberation of
southern Africa. The heads of front-line States, meeting
at Luanda on 4 March 1979, reiterated their commitment
to the struggle and strongly condemned the coordinated
acts of aggression committed by the racist regimes of
Pretoria and Salisbury. To this end, we wish again to echo
their condemnation of all the manceuvres of South Africa
aimed at frustrating the effective implementation of resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978).

21. It is indeed tragic that the Council should be convened
once again to consider acts of aggression committed by the
racist regime of Pretoria in total defiance of the wishesof the
international community. The latest acts of aggression by
South Africa against the territorial integrity and sovereignty
3

30. We wish to request the Council, and particularly the
Western five, to meet this challenge with an effective
response.

25. Further, Tanzania fails to understand the double talk
of South Africa-that of demanding the cessation of se
called hostile acts by SWAP0 as a prerequisite for the
impJementation of the proposals while on the other hand
unleashing violence on an unprecedented scale. This is
another act of arrogance, treachery, wavering and fear.
Indeed, it is a dichotomy.

31. In this context, the United Republic of Tanzania
requests the following: first, that the Security Council
should unanimously adopt a resolution unequivocally condemning South Africa’s latest acts of aggression against
Angola, which are a clear manifestation of its contemptUOUS disregard for the sovereignty of independent African
States; secondly, that the Western Powers that are at present
involved in negotiations with South Africa on the future of
Namibia should use their power to defuse the ever-charged
situation and to bring South Africa to heed world opinion
and make use of their super-power by speaking a language
that South Africa can understand and thus prevail on it.

26. Is it not becoming increasingly clear that the indications that South Africa’s intensification of attacks into
Angola and front-line States is aimed at destroying
SWAP0 in order to install a puppet r&me in Namibia that
will dance to its tune are not merely speculative but are
becoming a positive reality? Should these be mere allegations, the obvious way to refute them is to demonstrate
co-operation that will be verified in fact.

32. I should like to pause here and define “super-power’*Wbat is “super-power”, what is perfection of “superpower’? It is the same perfection that an eye has in seeing
and an ear has in hearing. Therefore,‘the perfection of
“super-power” is the moral power exercised in persuading
and telling the wayward that what they are doing is not what
should be done. The Western Powers should stop arming
South Africa; they should exercise their influence on behalf
of the implementation of the settlement proposals and the
United Nations plan for Namibia’s proper electoral process
and its independence and thus complete the work which
their fellowman, the Reverend Michael Scott, the English
missionary, so ably performed. I am told that it was his
voice, mandated by the Namibians. that for years helped to
keep the Namibiap issue alive, with the result that a resolution was adopted in 1953, giving the United Nations a kind
of a watching brief over the so-called South West African
affairs. The role of the Western countries at this point and
time is that of completing tbe work that was started by the
Reverend Michael Scott. Do not let him down. Be tough
with South Africa. The Council could show its toughness
towards South Africa by saying .what Horace said 65 years
before Chriit:

27. This is why, aposteriori, we are saying that the violations of the sovereignty and Jerritorial integrity of Angola
shbuld hot be viewed as isolated incidents but as part of a
much larger conspiracy to disrupt the peace process and
perpetuate the obnoxious racist policies in the region of
southern Africa. The escalation of the attacks on Zambia
and Mozambique is part of the Pretoria-Salisbury syndrome to torpedo the efforts of the international commtinity to achieve peace and, further, to slacken the tempo of
the liberation struggle.
28. The provocative attacks are attempts to extend the
area of conflict into Angola and to use it as a scapegoat in a
bid to use Namibia as a spring-board in this war which it is
waging against Angola because of its stand in the liberation
struggle and because of the help it renders to the displaced
sons and daughters of Namibia who are struggling to get
back their dwelling place and their birthright-which
is
Namibia. Namibia glitters with diamonds, not to mention
amazing quantities of other precious minerals. Of this
diamond-rich land,’ the following has been said: “Dig with
your toe in the sand here and you may be arrested. Build a
house and the police will watch every detail of the excavation.” Shall we therefore wonder at the intransigence and
attacks launched by the illegal regime of South Africa?

“If you do not know how to live aright with your
neighbours, make -way for those who do. You have
played enough, you have eaten enough and drunk
enough. It is time for you to leave the scene.”

29. These attacks not only jeopardize the prospects for
peace in the area, but constitute total defiance by South
Africa of all Security Council resolutions. This should be a
test of the viability of the Council as a guarantorof peace to
nations and of its ability to enforce its decisions. This is as
much a challenge to the five Western countries, which have
supposedly found logic and reason in the actions of South
Africa to warrant their present initiative to bring it to a
negotiating table as it is to the other members of the Council. The present Council meetings should serve to illustrate
the evil designs of the m&t @me and should be understood as an eloquent testimony to the obstinacyand obduracy of South Africa and to its hypocrisy in handling the
Namibian question. When attempts are&eing made to exert
pressure on the front-line States and on,SWAPO to negotiate with South Africa, tie should bear in mind that the
Pretoria regime is not only demanding unacceptable concessions but, even more, is not prepared to see the establishment of genuine majority rule in Namibia and in southern
Africa as a whole.

Why cannot the Council tell South Africa that it is time
for it to leave.and leave Namibia in peace? Tell them that
their civilizing mission is over-if it was ever a civilizing
mission. It is over and the people now wish to handle their
own affairs and to steer their own destinies. I repeat to the
Western Powers: please do not let the Reverend Michael
Scott down. Complete the work that he started.
33. As to the other Member States in the international
community we would say that, while it is good to express
moral outrage and condemnation of South Africa’s latest
aggression, it is far better to take concrete and effective
measures to secure the immediate withdrawal of South
Africa from its illegal occupation of Namibia.
34. Regarding the bombings and attacks recently carried
out by the Pretoria r&me against Angola, Member States
may wish to refresh their memory on what was resolved by
the Security Council in its resolution 428 (1978), by which,
4

her ah, it solemnly warned that ‘*in the event of further
acts of violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the People’s Republic of Angola”, it would meet again
“in order to consider the adoption of more effective measures-,in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, including Chapter VII thereof’. That is what the Council said.
35. What should the Council do now to keep its commitment to move forward, thus preserving its credibility and its
prestige and the honour of the Organixation? Surely, we
must move at least a step forward.

deal with the situation as it continues to develop. There is no
need to state that the only hope for the white communities,
both in Zimbabwe and in South Africa, to reach a peaceful
solution lies in the ability of the United Nations to be a full
partner in the dialogue and in the negotiations aimed at the
establishment of majority rule in those territories. If the
racist r&imes continue to demolish the image of the United
Nations, then they are certainly heading towards a racial
armed confrontation in southern Africa which, in the end,
will prove to be detrimental even to their very existence in
these territories.
43. The African countries have been closely following the
proximity talks which have been taking place in New York
in the past few days, not because those talks will lead to any
positive results, but because they feel that the Western
Powers concerned will have to face their responsibilities,
when they reach the ultimate conclusion that all these,
attempts at a dialogue with the South African authorities
are leading us nowhere. I feel that it is imperative for me at
this juncture to stress our disappointment that the proximity talks did not include the Organization of African Unity,
which, in the final analysis, is the instrument for African
solidarity and the Co-ordinator of their joint political action
vis-a-vis outstanding African problems. Our disappointment is keener because the participants were not limited to
those directly involved and the confrontation States. We
hope that this oversight will not be repeated in future
because the Organixation of African Unity is the main
support of the confrontation States and the liberation
movements which are involved in the struggle to liberate all
the captive African territories and continues to be the most
effective framework for action on behalf of the African
countries in their dealings with other groups and with the
major Powers.

36. Also, the Tanzanian delegation appeals both to
Member States and to the international community to provide material and moral support to victims of the wars of
aggression perpetrated by the racist regime against the People’s Republic of Angola and to the front-line States, in the
cause of the liberation of southern Africa and to safeguard
their sovereignty and territorial integrity.
37. We believe that the Council will unanimously adopt a
strong and effective resolution so that South Africa will
cease such premeditated and naked acts of aggression.
38. Filly,
the United Republic of Tanzania extends its
condolences to the bereaved people of Angola, SWAP0
and Zambia and reaflirms its unflinching support for the
solidarity with SWAPO, the People’s Republic of Angola,
Mozambique, Zambia and all liberation movements in
sourthem Africa as they confront yet another cowardly act
of the racist r&irne in Pretoria.
39. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the Sudan. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.

44. Africa cannot stand by and watch the recent develop
ments or the strong-arm tactics applied by the racists with
equanimity or indifference, for the fate of Africa is one and
indivisible. The perpetuation of the rule of white minority
r@imes in Zimbabwe, Namibia and South Africa cannot be
maintained. Sooner or later the African resistance movements will gain enough experience and strength to shift the
balance, which at present seems to be tilted in favour of the
white minority r@imes. ‘It is not?li&ult
to foresee such a
situation in the not-too-distant future. Meanwhile, the confrontation States will continue to be subjected to acts of
aggression, bombing raids, and infringements of their sovereignty and territorial integrity. The African States have
reatlirmed their previous pledge to assist the confrontation
States. I am confident that this pledge will be honoured if
the military situation in the confrontation States continues
to deteriorate as a result of such acts of aggression. Should
this situation develop, then we shall be heading towards a
racial war-a spectacle which will be viewed with concern
by all those who are involved in the South ~African scene.

40. Mr. SAHLOUL (Sudan): Mr. President, permit me at
the outset to thank you and, through you, the members of
the Council for permitting me to participate in the dlcussion of the item placed on the agenda in response to the
request of the representative of Angola for an urgent meeting to be convened in connexion with the question of South
Africa’s aggression against the People’s Republic of
Angola.
41. This meeting has been requested because the South
African regime continues to commit acts of aggression
against neighbouring African States in spite of all the resolutions and decisions adopted by this august body, calling on
that r&me, and on the other racist r&ime at Salisbury, to
desist from any acts of aggression against the neighbouring
African States. Members of the Council will recall that it
was only on 8 March that resolution 445 (1979) was
adopted, condemning similar acts then being perpetrated
by the illegal minority racist @ime at Salisbury against
Angola, Mozambique and Zambia.

45. It is therefore imperative that the Council should
make an effective pronouncement on these acts of aggression and demonstrate its resilience and capability by translating its resolutions and decisions into action, thus
introducing an element of respect for those decisions and
ushering the captive people of Zimbabwe, Namibia and
South Africa on to the road of equality, human rights and
independence.

42. The similarity of the acts committed by the regimes at
Salisbury and Pretoria and the timing of those acts prove,
beyond any doubt, that the two regimes maintain full consultations between themselves and co-ordinate their moves
in such a way as to wreakhavoc in the bordering States and,
most of all, to demonstrate to the world the ineffectiveness,
or rather the inability, of the international community to
5

46. In this regard, members of the Council will recall
resolution 428 (1978), by which the Council warned that in
the event of further violations of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola it would consider more effective
measures in accordance with the appropriate provisions of
the Charter, including Chapter VII thereof. We feel that the
time has come for the Council to act according to the
provisions of the above resolution, in view of the repeated
acts of aggression committed by the South African authorities, which constitute a flagrant violation of that resolution.

lessly violates the territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola, bombing villages and cities and maiming and
killing innocent Angolans and refugees from Namibia. The
systematic manner in which these acts of aggression have
been unremittingly pursued testifies to the close consultation which is taking place between the two executioners of
racism, Smith and Botha. Unable to reconcile themselves to
the inevitability of change in southern Africa and IO the
reality that their bastions of racism at Pretoria and’!%&
bury cannot much longer resist the forces of liberation and,
freedom, they now resort to tactics of open aggression
against independent African States in an effort to intimidate
and destabilize them.

47. The positive settlement of the Namibian question,
which in our view has reached a very delicate stage, has
become a matter of urgency. The resolution of the problem,
one way or another, will have far-reaching implications for
deciding the question of war or peace in the region. The
recent attacks on Angola and previous attacks on Angola.
Mozambique and Zambia are all inextricably linked to’the
political developments in both Namibia and Zimbabwe.
Resolutions by which the Council condemns acts of aggression by the racist r&imes have to be seen in their true
perspective, namely, the exertion of more political will by all
concerned to achieve positive progress towards Namibian
and Zimbabwean independence and the dismantling of the
edifice of apanheid in South Africa.

52. When we recall the role played by racist South Africa
in Angola on the eve of that Territory’s independence, we
recognize that South Africa’s present nefarious activities
represent the continuation of a policy of hostility towards
the Government of the People’s Renublic of Angola. These
repeated acts of aggression reflect the unwillingness of the
Pretoria regime to reconcile itself to the accessionto power in
Angola of a Government which is genuinely committed to
the eradication of colonialism in whatever form, and rooted
in that perception of the scenario in southern Africa lies
South Africa’s persistence in striving to impede the consolidation of Angola’s hard-won independence.

48. The African countries commend the valiant stand of
the People’s Republic of Angola in the face of armed aggression by a militarily superior adversary and, above all, the
sacrifices of the Angolan people along with those of the
peoples of Zambia, Botswana and Mozambique, because
these sacrifices are being made in the cause of African
freedom and in the cause of establishing a new political
order in the continent by means of which Africa will be for
the Africans only.

53. We should not lose sight of the special significance of
the fact that these acts took place precisely at a time when
conclusive arrangements were being formulated for installing a United Nations presence in the usurped Territory of
Namibia. The adoption by the Security Council of a plan
for a settlement of the situation in Namibia, as negotiated
by South Africa’s five major trading partners, sought-and
this is the understanding of my delegation-to usher in a
new era in the southern part of the African continent, an era
in which it was assumed that the Pretoria regime would
cooperate with the decisions of the Council in an effort to
ensure that the legitimate rights of the Namibian people to
self-determination would be effectively realized.

49. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Guyana. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
50. Mr. SINCLAIR (Guyana): Mr. President, I should
like first of all to thank you and, through you, the other
members of the Council for having afforded my delegation
this opportunity to participate in the debate on the issue of
which the Council is now seized. My delegation has every
confidence that you, a distinguished son of Africa, will
continue to preside over the work of the Council with the
same dignity and senseof justice which you have brought to
bear upon the Council’s consideration of those issues to
which it has already addressed itself during the course of
this month.

54. That assumption was predicated upon the belief that
South Africa had negotiated “in good faith” and would
“co-operate” in the implementation of Council decisions on
the issue of Namibia. It is apposite for me to recall that at
that time my delegation has expressed some reservations
with regard to the potential for successoffered by the plan,
since we were unconvinced then, as we continue to be now,
that there was or would be any change of heart on the part
of the Pretoria regime.
55. Today it appears that our misgivings and reservations
have been justified. We recall how reluctantly, how grudgingly the South Africans finally came around to professing
an acceptance of that plan. The Secretary-General endeavoured to begin its implementation by proposing conditions
for a cease-tire to take effect on 15 March. South Africa’s
response was a rejection of these proposals on rather spurious grounds and its most recent acts of aggression against
Angola. Where, then, lies the “good faith’* and “willingness
to co-operate” of the Pretoria regime?

51. The gravity of the situation in southern Africa
increases with eaclrpassing day. Not only are the peoples of
Zimbabwe, Namibia and Azania still being prevented by
the racist minority regimes at Pretoria and Salisbury from
exercising their legitimate rights to self-determination and
independence, but this denial is now compounded by a
series of naked acts of aggression, wanton murders and
brutal oppression wreaked upon the black peoples of southem Africa as a whole by the racist regimes-acts which have
assumed a new dimension of impudence and presumption
during the past two months. For even as the rebel Smith
engages in unprovoked acts of aggression against Angola,
Mozambique and Zambia, his counterpart at Pretoria relent\

56. The unprovoked acts of aggression against the People’s Republic of Angola unleashed by the Pretoria racists
must be roundly condemned for what they are. This is not a
6

,

I

ask the Security Council how long South Africa will be
allowed to carry out with impunity its arrogant armed acts
of aggression against neighbouring States.

time for equivocation or compromiSe.The tactics ofintimidation and provocation being employed by the Pretoria
regime have clearly perceptible objectives: the short-term
objective is the frustration of initiatives undertaken by the
Security Council for the realization of genuine independence in Namibia; the long-term objective is to make southem Africa safe for aparrheid The South Africans do not
want the plan to work; they do not see that plan as having
any place in their grand scheme for southern Africa.

64. The recent attacks on the people, the sovereignty and
the territorial integrity of Angola are, of course, only the
latest in a long series of similar acts of aggression. Members
of the Council will surely recall that the Council wasobliged
to condemn South Africa for its invasion of Angola at the
time when the lattei,achieved independence, back in 1975.
Only last year, South ;Africa’s savage attack on the refugee
camps at Kassinga, Angola, in which 700 people were
killed, was the occasion for yet another condemnation by
the Council, which also warned that further acts of aggression would I+ met by enforcement measures under Chapter
VII of the Charter. There have indeed been further acts of
aggression, so the responsibility of the Council to act in
accordance with its own decision is clear.
.,
65. The need for strong action is also supported when we
view the attacks on Angola in a broader context. South
Africa’s acts of armed aggression, must be seen as part of a
wide-ranging conspiracy, directed by the Pretoria and Salisbury r&imes, against the front-line.States and the liberation
movements which are struggling to contain and eliminate
the evil forces of racism and colonial oppression in southern
Africa.

57. My delegation condemns South Africa% wanton acts
of aggression against the Angolan and Namibian peoples in
the strongest terms. With these acts the chances for peace in
Namibia and in southern Africa in general recede frighteningly. They demand a positive, vigorous response by the
Council. How much more must Botha do; how many more
attacks must Angola and other neighbouring territories be
subjected to? How much more suffering must the innocent
victims of apartheid endure before this august body, in its
wisdom, can make a determination that a situation of threat
to peace and security exists in southern Africa? How much
more, do I ask?
58. If the Security Council should once again fall short of
taking the appropriate action as provided in Chapter VII of
the Charter, then we must recognize that the racist South
African regime will naturally take strength in the knowledge
that its nefarious activities can continue with impunity. And
my delegation is convinced that some of the permanent
members of the Council possess enough leverage with the
Pretoria regime to influence the actions of those racists by
merely demonstrating in this forum that they are prepared
not to impede the adoption by the Council of resolutions
calling for action under Chapter VII of the Charter.

66. Again we must ask: How long will the Security Council remain passive while those r&imes turn the air space and
the national territory of AngoIa, Zambia and Mozambique
into playgrounds for their vicious war games? In those
operations, as we are all well aware, hundreds of Namibians
and Zimbabweans who have fled from oppression and
injustice, together with innocent citizens of the front-line
States, have lost their lives. There has, of course, been
extensive damage to property and disruption of the lives of
the people in the border areas.
\
67. The representative of Angola has rightly posed the
question of whether attacks like those directed against his
country would have gone unpunished and virtually unnoticed in Western capitals if they had been perpetrated by
non-white r6gimes lacking close ties to Western countries.
My delegation has no doubt about the answer. The reaction
would have been loud and vigorous. But there has been no
such reaction in Western circles to the armed aggression
against Angola, carried out with the use of weapons condemned as inhuman by the international community.

59. In conclusion, I should like to take this opportunity to
reaffhm Guyana’s solidarity with the Angolan people in
their struggle against the apartheidmonolith. Their struggle
is symbolic of the wider struggle taking place within southem Africa today for peace, justice and freedom from colonialist and imperialist oppression. They have turned to the
Security Council in the faith that this body is able and
prepared to come to the assistance of States which are
victims of aggression. The Council therefore has a solemn
obligation to uphold that faith.
60. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Somalia. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
61. Mr. HUSSEN (Somalia): Mr. President, I thank you
and the members of the Council for giving my delegation
the opportunity to participate in this debate.

68. In ‘the past .few weeks there have been sensational
revelations in the international press showing the deepseated corruption and bribery within the South African
Government. Those reports have also shown the extent of
South Africa’s plans and financial outlay for the purpose of
selling to the Western world its illegal and inhuman policies
directed against the non-white people of Namibia and
South Africa itself. We are resisting the temptation of attributing this indifference to the success of South Africa’s
pocket-money concept of public relations. We do not
believe that South Africa, with all the gold and diamonds at
its disposal, could buy up enough influence to save it:
doomed internal and external policies of aparzheid. Such
bribery progaganda ‘can and has indeed managed to make
some noise and perhaps influence some who are weak-

62. The communique issued by the Ministry of Defenceof
Angola and the supplementary information supplied by the
representative of Angola in the most eloquent statement
that he made last Monday [213&h meeting] show once
again, without any shadow of a doubt, that the apartheid
policies of South Africa’s racist minority r&ime seriously
damage the peace and security of Africa and pose a grave
threat to international peace and security.
63. African States and indeed all States which look to the
United Nations for “peace with progress’* have a right to

.,

7

,
: . ..

. minded and some who are corrupt. Such a huge amount of
money might well have been spent for ~cotistructive and
meaningful purposes such as, for example, providing better
nutrition and better education for the black children in the
beleaguered country. Indifference is perhaps the wrong
word. The West is not, unhappily, indifferent to its vested
interests, which no one challenges. What the Council must
challenge is the subordination of the Charter of the United
Nations and peace itself to those interests. That indifference
is particularly strange in view of the fact that South Africa’s
armed aggression was obviously designed to sabotage the
plan for Namibian independence negotiated by the five
Western Powers and later approved by the Council in its
resolution 435 (1978).

72. The Security Council is now confronted with a caseof
unprovoked armed aggression, which is enough reason for
international action. When that aggression is directed
against efforts to fulfil the United Nations solemn moral
and legal obligations towards Namibia, then there should
be no hesitation about the course of action that should be
taken by the Council. My delegation believes that the Council must condemn South Africa’s aggression against Angola
in the strongest terms and must commit itselfclearly-and I
underline “clearly”-to
imposing economic sanctions
against South Africa, under Chapter VII of the Charter, if
its racist r&me should repeat its acts of aggression against a
neighbouring State and if it does not immediately agree to
carry out the terms for Namibian independence approved
by the Gouncil in its resolution 435 (1978). If the Council
should settle for less than that, given its past equivocations
and hesitations and in the light of the cruel nature of the acts
of aggression and the wanton repetitions of these acts by the
aggressors, it would be turning away from its responsibility
under the Charter for the protection,and maintenance of
international peace and security. It would also be jeopardiiing its credibility in the eyes of world public opinion; and
when that is gone, faith in the United Nations itself will
vanish, and then we will be opening wide the door to more
wars, which are even now moving to a dangerous
escalation.

69. Certainly there should be no illusions about the motivation behind the recent attack on Angola. Similar attacks
by the racist minority regimes have been launched in the
past as. counterpoints to efforts aimed at achieving just
solutions to southern African problems through peaceful
negotiations on the basis of United Nations principles and
resolutions. Those acts of aggression have always had as
their central aim the strengthening and maintenance of illegal
rule in Namibia and Zimbabwe and the entrenchment or
apartheid in South Africa.
70. The Council must face the fact that South Africa is
violently opposed to the establishment of a free Namibia,
led to independence by SWAPO, its indigenous and authentic liberation movement. South Africa’s strategy can easily
be discerned. First, it pretended to negotiate in good faith
while having no intention of relinquishing its control of the
Territory of Namibia. We have seen the various ill-founded
charges put forward by the Pretoria regime to delay and
subvert the Namibian independence process. Secondly,
South Africa has attempted to install a puppet regime in
Namibia through which it could continue to controlthe rich
resources of the Territory. The so-called internal settlement
has also been used-as the General Assembly noted in its
resolution 33/.182 A-as an excuse for fostering civil war
and to propagate the fiction that the liberation struggle of
the Namibian people constitutes aggression from outside..
Thirdly, South Africa’s strategy includes the most serious of
all international crimes-the wanton violation ofthesovereignty: and, territorial integrity of a State through armed
aggression. It also includes the attempt to destroy a liberation movement recognized by the United Nations as the sole
authentic representative of the Namibian people.

73. In conclusion, at this stage of the world situation it is
no time to encourage aggressors and play the “Munich
game”.
74. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is Mr. Makatini,
representative of the African National Congress of South
Africa, to whom the Council extended an invitation at its
2133rd meeting. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
75. Mr. MAKATINI:
The African National Congress of
South Africa seesthe repeated and universally condemned
aggression committed by the Pretoria and Salisbury
r6gimes against Angola, Zambia, Botswana and Mozambique as the direct consequence of the inhuman and anachronistic system that the people of southern Africa are
lighting, weapons in hand, to eliminate. It is for that reason
that we deem it necessary to join in the debate now going on
in the Council. Our thanks go to you, Mr. President, and to
the representatives of Gabon and Zambia for making it
possible for our movement to put on record its position at
this crucial stage in the struggle for the liberation of southem Africa and the security of the continent.

71. The negotiations initiated by the five Western Powers
two years ago undoubtedly brought the international community to believe that its responsibility towards the Namibian people could at last be discharged. The hidden reef of
those negotiations has always been the unwillingness of the
five Powers to make a clear and unequivocal commitment
to take the enforcement measures available under the Charter if South Africa continues to threaten international peace
and security by its bad faith and its intransigence. The
negotiations have now foundered on that reef-and not for
the first time. My Government sincerely hopes that the
proximity talks now being carried on will succeed,.but the
evidence of the past indicates that South Africa will fmd a
way to defy the United Nations as long as it is aware that it
can do so with no more severe penalty than a verbal
condemnation.

76. Mr. President, it is singularly significant ‘that the
Council is meeting under your presidency to examine the
question of wanton aggression against the People’s Republic of Angola by the South African apartheid regime. Your
personal dedication to the fight against the monstrous system of apartlreid is well known. The depth of the commitment of your country, as clearly demonstrated in 1975 when
the then newly-born People’s Republic of Angola was the
victim of premeditated and full-scale invasion by the same
Fascist upartheid regime, has since been a source of encouragement to our oppressed and struggling people. For, like
all true Africans and true friends of Africa, they know that
this imperialist-backed invasion,was intended to reversethe
course of history and to facilitate the perpetuation of their
enslavement. And they remember with pride the uncom8

promising anticolonial and anti-imperialist position taken
by Nigeria and other countries which love justice and peace
whose active solidarity enabled the heroic peuple of Angola
to in&t a humiliiting defeat on the Pretoria racist regime
and to offset its diabolical scheme of transforming the newly
independent Angola into a permanent base of aggression
and expansionism for the defence and exportation of
apartheid

and ‘G-e region in general. The economic, military and
nuclear collaboration which is persistently defended
through the vetc: the failure to lend active support to the
liberation movements that spearhead the international
struggle against the system that has been condemned as
constituting a threat to peace and international security; the
endless sermons preached to the liberation movements and
the ‘front-line States for moderation against such sanguinary regimes; the criticism and condemnation of the countries that respond favourably to the United Nations calI for
support of the liberation movements and the front-line
States: all that proves this ,point beyond doubt.

77. In their lucid statements, the ‘representatives of
Angola, Zambia, Botswana and Mozambique and the
representatives of other countries who have already spoken,
as well as the Vice-President ofSWAP0, have characterixed
the situation prevailing in southern Africa with pointed
clarity and have called for immediate and appropriate
action by the Security Council.

81. If we sound pessimistic or negative, the onus is on the
parties concerned to prove us wrong by strongly condemning South Africa’s aggression against the People’s Republic
of Angola and by facilitating the belated imposition of
punitive measures against the Pretoria regime, especially
mandatory comprehensive sanctions under Chapter VII of
the Charter. And to cleanse their past record of helping the
racist regimes to sow death and destruction in South Africa
by their supplying of genocidal weapons to a regime that
has legal&d aggression against all African countries, these
Western countries must’go further and join the struggling
peoples of southern Africa and progressive mankind by
commending the role played by the African, the nonaligned and the Nordic countries, as well as the socialist
countries, which have always rendered humanitarian, financial and material assistance to the liberation movements
and the front-line States. They should also put an end to
their involvement in what we see and condemn asthe game
of deception by the South African regime-a game which is
designed to gain time towards the imposition of a puppet
regime in Namibia through what we view as the imminent
proclamation of the so-called unilateral declaration Of independence by the Democratic Tumhalle Alliance, following
the envisaged endorsement of the fraudulent elections and
the lifting of sanctions in Southern Rhodesia.

78. The African National Congress of South Africa fully
endorses the viewpoint that the root cause of the explosive
situation in southern Africa that is now before the Council
lies in the tenacious determination of the Pretoria regime
and its imperialist allies to arrest the unfolding .process of
decolonixation in the region by imposing fictitious and
neocolonialist solutions in Namibia and Zimbabwe in
order to ensure the preservation of the status quo in South
Africa. The wanton aggression by the apartheid regime
against the People’s Republic of Angola is part of the
imperialist-backed strategy which is character&d by
equally wanton aggression against Zambia by the same
racist regime and against Botswana and Mozambique by
the Smith regime.
79. Speakers who have preceded us have underscored the
undeniable historical fact that the root cause of the problem
of which the aggression against the People’s Repubfic of
Angola is part, and of which it marks the watershed, is the
imperialist-backed
strategy of the Pretoria-Salisbury
tigimes. Many representatives have stressed the fact that
the catalogue of events in the past few months shows that,
each time the talks towards a negotiated settlement in Namibia and Zimbabwe reach an advanced stage, the minority
racist regimes intensify their acts of aggression against the
neighbouring States. And their allies, the Western countries
involved in the talks, not only fail to condemn this and to
use their collective economic and political leverage but,
instead, multiply their ‘sermons preaching tolerance and
patience to SWAPO, the Patriotic Front and the front-line
States and call for new rounds of talks. This has led a
growing number of countries which were initially convinced
of the good faith of the Western initiatives, and the PretoriaSalisbury regimes’ acceptance of the proposed plans, to
question seriously the sincerity of these commitments.
Indeed, the number of countries that suspect the existence
of a conspiracy towards the betrayal of the struggle for
genuine independence in Namibia and Zimbabwe is also
growing.

82. We have in the past voiced our reservations about,
and sometimes our opposition to, proposals that are based
on the Pretoria regimes being amenable to change or play’
ing the role of an-honest broker. The recent events go along
way towards strengthening our suspicions. And it is for that
reason that, in the face of the systematic sabotaging of the Y
negotiated settlements, we believe that the time hasperhaps come for this august body to consider seriously going back
to its original position of regarding the South African presence in Namibia as illegal and consequently resorting to the
policy of confrontation towards its immediate and unconditional withdrawal. ‘Such a position would help save the
United Nations from the maze of contradictions in which it
is now caught because,of its agreement to negotiate with the
illegal occupant, which position towards the United
Nations and SWAP0 is well known. Such a position would,
’
we maintain, also clarify a position that we tind.extemely
.confused and that we suspect has been created by some
forces that are bent on robbing the people of Namibia and
Zimbabwe of their inevitable, if not imminent, victory.
83. It is important ‘to note that our suspicions have been
further reinforced .by the ongoing revelations pointing to . ’
the financing of big operations towards the shaping of
public opinion and pro-upmhefd policy in some countries,
including the traditional allies of the apmzheid regime. The
buying of influential newspapers, editors and legislators in

80. That is the position that is firmly held by the struggling
masses in the region and is shared by the African National
Congress. It is strengthened by the conviction that is based
on our long experience, which shows that the PretoriaSalisbury axis and some Western Powers are resolutely
opposed to genuine independence iu Namibia and Zimbabwe. For they see it as inimical to their strategy for the
perpetuation of the stati quo in South Africa in particular
9

countries whose identification is not yet complete is a challenge to those who are not involved to demonstrate their
innocence by fully supporting the position of the Organization of African Unity, the non-ahgned movement and the
General Assembly.

91. According to this crude logic, the Pretoria racists
would find it well within their rights to drop bombs on this
very building, the Headquarters of the United Nations. For
is it not true that the United Nations recognizcs.SWAP0 as
the legitimate representative of the people of Namibia? That
recognition includes recognition of the legitimacy of the
struggle of the Namibian people, by whatever means,
against South African occupation.
92. In supporting SWAPO, Angola is discharging its
sacred duty as a’Member of the United Nations. The People’s Republic of Angola therefore has every reason to
expect the United Nations promptly and fittingly to punish
South Africa. Accordingly we are hopeful, Mr. President,
that under your wise guidance and respected wisdom the
Security Council will not shirk its responsibility. South
Africa’s repeated acts of aggression against Angola and its
violation of its sacred territory’s airspace and sovereignty
are the worst crimes that can be committed against any
country. It is meet that the culprits should receive a punishment that fits the crime.
93. We all know that when despotic regimes are confronted with domestic crises they often start wars outside
their borders in the hope that they can stimulate patriotism
at home. Right now the South African apartheid regime is
shaking from the colossal scandal about the theft of taxpayers’ money and the use of those funds to promote apartheid
at home and abroad. By picking on Angola, Botha and his
coterie of warmongers vainly hope that their..aggression
against Angola will push the scandal into the background.
As of now it does not look as though that intrigue will
succeed.

84. Finally, we wish to pay a tribute to the brotherly
people of Angola, who under the leadership of the MPLAWorkers’ Party, continue to write a golden page inthe grim
history of our common and indivisible struggle in southern
Africa.
85. For our part, we pledge to spare no effort to intensify
the armed struggle for the seizure of power by the people
and the establishment of a democratic State in South
Africa, a democratic State that will guarantee the inalienable rights of all the people of that country regardless of
colour, race or political belief.
86. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is Mr. Sibeko,
representative of the Pan Africa& Congress of Axania, to
whom the Council extended an invitation at its 2135th
meeting. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make a statement.
87. Mr. SIBEKO: Mr. President, our great respect for you
as a distinguished diplomat and a humane champion of
justice for all people on earth is well known. That is why we
are proud to serve on the Special Committee against Aparthefdas observers. Under your chairmanship, that Committee continues to distinguish itselfin mobilizing international
public opinion in support of the just struggle of the Azanian
people against apartheid, oppression and imperialist
exploitation.

94. However, of greater concern for the members of the
Council must be South Africa’s ever increasing contempt
for the United Nations. Nowhere‘is this monumental contempt more manifest than in the concoction that Botha’s
representatives here in New York have been circulating as
a so-called draft resolution to condemn SWAPO. Through
this cynical slap in the face for the United Nations, Pretoria
shows that as far as it is concerned this debate and the whole
exercise of dealing with a Member’s legitimate complaint is
nothing more than an amateur circus show.

88. Your country, the Federal Republic of Nigeria, is
respected the world over for its crusading role in the struggle
for the total liberation and unity of Africa. Nigeria has been
generous in its support of the struggle for freedom in Azania, and our movement enjoys very close relations with your
country and its militant people. These relations have deep
ened ever since the time the Pan Africa& Congress was
invited to open a representative office at Lagos by the
Federal Military Government, in 1976.

95. Those Member States which have become notorious
for protecting South Africa from international action
through their negative votes in the Security Council must
question themselves very closely on whether it was in the
interest of the honour and dignity of the United Nations to
be so permissive with the’gangster regime of Vorster and
Botha. For its crimes against the Azanian people and crimes
such as those committed against Angola and other frontline States such as Zambia, Mozambique and Botswana,
the South African apartheid regime has more than earned
punishment under Chapter VII of the Charter. This punishment must be directed to the place where it .will be felt
most-to the economy that sustains apartheid colonialism.

89. As has been stated by speaker after speaker during this
debate, the Security Council is once again meeting to consider a complaint against apartheld South Africa lodged by
the People’s Republic of Angola. Some two weeksago the
South African apartheid regime began yet another act of
aggression against Angola, using Mirage jet lighters to
bomb civilian targets and refugee camps deep inside
Angola. These piratical and cowardly attacks have caused
massive losses in human life and wanton destruction of
property. Reports from Angola tell us that the aerial invasion has been followed by daily attacks by ground soldiers
using artillery pieces and supported by gunboats and helicopters and other military aircraft. Armoured cars have
also been thrown into the attacks on Angolan villages.

96. It pains us, the people of Azania, to know the truth
that our enslaved labour and stolen natural resources are
used by the apartheid regime to build the war machinery it.
uses to murder our brothers and sisters in Angola and in
other neighbouring States. In addition to our unequivocal
condemnation of these dastardly crimes against the Angolan people, we pledge that we will intensify the struggle to
free Azania from this barbaric rule.

90. Apartheid South Africa’s sordid rationale for its
repeated criminal attacks against Angola is that that country provides bases and staging-zones for the war of liberation that SWAP0 is conducting in Namibia against the
illegal occupation of that international Territory by the
South African racists.
10

97. After 14 years of waging a just warof national htiation against Portuguese coloni&m and after a savage war
against lackeys ofTimperialism and aggression tram South
Africa itself on the eve of independence and during the early
stages of the birth of their nation, the people of Angola
more than deserve peace. The international community has
a duty to assist in that endeavour so-that the people of that
beautiful and naturally wealthy land may develop their
egalitarian society peacefully.

98; In the face of mounting internal struggle in South
Africa, in the face of the stepped-up mobilization against
the apurtheid r6gime all over the world, and in the wake of
the demoralization of the ,whitepopulation for the foreg+
ing reasons and because of the rank corruption of Vorster
and Botha, the time is ripe for imposing mandatory economic sanctions against apartheidsouth Africa with the full
authority of Chapter VII of the Charter.
Zhe meeting rose at 6.50 p.m.

-

~?~l~~bPBBBYM1BRf~I~~~~~~

~CdS~BQSQ~ff~~HE~~R~~~~~~

HOWTOOBTAiNUNITEDNATIONSPUBLICATIONS
Unite 1 Nations
publicatiotm
throughout
the wodd. Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.

may be obtained
your bookstore

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

CONI~~~?IiC)CUltBBLBSPUBLICATfONSDESNATI0NS
UNIES
Levi p~b&ati~
d&s Nations
Unies aont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
d@pWtaires
i : Nations

du monde entier. Informez-voua
aup&
de votre
Unfea Se&i&i dea ventes. New York ou Geneve.

RAk fr(lfLJrq#fTIi

ii3AAHX-I

OPPAHH3AUWi

libraire

ou adressex-vous

OL;‘bE~NHEHHhIX

HAUHI?

E%%laRhk h%HHSllqHH
06meAmeHHsIx
HattaR
MOXHO
XyIIHTb
a KHH~(R~IX Harastutax
H annic%%x
ilo ace% pafionax
unpa. HaEOAHTe
cffpasxn
ot5 n~~anxsx
a
BaIueY
~~1Ixtnml
uarasnne
HIH nwmfTe
no anpecy : Oprann384siR
06meARReRXblX
WtttwR. Cektwt
no npoaame nsgannit,
Hato-Fiopx
nna )Kexena.

~~MO~~NS~X%~~P~~B~~~A~I~N~DELAS
Las pubIk%ion~
de Ias Naciones Unidas
e&n
buldofa#
en t&t
prirtes de1 mundo.
Cons&e
Unidaa, &%x!f6n de VetWa. Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

NACIONES UNIDAS
en vents en librerias
y casas distria su libtero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones

Price: su.s. 1.50

79-70002-Febrnary

1982-2350
