:.

UNLIBRARY

UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

FORTIETH

YEAR

261Sh

MEETING:

NEW

I

2 OCTOBER 1985

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/261 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... . . . . . . . .

1

Statement by the President ..............................................

1

Adoption of the agenda ................................................

1

Letter dated 1 October 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17509) . . .

1

S/PV.26 11

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Secutiry Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2611th
Held

&IEETING

in New York on Wednesday,

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/Z611)

2.

1985, at 3 p.m.

3. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Afghanistan, Cuba, Greece, Lesotho, Mauritania, Morocco, Pakistan, Senegal, the Syrian Arab
Republic and Yemen in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

President: Mr. Vernon A. WALTERS.
(United States of America).
Present: The representatives of the followmg States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom. of Great Britain. and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

1. Adoption

2 October

of the agenda
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zurif(Afghanistan),
Mr. Malmierca PeoIi (Cuba), Mr. Dountas (Greece), Mr.
Makeka (Lesotho), Mr. OuId Boye (Matiritania). Mr. Alaoui
(Morocco), Mr. Yaqub Khan (Pakistan), Mr. Sane’ (Senegal), Mr. AI-Sharaa (Syrian Arab Republic) and Mr. Basendwah (Yemen) took the pIaces reservedfor them at the $ide of
the Council chamber.

Letter dated 1 October 1985 from the Permanent
‘Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17509)
The meeting was caled to order at 4.35 p.m.
Statement by tbe President

4. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter dated 2 October 1985 from the
representative of Kuwait [S/Z7525j, which reads as
follows:

1. The PRESIDENT:
Before we Droceed to the adomion
of the agenda, speaking as the’ representative 0; the
UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA,
I should like to
express my deep condolences to the representatives of the
Soviet Union here for the brutal, vicious murder of Soviet
citizens in Beirut.

“In my capacity as Chairman of the Group:of Arab
States for the month of October, I have the honour to
request that, during the Council’s discussion of the item
presently on its agenda, the Security Council extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Adnan Omran, Under-Secretary-General
for Political and International Affairs of the League of
Arab States.”

Adoption of tbe agenda
The agenda was adopted
Letter dated 1 October 1985 from tbe Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations addr&sed to
tbe President of tbe Security Council (S/17509)

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees
to extend an invitation under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure to Mr. Omran.

2. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken at the 2610th meeting, I invite the representatives of
Tunisia and Israel to take a place at the Council table; I
invite the observer for the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to take a place at the Council table; I invite the
representatives of Algeria, Jordan, Kuwait, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya and Turkey to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

It was so decided
5. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to draw the attention
of members of the Council to document 3117514, which
contains the text of a letter dated 2 October 1985 from the
representative of Kuwait to the President of the Council.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cai:d Essebsi (Tunisia) and Mr. Netanyahu (Israel) took pIaces at the Council
table; Mr. Qaddoumi (PaIestine Liberation Organization)
took a place at the Council table; Mr. TaIeb Ibrahimi (Alge‘n-a), Mr. Salah (Jordan), Mr. Abulhassan (Kuwait), Mr.
Azzarouk (Libyan Arab Jamahariya) and Mr. HaIefogIu
(Turkey) took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

6. Mr. de KEMOULARIA
(France) (interpretation from
French): I should like first of all to congratulate you, Sir,
and express to you my best wishes for the success of your
presidency. We are convinced that .your professional and
human qualifications will ensure that the Council will be
guided objectively and effectively this month.
1

7. I should also like to express, very briefly, to Sir John
Thomson our felicitations on the very masterly way in
which he conducted the Council’s work last month.

“Nothing can excuse the act of force against Tunisia, a
sovereign country, a friendly country, a peaceful and
tolerant country, which has always endeavoured to
make the language of reason heard in international
affairs.*’

8. At the request of the Government of the Republic of
Tunisia, the Council is meeting today to consider the situation resulting from the attack carried out on I October by
the Israeli air force against the headquarters of the PLO in
a suburb of Tunis. The Council, which already has before
it the problem of the Middle East, including the question
of Palestine, is therefore once again being called upon to
take a stand on a particularly serious ‘event which has
caused the loss of many lives.

The Prime Minister in his statement also assured President
Bourguiba and the Government and the people of Tunisia
of the sympathy and sorrow felt by France.
16. Mr. BIERRING
(Denmark): I should like to begin
by saying how pleased we are to see you, Sir, presiding
over the Council for the month of October. With your vast
diplomatic experience, we are confident that the affairs of
the Council are in the best hands. I should also like on this
occasion to express my delegation’s admiration for the
way in which the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom and Sir John
Thomson conducted the Council’s work last month.

9. Coming from a Member State under an obligation to
respect the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations-and
I would mention only the commitment to
refrain from the use of force against the territorial integrity
of any State-such an operation constitutes an inadmissible violation of the rules of international law.

I

10. The French Government, for its part, firmly condemns the military operation carried out by the Israeli
forces on the territory of a sovereign and peaceful State
that is a friend of France. My Government believes it more
than ever necessary to denounce the chain of violence
which, in the absence of a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East, has so often struck down innocent victims
under one pretext or another.

17. In a statement made yesterday [S/Z7520l, Denmark,
together with the other members of the European Community, has vigorously condemned the bombing by the Israeli
air force of the headquarters of the PLO in Tunis. That
action violates the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Tunisia in contravention of the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and the rules of international law. It
also represents a further stage in the continuing violence
and counter-violence in the Middle East, against which my
Government has repeatedly warned.

11. I should like to express to the Council the concern of
the French Government at the disastrous consequences
this military action will inevitably have on the efforts now
under way to bring about a resumption of the peace process. It may also contribute to increasing tensions in a
region that is already in many respects severely tried.

18. While at the same time condemning acts of terrorism
committed against Israeli citizens, Denmark does not
believe that they justify such action.
19. It is our fervent hope that this new escalation of
violence will not compromise efforts being made to
achieve a peaceful solution of the Israeli-Arab conflict.

12. The Council must take a clear stand on the issue
brought before it by the Tunisian Government. The Council’s responsibility is at stake, and it cannot evade that
responsibility without damage to its authority.

Mr. HUANG
Jiahua (China) (interprezation from
Chinese): I wish to congratulate you warmly, Sir, on your

20.

assumption of the presidency of the Council for the current month. I am convinced that with your rich experience
in diplomacy you will certainly prove equal to this important office.

13. France, which has on many occasions affirmed its
commitment to the security of Israel and its people, does
not believe that the use of force enhances that security. It
urgently appeals to all the parties to the conflict to replace
the language of violence and reprisals with a spirit of dialogue which alone can make possible an overall settlement.

21. I wish also to take this opportunity to express my
sincere thanks to your predecessors Sir Geoffrey Howe,
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs
of the United Kingdom, and Sir John Thomson for their
outstanding work in presiding over the Council last
month.

14. France wishes to express to the Tunisian Govemment, which has tirelessly sought a path towards a just
peace, its condolences on the mourning that has fallen
upon its population and its unswerving support. We stand
with Tunisia in its present trial and solemnly reaffirm our
commitment to respect for the territorial integrity and
security of Tunisia.

22. Just as we are commemorating the fortieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations and many
leaders in their statements in the general debate in the
General Assembly are voicing support for the just struggle
of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples and demanding
a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the Middle
East question, the Israeli authorities have brazenly dispatched their air force, on 1 October, and wantonly
bombed the capital of Tunisia, a peace-loving country,

15. In this connection, I have just received excerpts from
a statement made by the Prime Minister of France, Mr.
Laurent Fabius, in the National Assembly this afternoon
in Paris. If I may, I should like to quote one or two passages from that statement:
2

thus causing grave losses of life and property to the Tunisian people.

29. Although we are, unfortunately, accustomed to the
increasing use of violence in the Middle East, the air raid
of the Israeli Government against the capital of Tunisia,
by virtue of its timing, the characteristics of the attack and
its inevitable political consequences, takes on special and
ominous gravity.

23. Therefore, the People’s Republic of China has today
issued a statement solemnly pointing out that
“This is a serious &me committed bv the Israeli
authorities against the Palestinian and oth& Arab peoples. It constitutes a wanton encroachment upon the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Republic of Tunisia and a gross violation of the
principles of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations.

30. International public opinion, severely jolted by this
disproportionate escalation, is wondering what purpose is
being pursued by such acts. It could not be imagined that
the aim is to prejudice the precarious progress being made
towards just and lasting peace in the region, because in the
end, that would be suicidal. Is it then a new and disproportionate application of the principle of an eye for an eye,
carried out with arrogant disregard for others? If so, it
seems to us there are too many eyes; that on this path of
collective blindness, we shall be increasingly incapable of
seeing the right way to arrive at peace and justice.

“The Chinese Government and people strongly condemn this most savage act of aggression on the part of
the Israeli authorities and reaffirm that China will as
always resolutely support the just struggles of the Arab
countries and the Palestinian people until the complete
realization of their lofty national goal of recovering
their occupied territories and regaining their national
rights.”

3 1. The international community cannot take part in this
primitive settling of accounts based on the claim of a unilateral right to vengeance. We must stop this escalation of
violence, whatever its source, and take this occasion to
condemn this attack. My delegation will support the measures adopted by the Council in that regard.

24. The Chinese delegation is of the view that the Israeli
,authorities should assume full responsibility for their latest
act of aggression and for all its consequences. The Tunisian Government demands that the Council condemn
Israel and see to it that Israel compensates for all the losses
inflicted on Tunisia and pledges not to commit further
similar crimes. In our view, these demands are all reasonable, and the Council should see that they are met.

32. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Turkey, Mr. Vahit Halefoglu. I welcome him and invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
33. Mr. HALEFOCLU
(Turkey):
Mr. President, I
should like to thank you and the other members of the
Council for affording me the opportunity to address the
Council on the item under consideration. We regard it as
our duty to speak on this grave development since we have
a direct stake in the peace and stability of the Middle East
and consider that acts of military aggression violate basic
norms of international conduct and open new wounds in
the fabric of international relations.

25. We should like to take this opportunity to express
our deep sympathy and firm solidarity with the Tunisian
Government and people. The latest act of aggression committed by Israel shows once again that its policy of aggression and expansion against the ?alestinian and other Arab
peoples is the main cause of the prolonged turbulence in
the Middle East. Therefore, in order really to solve the
Middle East question it is imperative that the Israeli
authorities be compelled to give up that policy.

34. Before going into the matter at hand, may I offer you
my congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council. I should also like to pay a tribute to Sir
Geoffrey Howe and Sir John Thomson, who conducted
the work of the Council last month.

26. The international community, and above all, the
Security Council, should deal with this question in all
seriousness and with a greater sense of urgency and
responsibility and should adopt the necessary strong measures, pursuant to the Charter, to put an end to Israeli
aggression and bring about peace in the region.
27. Mr. ALZAMORA
(Peru) (interpreturionfrom
Spanish): We congratulate you cordially, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council. We wish to say how
greatly we appreciate the exemplary manner in which the
representatives of the United Kingdom exercised the presidency last month.

35. It is not possible for my Government to tolerate the
Israeli military action against Tunisia. We strongly condemn that action, which violates Tunisian sovereignty and
territorial integrity. It is indeed shocking and disturbing to
see that Israel, after persistent and repeated violation of
the sovereignty of its neighbours in the Middle East, has
now chosen to carry similar actions to North Africa, more
than halfway across the Mediterranean.

28. My delegation cannot fail to express its vigorous
rejection of this act of aggression against the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of a Member State and against
peace in the region to which it belongs.

36. We have publicly stated that this use of force
infringes the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, It cannot be justified as a
reprisal raid.
3

?

37. The Israeli military action must inevitably be
assessedin the light of a long list of previous acts by Israel
which have involved the frequent and arrogant use of
force, such as the aggression against Lebanon, the occupation of the West Bank, Gaza, the Golan Heights and Jerusalem, policies of oppression in .the occupied Arab
territories and the air raid against the Iraqi nuclear power
plant in 1981. The latest Israeli action is in total contradiction of the hopes and efforts for a peaceful settlement in
the Middle East. Israel seems to rely exclusively on the use
of force and to be totally uninterested in promoting conditions conducive to dialogue and conciliation.

our warmest congratulations on your assumption of the
nresidencv of the Security Council for the month of October. It is-more than a pleasure for us to see you, as the
representative of the United States, a friendly country
which has very close and long-standing ties with Thailand,
presiding over this meeting. I am convinced that your wide
experience, political wisdom and proven diplomatic skill
will guide the Council’s proceedings to fruitful and constructive results.
43: I should like also to congratulate Sir John Thomson,
the representative of the United Kingdom and the President of the Council for the month of September. His effective and skilful diplomacy and his knowledge of the
substantive issues of concern to the Council earned our
respect ‘and gratitude as he steered our proceedings to a
successful conclusion during that busy period.

38. We have been watching closely the recent efforts
aimed at initiating’a process of negotiation in the Middle
East. We have regarded the Jordanian-PLO
initiative as
an opportunity which should not be wasted. The difficulties
on the way to a peaceful settlement cannot be minimized,
but obviously they can never be surmounted if steps are not
taken to overcome them. That is’what we believe should
have been done by Israel. Actions which fan the cycle of
violence will further hamper the search for a peaceful solution and inevitably distract attention from this goal.

44. My delegation deeply regrets and deplores the violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Tunisia,
a country friendly to Thailand, by the Israeli air force. We
take note of the reasons cited by Israel for launching the
air strike-namely,
that it was done in retaliation for vi&
lent acts against Israeli nationals. It is well known; however, that according to international law the principle of
proportionality
must be taken into account. While we
regret the loss of 15 Israeli lives during the past few weeks,
we also regret deeply the loss of over 60 lives in TunisiaLa
figure which is evident proof of the lack of proportionality
on this matter. In any case, the violation of Tunisia’s sovereignty and territorial integrity must be condemned.

39. Nothing can justify the ruthless action taken against
Tunisia, a peace-loving country with which Turkey has ties
of valued friendship. The Israeli attack was carried out
indiscriminately. We offer our Tunisian and Palestinian
brothers our deep sympathy for the human and material
’
losses they have suffered.
40. Turkey, having suffered bitterly from acts of violence
and assassination both at home and abroad, is a staunch
advocate of effective multilateral action against international terrorism, and we have been outspoken in this
respect. However, we have always rejected the concept of
the State itself indulging in terrorism-in
particular,
actions which are contrary to international law and liable
to kill or harm innocent people. We certainly do not condone the terrorist attack,on three Israelis in ,Lamaca; but
the perpetrators of that odious crime have been arrested.
On the other hand, the PLO has denied responsibility for
this attack. Israel would have been quite justified in
demanding that the criminals in South Cyprus should be
adequately punished. But to attack a country like Tunisia,
whose moderate and constructive policies have won the
respect of the whole world, is outrageous. Israel also
manifests a deep contradiction. On the one hand, it refuses
to recognize the PLO as the representative of the Palestinian people; on the other. hand, it holds the PLO responsible for acts that any Palestinian commits. ,.

45. In this regard, my delegation wishes to express its
sincere condolences to the Tunisian Government .and
people for their grievous losses.
46. While we condemn all acts of violence, particularly in
the Middle East-an area which has been ravaged by so
many conflicts for so long-we must all stand firm for
principles and for, the rights of peoples, particularly the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. We are deeply
sympathetic with them in their plight.
47. In this .particular case, and in the interests of interna:
tional law and order, my -delegation demands that Israel
desist in the future from the perpetration or the threat .of
such acts and that Israel pay due compensation for the
losses resulting from its aggressive acts.
48. Mr. WOOLCGTT
(Australia): ,Let .me begin by
extending my delegation’s warm congratulations to .you,
Sir,.on your assumptibn of the presidency for the month of
October and wishing you every successin the task ahead of
you.

41. If Israel can get ‘away with its latest unwarranted
action, that will be tantamount to ,tacit approval of the use
of force each time the Government of Israel considers that
opportune. We hope; therefore,, that the Council will not
fail to condemn unequivocally the aggression of Israel
against Tunisia .and’to stand fm against any repetition of
such acts.
~
42. Mr; KASEMSARN
(Thailand): I should like at the
outset to extend to you, Sir, on behalf of my delegation,

49. I should like also to express briefly. my delegation’s
very sincere appreciation. to’ the representative of. the
United Kingdom, Sir John Thomson; for his skilful and
distinguished discharge of his duties in September, which
turned out to be a rather arduous month.
50. We have seen yet another incident -iri the sad cycle of,
violence and counter-violence in the Middle East. It is. an
4

incident which, whatever- the background may be, cannot
be condoned, and we express our sympathy tothe Govemment and people of Tunisia on the violation of their sovereignty and the loss of life that has been occasioned by this
unfortunate event.

60. What are the facts? For the past year, the PLO headquarters in Tunisia has initiated, planned, organized and
launched hundreds of terrorist attacks against Israel,
against Israeli targets outside Israel and against .Jewseverywhere. Those attacks have included several sea-borne
assaults aimed explicitly at the mass murder of civilians.
Fortunately, they were intercepted by our forces, but I
think only the most irresponsible and cynical would consider the planning of such crimes less heinous because they
failed. But they did not always fail. In the past year, more
than 600 such attacks have killed or’ severely wounded
more than 75 Israeli civilians-schoolchildren,
teachers,
commuters, shoppers, tourists.

51. Australia condemns all acts of terrorism and violence, wherever ‘and whenever they take place. On this
occasion, Israel has engaged in an act of violence which
has resulted in the death of innocent civilians and which is
clearly a breach of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations.
52. Whether or not the PLO has carried out acts of terrorism against Israel is not really’the point at issue. The
point is ‘that even if we were to accept Israel’s version of
the events, two wrongs do not make a right. There is also,
of course, the question of the strength of the response to
the alleged actions that were used to justify Israel’s
reaction.

61. There is something common to all those civilian victims. Not only were they obviously innocent noncombatants under any definition, they aiso had no
involvement whatsoever with any military activity, nor
were they near any military targets. They were not the
incidental and regrettable civilian casualties of military
actions which occur in every military action, or in many.
They themselves were the intended victims, the designated
targets of the PLO, because the aim of the PLO is identical
to its methods-murder,
deliberate and systematic murder
of Israelis and Jews, and ultimately murder of the Jewish
State itself.

53. Australia has always maintained, and still maintains,
that Israel has the right to exist in peace within legally
recognized borders and free from outside attack. Tunisia,
of course, has exactly the same right.

62. The most recent killings-and
I stress ‘merely the
most recent-were the savage early-morning slaughter of
three ~defencelesspeople, a woman and two men, vacationing on a boat at the marina in Lamaca. Like other such
“heroic actions”, to use PLO language, that one was carried out by the “elite” unit of the PLO, which tells us
something, I suppose; about the PLO’s ideas of excellence.

54. It is particularly unfortunate that the raid should
have taken place at a time when there had been some
encouraging signs of movement towards a comprehensive
settlement in the Middle East, and in that context my
delegation welcomes especially the statement of King Hussein of Jordan in the General Assembly last week.* We
must ensure that this kind of action by Israel is not permitted to set back the search for peace.

63. Sensing that even the tolerance of a cynical world has
its limits, the PLO first denied culpability in the murders,
and then switched to the preposterous allegation that the
middle-aged tourists were spies. The butchery at Lamaca
was perpetrated by “Force 17”, Yasser Arafat’s personal
bodyguard unit. We have irrefutable evidence, intelligence
evidence, which will soon be coming out not only from our
sources but from other sources as well. Those are the same
people who attempted to carry out the mass murder from
the boats we intercepted a few weeks ago, as well as many of
the other attacks which I have cited. They are also the very
people who occupied the PLO headquarters in Tunisia.

55. Australia condemns Israel’s action and calls upon
Israel to respect the norms of international law.
56. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Israel, on whom I now call.
57. Mr. NETANYAHU
(Israel): I congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We are confident in your wisdom and your abilities, which have been demonstrated in so many other international forums and gatherings.

64. There has seldom been a more focused, more limited,
more surgical strike aimed at the culprits, and at the culprits alone. Israel’s forces took special care to pinpoint the
target-three buildings that housed the PLO headquarters.
Despite the assertion of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Tunisia that they were scattered private houses, the facts
are different. I heard the PLO say here today that the
targets were “PLO of&es” and the Egyptian representative say, correctly, that they were “PLO headquarters”. So
let us put that one to rest: the target was the headquarters
of the PLO, the nerve centre of its world-wide operations,
and everybody here knows it. If there were any civilian
casualties, they were wholly inadvertent and unintentional,
and the result of the deliberate PLO tactic, which, I may
add, has been well established in Tripoli, Beirut and else-

58. This is also an occasion to congratulate Sir John
Thomson on what I think can be called a truly exemplary
stewardship of impeccable impartiality in the conduct of
the Council’s business.
‘59. Once again the Council is selectively convened to
attack a legitimate act of selfdefence by Israel. The allegation against us is that we engaged in an aggressive act
against another country. Nothing could be a greater perversion of the truth. If anything can be defined as aggression, it is the actions taken against us. If anything can be
defined as self-defence, it is the action taken by us. It is a
legitimate ‘response to acts of terrorism.
5

launched its sea-borne killers and its murderers throughout the world? Was there a word, or even a whisper, or
condemnation, let alone a suggestion of any action against
the PLO after the killers had done their grisly deeds at
Larnaka? Faced with this stunning indifference from the
international community, Israel had to act. And it acted,
as is its right and its obligation, to protect its citizens. No
other country would act differently.

where, of planting its bases among civilians. Civilians, let
us remember, are the key to the PLO strategy. It kills
civilians and it hides behind them.
65. As for the assertion that it was an unprovoked attack
on a country not actively at war with Israel, every State has
a responsibility to prevent armed attacks from its territory,
especially terrorist attacks against civilians. Which country
would tolerate repeated attacks against its citizens by terrorists openly headquartered, organized and trained in,
and launched from, another country? Distance does not
absolve one of responsibility. Uganda, after the Entebbe
rescue, offered the feeble and false excuse that it did not
know of the terrorists’ designs. Lebanon claimed that it
was too weak to do anything about them. But Tunisia
knew, and it. was strong enough to stop them. It knowingly
harboured the PLO and allowed it complete freedom of
action in planning, training, organizing and launching
murderous attacks from its soil. While the PLO’s poison
has contaminated many countries, the head of the PLO
serpent is in Tunisia.

71. Some’ here have alleged that our action was aimed
against the peace process. What nonsense! Israel remains
committed to peace-real peace-with all its neighbours.
But what kind of peace have some of the people been
talking about here today? They have been talking about a
peace that allows PLO gunmen to kill with impunity; a
kind of peace where so long as innocent Jewish blood is
shed, no one bats an eyelash; a peace where, when we
finally rise to defend ourselves against PLO terror, we face
a deafening chorus of hypocritical condemnation, sometimes, I might add, from the very victims of that same
terror. The kind of peace that some have talked about here
is the peace of the grave, with Israel buried and gone. That
is not the peace we have in mind.

66. Under no circumstances can Israel accept the notion
that bases and headquarters of terrorist killers should
enjoy immunity anywhere, any time. It was against them
that our action was directed, not against their.host country. Nevertheless, the host country does bear considerable
responsibility.

72. No one can seriously talk about peace with Israel
while embracing the PLO.*It remains unalterably committed to the destruction of my country and to the unbridled
practice and ‘espousal of terrorism. The true obstacle to
peace is the PLO, and those who acquiesce in terrorism,
those who urge us to submit to it, are not building peace:
they are burying it.

67. What is that responsibility, and what is its relationship to the question of sovereignty? We cannot be confused or deflected by a misleading definition
of
sovereignty. Sovereignty cannot be separated from its
responsibilities, and chief among these is preventing a sovereign territory from being used as a launching ground for
acts of aggression against another country. When a country abdicates that fundamental responsibility, either deliberately or because of neglect, it risks taking upon itself all
the consequences of such dereiiction of duty.

73. Our operation against the PLO headquarters, therefore, should be viewed for what it is: one action in our
larger continuing battle against the core of regional and
international terrorism, the PLO. The PLO has nurtured,
and trained, and armed, and financed terror groups on
every continent and of every political complexion. The
only requirement is that these partners in crime share the
PLO’s savage impulses. In Lamaka, for example, one of
the apprehended killers, a foreign recruit to Force 17, who
shot Mrs. Esther P&u in the back of the head, is a British
neo-Nazi. And although the PLO had lost its all-important
terrorist empire in Lebanon, it established a new extraterritorial base in Tunisia, from which it sought to continue,
presumably at a safe distance, its campaign of global
terror.

68. It has been stated often, and I shall state it once
more: the interest of a State in exercising protection over
its nationals may take precedence over territorial sovereignty. Article 51 of the United Nations Charter says quite
clearly:
“Nothing in the present Charter shall impair the
inherent right of individual or. collective selfdefence if
an armed attack occurs against a Member of the United
Nations.‘*

74. This cannot be. Terrorism unchallenged and unopposed breeds further terrorism, because the successof terrorists ‘in one part of the world encourages terrorists
everywhere. Like cancer, terrorism spreads throughout the
international body, one cell multiplying into many. By
now, I think, everyone here can see how far the disease has
spread. Even the sponsors and defenders of terror are not
immune. International terrorism, patented, perfected and
propagated by the PLO, has become the modem equivalent of the plague. It is not-it never was-merely Israel’s
problem. It strikes at Korean Ministers; it blows up Indian
aircraft; it kidnaps French, and American, and now even
Soviet, diplomats; it bums uncontrollably throughout the
Middle East; it bombs the streets of Europe; it wreaks

69. Indeed, scores of Member States, many of them iu
this chamber today, have often claimed precisely this right
to act in self-defence to curb armed attacks from other
countries. The only question that may arise is whether
other remedies are available. In this case none existed. On
the contrary, Tunisia did not show an inkling of a desire or
an intention to prevent the PLO from planning and initiating terrorist activities from its soil.
70. I have heard a lot of censure and condemnation
today. Perhaps I can ask representatives: Where was the
censure of the international community when the PLO
6

havoc in the capitals of Latin America. It is a disease that
must be arrested, and soon, before it engulfs us all.

lism of this General Assembly session of peace, it can be
seen in what Tunisia has just suffered because of zionism, t
its logic and its objectives, which it has never concealed.

75. If, finally, on its fortieth anniversary the United
Nations were truly committed to acting effectively against
_,intemational terrorism, it would before all else rid itself of
the contaminating presence of the PLO, the arch-terrorists
of our time. And if the Security Council were to adhere
faithfully to its true purposes, it would convene to fmd
ways and means of combating this major threat to the
international order rather than condemning one of the few
countries which has acted boldly, and resolutely, and
responsibly to defend itself-and, may I add, the entire
civilized world-against the scourge of modem terror.

83. I have said that Zionism has broadened its sphere of
aggression to the Maghreb. This is an ambition it has
always admitted. The action therefore comes as no surprise. If it is a surprise to anyone, it is those whose consciences have been lulled and who have lost their sense of
what Zionism is and what it has always been. The order of
aggressive violence is spreading to cover that vast space
which, from the Gulf to the Atlantic, has been designated
by the strategists of zionism as the area for the materialization of their ever-present plans of hegemony and conquest.

76. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Algeria, Mr. Ahmed Taleb Ibrahimi, whom I welcome. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

84. Zionism, therefore, has no other basis, no other logic,
than the negation of peace. Algeria has affirmed this, and
reaffirms it now with all the more conviction since these
new events serve to corroborate what we have always
believed.

77. Mr. TALEB

IBRAHIMI

(Algeria)

(interpretation

85. That zionism means a desire for expansion and endless hegemony is a fact. That it represents the genocide of
the Palestinian people is another fact. In response, the
Arab nation can only close ranks, join forces and rally its
strength’. There is in this much food for thought for Palestinian resistance, which represents the will of the Palestinian people never to surrender its destiny.

from French): I should like first of all, Sir, to congratulate

you warmly on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the current month. I am convinced
that your great experience and your knowledge of world
affairs will make your presidency a successful one.
78. I wish also to express my appreciation of the most
skilful way in which Sir John Thomson discharged his
presidential responsibilities last month.

86. What the Arab people is undergoing, what the Palestinian people is experiencing, in daily martyrdom, enjoys a
certain indulgence, if not complicity, The Council is the
first witness of this.

79. Zionism has just struck at Tunisia, thus widening its
sphere of aggression from the Arab Mashreq to the Arab
Maghreb. Algeria, of course, feels doubly affected: first of
all, because our sister country, Tunisia, has been the victim
of an attack on its security, its sovereignty and its territorial integrity; and secondly, because the Palestinian people
has been hounded to the last lands of sanctuary where its
exodus and wandering have forced it to seek refuge.

87. History will remember that those who strove to stifle
the hopes of the Palestinian people only nourished its despair; history will remember, furthermore, that those who
saw tit to conceal, justify or, worse yet, endorse its acts of
aggression wherever they occurred gave comfort and
encouragement to Zionism; history will remember, lastly,
that the only response to fierce oppression is a fierce and
unbending desire to be free. They bear.responsibility for
the continuing tragedy of the Middle East, just as they bear
responsibility for what Tunisia has just suffered.

80. This aggression evokes in my country’s national
memory the first price paid by Tunisia, through Sakiet Sidi
Yusuf-for the cause of Algeria’s independence. Tunisia is
today paying a second price-for the cause of the national
rights of another people, the Palestinian people.

88. If the crisis in the Middle East and the question of
Palestine arose at the time the United Nations was born,
that is all the more of an obligation for it to act on this
issue to ensure respect for the principles on the basis of
which it was established. An act of aggression cannot go
unpunished. The Security Council especially must no
longer accept fairs accomplis. It must reawaken its conscience, as is demanded by an outright act of aggression
against a Member State.

81. I cannot recall those events without feeling strong
emotion in respect of a country, Tunisia, whose clearmindedness and sense of responsibility have characterized
and continue to characterize its international relations,
and above all, the determination of its actions when what
is at stake is no less than the cause of the freedom of
peoples, the meeting of their aspirations and full realization of their rights.

89. Here, where too often the same arguments are developed to try to justify the most flagrant violation of principies which it is the duty of the Council to safeguard, it is no
coincidence that Tel Aviv and Pretoria must both-answer
for offences of the same nature on a continent united, from
north to south, in the same solidarity against two determined aggressors.

82. If Tunisia is attacked, the Maghreb, the Arab nation
and Africa as a whole are attacked. But the entire.intemational community also is defied, at a time when it is gathering here to proclaim loud and strong the validity and
relevance of the ideals of the United Nations. If there is a
breach of those ideals, a nameless outrage to the symbo7

90. The commemoration of the foretieth anniversary of
the United Nations is a unique opportunity for this reawakening of conscience. We venture to believe that the
opportunity will be grasped by the Council in the name of
its mission of peace. What is at stake is its credibility and
that of all we are celebrating today for a better world. To
this end, we must first eliminate for ever the crimes of
apartheid and of zionism.
.91. The Council ‘is in a position to affirm this primary
necessity. It has in its hands its own prestige and that of the
entire United Nations, of which it is the corrective arm.
The crimes so often concealed or absolved here cannot
serve its purpose.

and naked force, and the complete absence of respect for
elementary human rights, primarily for the inalienable
right to life.
97. That is the unmistakable answer of the Israeli leaders
to the repeated demands addressed to them -resolutely by
the international community, demands for them to put an
end immediately to the policy of terror and aggression
against the Arabs, to revise their obstructionist policy and
to proceed along the path of a comprehensive and just
settlement in the Middle East.
98. Israel has ouenlv taken unon itself the rirrht to use
terror. The attitude of the So& Union to Stateterrorism
and any other kind of terrorism is well known. We cannot
fail to remind members of the Council that, at the thirtyninth session of the General Assembly, it was precisely the
Soviet Union that submitted a draft resolution on the inadmissibility of the policy of State terrorism, which was
adopted by an overwhelming majority [resolution 39/Z.WJ.
That resolution is highly applicable to the situation now
under consideration by.the Council. The events in Tunisia
convincingly show that Tel Aviv not only is unwilling to
heed the voice of reason but is deliberately hurling a challenge at the United Nations and the whole. world
community.
,

92. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union’ of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): I welcome you,
Sir, as President of the Security ‘Councii for this month and
wish you success in the ‘fulfilment of your msponsible
tasks. I should also like to thank your predecessor, the
representative’ of the United Kingdom, for his highly
skilled leadership of the work of the Council in September.
93. On behalf of the Soviet delegation I wish to thank
you and all those who have expressed condolences in connection with the criminal kidnapping of four Soviet off&
cials in Beirut and the killing of one of them.

99. -We would be failing to state the whole truth were we
to pass over in silence the role of those who stand behind
Israel. Were it not for their unlimited support and assistance, it would have long ago proved possible to call the
aggressor to order. This time again, United States officials
at the highest possible level have hastened to give Israel, as
it were, an indulgence for the remission of its sins by
declaring that they regarded yesterday’s .raid by Israel
against the capital of Tunisia as a legitimate reaction to the
actions of terrorists.

94. Like the overwhelming majority of delegations in this
chamber and outside it, the Soviet delegation learned with
profound indignation of the aggression. committed by
Israel against yet another sovereign Arab country, Tunisia.
We listened attentively to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Tunisia, Mr. CaId Essebsi [262&h meeting]. The facts he
set forth demonstrated convincingly that what we are dealing with here is an act that Tel Aviv carefully planned and
executed in cold blood, an’act designed to undermine the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of a peace-loving, independent Member State.

100. The question properly arises how one can reconcile
the role of the United States as a permanent member of the
Security Council, which bears primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, with its
unconditional support of even the most extreme manifestations of the adventurist policy of Israel. In the recent past
there have been quite a few speeches made in Washington
about the need to light international terrorism; at the same
time, it is difficult to find a clearer example of State terror
elevated to the rank of a State policy than that which has for
a long time been practised by Tel Aviv.

95. The Soviet delegation expresses its profound condolences to the Government and people of Tunisia in connection with the civilian victims of this act; We were deeply
impressed also by the statement of the Deputy Prime Mini
ister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait, Sheikh
Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah [ibid.], who was
speaking on behalf of the Group of Arab ,States, and the
leader of the Political Department and member of the
Executive ‘Committee of the Palestine Liberation Organization, Mr. Farouk Qaddoumi [ibid.]

101. There is another quite important aspect to the present situation .to which we must refer; With each passing
year, the number of resolutions condemning Israel and
demanding that it put an end to its aggressive policy has
been constantly growing. Virtually all of them have
remained unfulfilled. Such a state of affairs is intolerable,
because it undermines the very foundations of the Organization. It is the firm conviction of the Soviet delegation
that the collective duty of the Security Council is to guarantee the implementation by Israel of the decisions we
have adopted, as required directly by the provisions of
Article 25 of the Charter.

96. ’ In these latest events, we see reflected as in a drop of
water the essence of the policy pursued ,by Israel over
almost four decades now against the Arab States and peoples. Whether we are talking of the West Bank, the Gaza
Strip, the Golan Heights, Iraq, Lebanon and now Tunisia,
this signature of the Israeli aggressors everywhere remains
the same; It is a cynical disregard for the fundamental
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, the norms
of international law and the resolutions of the United
Nations, a studied undermining of the generally ‘recognized bases’for,‘. inter-State relations, the reliance on terror
8

stance in international relations and one which has consistently played an important and constructive part in the
history of the Organization from its earliest years.

102. Only recently, on 26 September, a highly important
meeting of the Security Council was held, in which the
ministers and representatives of all 15 members of the
Council took part [2608th meeting]. A great deal was said at
that meeting about the need to enhance the effectiveness of
this principal organ of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and security. Yet we find that
today, only a few days after that meeting, the Council is
dealing with the consideration of a situation which it would
seem should be exceedingly clear, namely, a wholly unprovoked attack on one of the States Members of the United
Nations. One would have liked to hope that the Council
would prove equal to the tasks before it. Otherwise, all the
talk about enhancing its effectiveness may turn out to be
just a hollow, empty sound.

109. Tunisia deserves the support and solidarity of the
entire international community in the face of the violation
of its sovereignty. My Government .:offers this wholeheartedly. We also offer our deep sympathy to the Govemment and people of Tunisia who have. been the victims of
this outrage and to the families of those, both Tunisian
and Palestinian, ,who have been killed or wounded in the
raid.
110. The British Foreign Secretary in a statement yesterday expressed his understanding for the deep feelings of
revulsion and anger in Israel at ‘recent terrorist attacks.
The United Kingdom’s abhorrence of international terrorism is well known. My Government condemns any terrorist act anywhere in the world by whomsoever committed.

103. The Soviet delegation resolutely condemns the
attack of Israel against the capital of Tunisia and supports
the fully justified appeal by Tunisia to the Security Council. We consider that the duty of the Council is not only
resolutely to condemn the aggressor and demand from it
reparations for the damages inflicted but also to take, at
long last, measures in order to compel Israel to put an end
to its adventurist policy, which is profoundly inimical to
the interests of all peoples of the Middle East and the
interests of international peace and security as a whole.

111. However, my delegation cannot accept as valid the
reasons put forward by the Government of Israel for its
action. States Members of the United Nations, in accordance with Article 2 of the Charter, commit themselves to
settle their international disputes by peaceful means. Arbitrary and disproportionate violence of this ‘sort, even in
retaliation, is in clear breach of this obligation: Moreover,
we are not satisfied that the accusations levelled against the
PLO concerning the deplorable murder of three Israeli
citizens in Cyprus on 25 Septemberare valid. We take note
of the statement issued in Nicosia that day by the PLO
which explicitly denied involvement and condemned the *
action. But even if there had been demonstrable responsibility by the PLO, this would not have justified the retaliation
taken against Tunisia on 1 October.
:’

104. The Soviet Union once again expresses its solidarity
with and support for the Palestinian and other Arab peoples in their just struggle against Israeli aggression and the
intrigues of imperialism.
I.
105. Sir John THOMSON (United Kingdom): Mr. Presi;
dent, this is’a distinguished body, but you bring added
distinction to it. Although you did not begin as a career
diplomat, you have had a wealth of experience and mostly
at the highest levels that few professional diplomats possess. We shall all benefit from your wisdom.

112. In a statement issued yesterday [S/Z7520j, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Ten and of Spain and Portugal, meeting in the framework of European political
co-operation, strongly condemned the bombardment by
the Israeli air force of the headquarters of the PLO at Tunis,
an act which violated the sovereignty of a-friendly, peaceful
and moderate country and which constitutes a further element in the cycle of violence and counter-violence in the
Near East. While condemning equally the acts of terrorism
committed against Israeli citizens, the Ministers were of the
opinion that these did not justify such an action.

106. I should like to add that, on behalf of Sir Geoffrey
Howe and myself, I am most grateful to all for the kind
things that have. been said about our presidency.
107. It was with deep concern that my delegation heard
the news of the attack carried out by the Israeli Air .Force
in Tunisian territoryon 1 October. We have listened with
attention and sympathy to the characteristically restrained
statement made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Tunisia. We have also taken careful note of the public
statements made by the Israeli Government in explanation
of their action, including the eloquent statement just made
by the’representative of Israel. We have studied the facts of
the case as they have become widely known. Our conclusion is that there can be no question but that the raid
constitutes a serious violation of Tunisian sovereignty and
that it has been the cause of the indiscriminate killing and
wounding of many innocent civilians.
.
108. The United Kingdom has for many years enjoyed
excellent and friendly relations with Tunisia. It is especially
sad that this act of violence should have been directed
against a country known for its peaceful and moderate

113. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Ten and of
Spain and Portugal went on to express’the hope that this
further escalation of violence would not undermine the.
efforts now under way aimed at bringing about a peaceful
solution to the Arab/Israeli conflict. This is indeed an
important point, with practical, long-term consequences.
This year, hopes have been raised by first steps towards
negotiations ,essential to the solution of the longstanding
and bitter issues raised by the dispute. My Government
from the start declared its warm support for King Hussein’s
courageous initiative, together with chairman Arafat; in
proposing a path towards such negotiations.
9

114. It was in the hope of encouraging this process,
which has already been delayed dangerously long, that the
British Prime Minister announced at Aqaba on 20 September an invitation to two distinguished representatives of
the PLO Executive Committee to visit London for a meeting with the British Foreign Secretary.

121. None the less, the Power that gives economic, military and diplomatic support to the Tel Aviv Government,
and parades its “strategic alliance” with that Government,
is directly responsible for the deadlock in the Council and,
therefore, for the continuation of Tel Aviv’s aggressive
actions.

115. As Sir Geoffrey Howe said in his statement yesterday, the urgent need is to break the cycle of violence. My
delegation urges all those who support efforts to resolve
the Arab/Israeli dispute in a peaceful and just manner not
to be deterred by this latest chapter in the unhappy history
of violent reprisal. We call upon the Israeli Government
and all the parties concerned to reaffirm their commitment
to seeking a peaceful solution and to abstain completely
from violent and provocative actions which imperil this
objective.

122. In fact, just a few weeks ago, on 13 September
[2aosth meeting], the representative of the United States
vetoed once again a draft resolution, moderate in tone,
which the non-aligned members of the Council had submitted and which deplored the repressive measures taken
by Israel against the Palestinian population in the occupied
territories and requesting an immediate cessation of those
measures [S/I705rl.
123. The unconditional support ,for Israeli policies and
practices given by the United States Government explains
the fact that the Security Council is obliged to meet time
and again to consider actions such as that carried out
yesterday against the peaceful Republic of Tunisia.

116. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, Mr. Isidoro Malmierca Peoli.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

124. Tunisia, in fulfilment of its duty of solidarity with
the Palestinian resistance and with the heroic struggle of its
Palestinian brothers, welcomed in its capital its sole and
legitimate representatives, the leaders and cadres of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, thus arousing the ire of
the Israeli Zionist regime. Yesterday’s act of aggression,
aimed mainly against Palestinians, also had the objective
of punishing Tunisia for its worthy and fraternal attitude
in defence of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people.

117. Mr. MALMIERCA
PEOLI (Cuba) (interpretation
from Spanish): There have been many occasions on which
this body, which is responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security, has had to meet to consider Israel’s repeated acts of aggression against neighbouring Arab countries. To this long chain of victims of Zionist
terror the Republic of Tunisia has today been added.
118. It was with genuine indignation that the intemational community, and, in particular, the non-aligned
countries, received the news about the criminal and unjustified attack perpetrated by Israeli military forces against
Tunisia, causing a large number of dead and wounded
among the Tunisian and Palestinian civilian population
and enormous material damage.

125. With unparalleled cynicism, the White House
spokesman described as legitimate that act of international
piracy, worthy of Nazi Germany. Such an affirmation is
plainly and simply to sanctify terrorism as an international
practice. This comes as no surprise to us. The present
United States administration advocates the carrying out of
similar “‘surgical strikes” against Nicaragua and other
independent States, while the arrogant attacks and interference that violate the sovereignty of peoples have been the
comer-stones of its imperialist policy from the days of
Monroe to the present.

119. This flagrant violation of the rules of international
law and of the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations is all the more striking in view of the
fact that this latest action by the Tel Aviv Government has
been taken against a country whose peace-loving nature is
universally recognized.

126. We may well wonder in this case, in view of the
prompt and open support that Israeli aggression has been
given by the United States Government, whether the strategic alliance was not in operation here as well, providing
the aggressors with logistical, intelligence or other support
for the attack on the Republic of Tunisia.

120. On many occasions my country has referred in the
Council to the dangers to international peace and security
posed by the fact that the Israeli leaders continue with
impunity to attack neighbouring States and the Palestinian
people. In drawing the attention of members of the Council to this problem, we have expounded the need for the
Council to apply against Israel the comprehensive mandatory sanctions provided for in the Charter, and in particular those contained in Chapter VII. Had the Council been
able to carry out its responsibilities under the Charter, it
might perhaps have been possible some time ago to stop
the spiral of violence started by Israel and to create the
conditions necessary for a just and lasting solution to the
conflict of the Middle East and its root cause, the question
of Palestine.

127. The Government of the United States should be
made to understand that it cannot continue to violate the
spirit of the Charter by using the rule of unanimity to
impede the action of the United Nations and to cast a
protective cloak over the misdeeds of its, Israeli allies.
128. We hope that the Council will be able to fulfil its
responsibilities as the guardian of international peace and
security and that it will adopt the appropriate measures
which, according to the Charter, are called for by that
10

“We strongly condemn this savage act, which violates
all the principles of international law and also those of
the Charter of the United Nations to which the Jewish
State has, however, acceded.

unjustified aggression against a State Member. In addition,
Israel must be required to pay proper compensation to the
Republic of Tunisia and to the Palestinian population for
the loss of life and the material damages caused by this
brazen attack.

“In my capacity as current Chairman of the OAU, I
should also like to express to you the sense of shock felt
by Africa, and our unreserved support in these most
trying circumstances.

129. Lastly, I should like to express our most heartfelt
condolences to the Government and people of Tunisia, as
well as to the Palestinian people, through its sole and legitimate representative, the PLO, for the irreparable loss of
life. At the same time I reafftrm the unswerving solidarity
of the people and Government of Cuba.

“Let Israel, which is no longer troubled by the condemnation of the international community, know that
all of Africa is on Tunisia’s side and strongly castigates
its action, which is frankly unworthy of our day and
age.” [S/17559, annex I.]

130. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker inscribed on
my list is the representative of Senegal. I invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
13 1. Mr. SARRE (Senegal) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, your abilities as a statesman of integrity
anxious to see justice prevail over force were familiar to us
even before you came here. I am sure that under your
presidency our work will be crowned with success. In any
case, my delegation is very pleased to see you presiding
over the Security’ Council at this crucial moment.

The second message is addressed to chairman Arafat:
“In its blind frenzy against the Palestinian people,
Israel has, by its deadly and senseless bombing of Palestinian refugee camps in the suburbs of Tunis, once
again perpetrated an act of deliberate murder against
innocent civilian populations.

132. I should also like to take this opportunity to convey
our sincere congratulations to your predecessor, Sir John
Thomson, representative of the United Kingdom, for the
exemplary manner in which he conducted the work of the
Council in September.

“I should like to express to you on this painful occasion my deep sympathy, total support and active solidarity, and that of the Senegalese people.
“Senegal strongly condemns this blatant act of
aggression which tramples underfoot the rights of individuals and the Charter of the United Nations at a time
when the international community is preparing to celebrate the fortieth anniversary of the entry into force of
the document adopted at San Francisco.

133. Finally, I should like to thank all the members of
the Council for allowing me to take part once again in the
debate on the situation in the Middle East.
134. The whole of Africa was deeply distressed to learn
of the Israeli aggression against Tunisia-a
friend, a
brother and, moreover, a member of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU).

“In my capacity as current Chairman of the Organiration of African Unity, I should also like to reiterate to
you the solidarity of Africa which, like the Palestine
Liberation Organisation (PLO) against Israel, is waging
a struggle for the freedom and dignity of its people.

135. As soon as he learned of the act of aggression
against Tunisia, the President of the Republic of Senegal
and current Chairman of the OAU, Mr. Abdou Diouf,
addressed messages to Mr. Habib Bourguiba, President of
the Republic of Tunisia, and to Mr. Yasser Arafat, Chairman of the Executive Committee of the PLO.

“Through me, Africa expresses to you its unswerving
support for the PLO, the sole authentic representative
of the independent and sovereign Palestinian people.”

136. Before going into my statement, I should like, with
the Council’s permission, to read these messages. The first
is addressed to President Bourguiba:

[Ibid,

annex II.]

137. Exactly one week ago, the Security Council held a
commemorative meeting [260&h meeting] at which distinguished ministers and representatives of the countries
members of the Council unanimously renewed their collective commitment to work for the maintenance of intema-’
tional peace and security-decisive
factors for the
realization of the theme we have set ourselves: the United
Nations for a better world. Today’s meeting seems to be a
test of that collective commitment.

“I have just learned with surprise and consternation,
while on my way to the front-line States in my capacity as
current Chairman of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), of the violation by Israel of your country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity through its bombing of
Palestinian camps situated in the suburbs of Tunis.
“This barbarous raid has caused numerous casualties
among innocent victims and significant material
damage.

138. My country has always condemned terrorism, whatever its source and whatever its purported justification.
The cycles of violence we are now witnessing derive their
origins, we must acknowledge, from the fact that the question of the Middle East has not been solved. In that regard,

“On this distressing occasion, I should like to express
to you my active solidarity and that of the Senegalese
people.
11

my country has constantly emphasized that the question of
Palestine, which is at the heart of the problem of the Middle East, cannot be solved unless a just and lasting solution
to the question of the Middle East is found. That will be
the best way to eliminate the tension and violence which
we are witnessing today and which endanger international
peace and security.
139. This is the second time in less than a month that the
Council has met to consider steps taken by Israeli forces
against the Palestinian population. At the Council meeting
on 13 September [2605th meeting] which dealt with the
Palestinian population in the occupied territories, I
emphasized, on behalf of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, that the
question of Palestine had now reached a critical phase, and
I urged the members of the Council to redouble their
efforts to find a just and lasting solution to that question. I
also expressed my,conviction that the International Peace
Conference on the Middle East, which enjoys virtually
unanimous support, provided all the interested parties
with enormous possibilities for participation in the negotiations, which should lead to a just and lasting solution. I
also appealed to the Council to take the appropriate measures to revive, on the basis of the principles and purposes
of the Charter and the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations, the policy of sincere dialogue between all the
parties.
140. With the passage of time and in response to the
growing pressures, from various quarters in support of a
just and lasting peace in the region, we would have thought
that Israel would show greater wisdom and greater moderation. Far from it, alas: in view of what has just happened,
it seems Israel has chosen tire power over negotiations.
Tragically for the Palestinian people and for the Middle
East, if not for the international community as a whole,
the cycle of violence continues. Earlier speakers have
already given the details of the unprovoked armed attack
by Israel against the headquarters of the PLO at Tunisthat is, 2,500 kilometres from Israel’s borders-which,
according to the Israelis, left at least 50 dead and more
than 50 injured, Palestinians and Tunisians, women and
children as well.

mination needed to tackle the underlying cause of the
Middle Fast problem, namely, the unacceptable fate of the
Palestinian people and the full exercise of their inalienable
rights in accordance with United Nations resolutions, we
shall continue to be confronted by such violence.
143. We strongly urge Israel to renounce these practices
and to respect the internationally recognized principles
and decisions of the Council, to associate itself with others
in a process of peace capable of doing justice to the rights
of the Palestinian people and leading to a just and lasting
solution to the Middle East problem, in all its aspects.
144. The question is what should be done in this fortieth
anniversary year of the United Nations, at a time when
Member States are seeking to reaffirm the role and authority of the United Nations and of the Council in regard to
the non-use of force in international relations and other
principles of international law. My country feels that it is
up to the Council to make sure that Israel at long last takes
account of its obligations under international law and the
Charter and resolutions and decisions of the Organization
designed to bring about a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East.
145. For that reason, we urge the Council to implement
the recommendations of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and the
recommendations unanimously adopted by the Intemational Conference on the Question of .Palestine, held at
Geneva in 1983, which have been endorsed several times
by an overwhelming majority-of the Members of the General Assembly. We repeat once again that these recommendations are solidly based on internationally recognized
fundamental principles relating to the Palestinian problem,
the very core of the Arab/Israeli conflict.
146. As it happens, the commemorative meeting of the
Security Council was presided over by a -permanent
member of the Council, and it also happens that this
Council meeting that is being held on the heels of that
commemorative meeting is presided over by another permanent member of the Council. This reminds me of the
statement made by the late Paul-Henri Spaak, the first
President of the General Assembly, in London in January
in 1946. In that statement he addressed himself to the great
Powers, and I should like to conclude my statement by
quoting what he said:

141. Whatever official explanations the Government of
Israel may give, there can be no doubt that Israel has once
again committed a t&grant violation of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of a Member State. This act is
indefensible under international law and runs wholly counter to the quest for a peaceful solution to the Middle East
question, and particularly to the Palestine question. .The
international community, must therefore firmly condemn
such reprisals beyond international boundaries. We offer
our solidarity to Tunisia, a sister country and also a
member of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienai
ble Rights of the Palestinian People, and to the PLO.

“At San Francisco opposing conceptions were apparent. One system has triumphed, a system which confers
considerable importance upon the great Powers. That
system must now be accepted, and I am sure I am
speaking for the great majority of the representatives
when I say to the great Powers, whose will prevailed at
San Francisco, that we attach the utmost importance to
a good understanding among them and that it is from
their agreement and collaboration that we expect success in our work, security and a lasting peace.“’

I42. Senegal is most deeply concerned at the possibility
that this kind of raid may be repeated in the future, as has
happened all too often in the past. So long as the intemational community fails to show the political will and deter/

147. Forty years later, I think that that appeal is more
valid than ever. As we enter a new era, having reached the
12

.’

fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, a call is once
again made to our conscience, and thereby that of the great
Powers. That awareness is in fact an appeal to the great
Powers entrusted with the responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security in the world to do
their utmost to find a felicitous and lasting solution to the
burning problems before the Organization. I am absolutely
.sure that that appeal by Paul-Henri Spaak is still alive in our
minds and that it will be taken account of by the Council
during its deliberations.

itself the right to attack any State, at any time and under
any circumstances, to protect its arbitrarily conceived selfinterest.

148. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan, whom I welcome. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

154. The gravest aspect of the Israeli attack was
undoubtedly Israel’s underlying motive to destroy the
recently improved prospects of peace in the Middle East.
The choice of timing for the attack, when important proposals for negotiations involving the Palestinians were taking shape, is no coincidence. Nervous about the
implications of a peace built on recognition of Palestinian
rights, Israel has shown a clear preference for uncertainty
and chaos so that it may resort to the use of force at will
and keep the Palestinian people deprived of their legitimate national rights.

149. Mr. YAQUB KHAN (Pakistan): May I extend to
you, Sir, my warm felicitations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of October. Your
great country shares a momentous responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace, and, being a close
friend, Pakistan has great expectations of the United States
as a promoter of peace and a pioneer in .world progress. I
am confident that your acknowledged experience in diplomacy and your statesmanship will ensure successful stewardship of the important work of the Council this
month.

155. The Israeli attack was illegal on all counts, and
cannot be legitimized on the basis of any legal or moral
criteria. As Israel’s principal ally, the United States has a
special role to play in rectifying the situation created by
the Israeli refusal to respect the imperatives of peace in
the area. Decisive action by the United States to ensure
the fruition of current Arab initiatives for peace and to
promote the United Nations proposal for a peace conference is necessary in order to dispel the shadow cast by
the Israeli action on the prospects for peace in the Middle East.

150. I further take this opportunity to congratulate Sir
Geoffrey Howe and Sir John Thomson on the excellent
manner in which they guided the work of the Council
during the course of the past month.

156. Pakistan desires to see the Security Council exercise the authority vested in it by the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and impose mandatory
sanctions against Israel to curb’its defiance of the principles of the Charter and the Council’s decisions. Given
the limitations of the Council, however, the least we
expect from it is that it take a position of principle condemning the illegal and unprovoked
Israeli attack
against the sovereignty and independence of Tunisia and
adopt a decision to prevent its recurrence and to promote the Arab initiatives for peace, especially those
within the United Nations context. The victims of the
Israeli attack also deserve to be fully compensated.

151. Four days ago, King Hussein of Jordan elaborated
a blueprint for a peaceful settlement in the Middle East in
his important address to the General Assembly.’ His eloquent advocacy of peace and his offer of concrete proposals for a just settlement revived hopes that the concomitant
issues of Palestine and the Middle East might finally begin
evolving towards a just and comprehensive settlement.
152. That optimism now lies buried in the debris of the
premises of the PLO at Tunis, razed to the ground by the
outrageous Israeli attack which caused the tragic loss of
scores of innocent Tunisian and Palestinian lives. The
Government and people of Pakistan condemn the attack
in the strongest terms and extend their. condolences to its
victims. We renew our pledge of solidarity with the people
and Government of Tunisia and with the Palestinians and
their representative, the PLO.

157. The Security Council has a sacred obligation to
bring about a just solution of the Palestine issue. It was
the United Nations decision to partition Palestine 38
years ago that created the State of Israel. Now it is for
the Council to ensure that the Palestinians, who remain
deprived of their legitimate national rights, are enabled
to regain their rightful place among the comity of
nations, with a State of their own in Palestine. c

153. The Israeli attack was an act of stark terrorism brazenly committed with the arrogance of a State blinded by
vengeance and spurred on by unbridled expansionist ambitions. It was a premeditated and organized attack,
launched by Israel without provocation 2,500 kilometres,
away from its borders, against the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Tunisia, whose adherence
to a policy of peace has been beyond question. The Israeli
crime is compounded by the fact that Israel arrogates to

It%e meeting rose at 6.30 p.m.

NOTES
’ Official Records of the GeneraI Assembly,
Meetings.
12th meeting.
2 Official Records of the General Assembly.
Plenary Meetings.
2nd meeting, p. 49.

13

Fortieth

Session. Pienary

First part offirst

session,

HOW TO OBTAIN IJNITRD NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtainedfrom bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales!iection. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCIJRRR LRS PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNDZI
Lespublications
desNationsUniessentenventedamleslibralrieset lesagences
d@ositaires
du mondeentier. lnformez-vous
aupr&sdevotre libraireou adressez-vous
g : NationsUnies.
Sectiondesventes.NewYork oarCledve.
KAK I’IOJIYYIITB W3JIAHMR OPTAHM3AlJIW OB’bEJIIHEHHbIX
ki3iWWl

OpWH3itUHH

O~WXHHCHH~

HaUHli

MOXCHO

HAIDIn

KYIIHTb

8 YHHXHblX
MaTa3HHaX
Harettrcraax ~0Bcexpall0~ttxMttpa.H~~IOXHTC
cnpaawrt
06 tt3natmnxB faueh4 KHH)I(HOM
HaIZlHHC
HJIH IUUUHTC
II0 &UlpecY:
OpraHH3aUHn
O6lSnHHCHHblX
HauHR.CeKUHR
no
n~ila%CC
H3REIHHtt.
HbIO-ROpK
HJIH XeHCBa.

COMO CONSECUIRPIJBLICACIONBSDE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS
Laspublicaciones
delasNaciones
Unidases& enventaen librerfasy casas
distribuidoras
en
toriaspartesdelmundo.Consulte
a sulibreroo dirtjasea: Naciones
Unidas.SectiondeVentas.
NuevaYork o Ginebra.

Litbo in UnitedNations,New York

00300

90-61439-January1995-1.925
