S/2021/828

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 September 2021
Original: English

United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2547
(2020), by which the Council extended to 15 October 2021 the mandate of the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH), in accordance with Council resolution
2476 (2019), by which it established BINUH and requested me to report on the
implementation of the resolution every 120 days. The report includes significant
developments that have occurred since my previous report ( S/2021/559) and provides
an update on the implementation of the BINUH mandate.

II. Political issues and good governance (benchmark 1)
2.
The reporting period was marked by two watershed events: the assassination of
the President, Jovenel Moïse on 7 July, and an earthquake with a magnitude of 7.2
that struck south-western Haiti on 14 August, killing more than 2,240 people and
injuring some 12,700 others. Both events contributed to further heightening
uncertainties over the country’s stability and political trajectory and caused additional
delays in the overdue polls. On 19 August, my Deputy Secretary -General,
accompanied by the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme
made a two-day visit to express the solidarity and support of the United Nations to
Haiti. They visited affected communities and held discussions with the Government,
the Civil Protection Directorate and civil society leaders.
3.
In the early hours of 7 July, the country awoke to the shocking news that
President Moïse had been assassinated in an attack on his private residence in
Pétionville (West Department) in which the First Lady was gravely injured. In the
immediate aftermath of the assassination, the caretaker Cabinet, headed by the interim
Prime Minister, Claude Joseph, invoked article 149 of the amended Constitution to
decree a series of security measures, including a 15-day state of emergency which
conferred on the Government the authority to mobilize the Haitian National Police
and the Armed Forces of Haiti to conduct home searches and arrests, and to restrict
access in and out of the country – including by conducting security checks on the
roads and ordering the temporary closure of international airports. The population of
Port-au-Prince largely sheltered in place in the ensuing 48 hours and the overall
security situation in the country remained calm. However, during the State funeral on
23 July in Cap-Haïtien (North Department), protesters demanding justice for the late

21-12899 (E)

300921

*2112899*

S/2021/828

President blocked several main roads and looted private businesses as the police
worked to restore public order.
4.
To date, 44 suspects, including 20 Haitian police officers and several fore ign
nationals, have been arrested for their alleged involvement in the assassination, as
other individuals are wanted for questioning. Even though several investigations were
promptly launched, and assistance from international partners was provided, the
circumstances of President Moïse’s violent death remain unclear, and progress is
further complicated by the alleged transnational dimension of the crime. As a result,
speculation abounds over who financed and masterminded the assassination.
5.
The assassination further aggravated the institutional vacuum in Haiti as –
following the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)-related death of the President of the
Court of Cassation in June – the country’s three branches of power are now
dysfunctional. Nevertheless, the uncertainty as to the executive leadership caused by
the initial differences between the interim Prime Minister Claude Joseph and the
Prime Minister-designate Ariel Henry, whom the President had appointed some
24 hours before his death but not yet installed, rapidly abated. Prime Minister Henry
and his 18-member Cabinet took office on 20 July, with Mr. Joseph retaining his post
as Minister for Foreign Affairs and Religion. In this context, my Special
Representative and her team, in coordination with the Organ ization of American
States and other national and international actors, have continued to engage political
parties and civil society leaders to encourage dialogue among key stakeholders in
order that differences be set aside and the necessary consensus on the way forward be
forged.
6.
Since taking office, Prime Minister Henry has expressed his desire to reach a
political agreement, using an inclusive and consensual approach to create conditions
for holding national elections. On 11 September, over 150 political parties and civil
society organizations, including former opposition and ruling coalition groups,
reached an agreement with the Prime Minister on the governance arrangements for
the period leading up to elections, to be organized no later than the end of 2022. The
agreement provides for a Prime Minister-led executive branch, a reconstituted
Cabinet and a new Provisional Electoral Council, as well as a Constituent Assembly
to finalize a draft constitution to be submitted to referendum for “ratification” .
Notably, a 33-member oversight body, inclusive of the 10 remaining senators, would
be given authority to block government decrees with a two -thirds majority. The
agreement also identifies priority areas for Government action with a focus on
security, justice and the economy.
7.
At the same time, some national stakeholders, including the Civil Society
Commission for a Haitian Solution to the Crisis, reiterated their preference for a
provisional president and a Prime Minister to lead the Executive and call ed for a
longer political transition during which extensive governance and security reforms
would be undertaken.
8.
The Prime Minister has continued to pursue intense outreach efforts to broaden
adhesion to the agreement, including by engaging with the Co mmission for a Haitian
Solution to the Crisis. These discussions are taking place amid a political rupture
between the Prime Minister and some senior officials from the late President’s
administration, who have been critical of the assassination investigat ion.
9.
Given that the political process had yet to fully ripen, Prime Minister Henry
dismissed as untenable the revised electoral calendars published by the Provisional
Electoral Council during the summer. Likewise, upon receiving on 8 September a
third version of the draft constitution from the Independent Consultative Committee
created by President Moïse, the Prime Minister indicated that a proposed Constituent
Assembly would review the document and produce a final text.
2/26

21-12899

S/2021/828

10. Meanwhile, a new electoral decree was published on 5 July. While most of the
provisions of the 2015 decree, which governed the organization of the 2015 –2017
electoral cycle, have been retained, some aspects – such as strengthening women’s
participation through binding measures and financial incentives to increase the
number of female candidates – have been improved.
11. The lack of consensus around the referendum, the earthquake, the Electoral
Council’s contested legitimacy and the intention of Government to change the
electoral council once a political agreement is reached, continued to hamper progress
in preparing for the polls. In mid-June, anti-referendum protests disrupted electoral
officer training sessions in Fort Liberté (North-East Department) and Jacmel (SouthEast Department). In addition, the electoral council has not yet completed the
recruitment of poll workers. In the aftermath of the 14 August earthquake, the Council
suspended electoral activities pending an evaluation of infrastructural and material
damage in the affected areas. Initial assessments indicate serious damage to some
commune-level electoral offices and scores of public buildings which the Council
intended to use as voting centres.
12. In the light of the likely additional delays in the electoral calendar, the registration
window is expected to be reopened. As at 30 August, more than 5 million Haitians of
voting age had registered for the new identity card, which also serves as a voter card,
with women making up 52.7 per cent of the new voter registry. The t rend of higher
female registration is consistent across the 10 Departments and within the United States
of America-based diaspora. Lastly, on 19 July, the Government disbursed an additional
$6.5 million to the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) -managed basket
fund for elections, bringing its total contribution to $39.8 million, of which $12.4 million
has been disbursed to facilitate the organization of the earlier-planned constitutional
referendum.
13. Despite the uncertainty over when elections will be held, the joint electoral
security cell coordinated by the National Police continued to hold weekly meetings
with the electoral council, the United Nations and other national and international
partners. Owing to the expected delays stemming from the changes likely in the
electoral council and post-earthquake adjustments, the integrated national election
security plan and the cell’s election security budget will be further revised.
14. In parallel, international partners are supporting the police in upgrading its risk
assessment of the 1,534 polling centres and the logistics hubs where electoral
materials and assets are stored. Moreover, as part of a $1.5 million Peacebuilding
Fund project, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empower ment
of Women (UN-Women) and UNDP helped bring together representatives from civil
society organizations, political parties and the Provisional Electoral Council to
develop an electoral violence prevention and deterrence strategy. Lastly, the
recruitment and training of the 7,000 temporary election security officers has been
postponed pending a confirmed election date.

III. Community violence reduction (benchmark 2)
15. Gang violence in the Port-au-Prince metropolitan area continued despite a short
respite between the President’s assassination and his State funeral on 23 July. Since
early June, the resurgence of inter-gang turf wars and shifting alliances have caused
the displacement of some 19,000 people in the communes of Carrefour, Cité Soleil,
Croix-des-Bouquets, Delmas and the Port-au-Prince neighbourhood of Martissant
(West Department). The deadly clashes have also resulted in a restriction of road
access to the four southern departments – triggering shortages in essential goods such
as fuel and further crippling economic activities. On 2 August, Doctors Without
21-12899

3/26

S/2021/828

Borders was forced to close and relocate its hospital in Martissant, a facility which
had been operating for 15 years, owing to continuous aggression by armed gangs. In
addition, from 1 to 6 June, gangs ransacked six police stations in Martissant, Cité
Soleil, La Saline and downtown Port-au-Prince, brutally killing four police officers
and injuring one. Following the 14 August earthquake, the National Commission for
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration facilitated temporary arrangements
with gangs to allow for the safe passage of humanitarian convoys to the affected
regions. The National Police also implemented additional measures to secure the
movement and distribution of relief assistance.
16. The increasing inter-gang violence in the southern parts of the Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area contributed to the West Department continuing to account for some
75 per cent of major crime and civil unrest incidents from May to August 2021. Wi th
549 instances reported, the number of intentional homicides increased by some 5 per
cent as compared with the previous period. Similarly, the number of kidnappings
continue to rise in 2021, with 328 victims reported to the police in the first eight
months of 2021 compared with 234 for all of 2020. The increased level of criminal
gang activities contrasts with a reduction of civil unrest, with a total of 218 mostly
violent episodes recorded from May to August. This represents a 55 per cent decrease
from the previous period (486) during a time marked by the assassination of the
President and the 14 August earthquake. Instances of gender-based violence recorded
by the national health system, which are still underreported, declined by 25 per cent
from May to August as compared with the previous quarter, while the police
registered a 25.6 per cent decrease in rapes, from 39 to 29, during the same period.
The closure of the Doctors Without Border hospital in Martissant, the absence of State
presence in gang-affected areas and the 14 August earthquake have had a direct
negative impact on the reporting of gender-based violence in Haiti.
17. In an effort to restore public order, the Superior Council of the National Police,
headed by Prime Minister Henry, has committed to strengthening the operational
capacity of the police, including through the provision of additional equipment. In the
meantime, the national police has re-established a partial presence in Martissant, and
intermittent traffic along Route Nationale 2, which connects the capital to the South.
Following the late President’s request on 16 March for additional United Nations
assistance in the face of mounting gang-related crime and violence, a team of police
experts deployed from May to July by the Secretariat, in the aftermath of the attack
on the national police in the Port-au-Prince neighbourhood of Village de Dieu in
March, recommended that an intelligence-led policing approach be adopted, one that
aligns law enforcement with community violence reduction and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration measures.
18. With the endorsement by then Prime Minister Joseph of the three -year national
strategy for community violence reduction on 5 July, the interministerial task force
on community violence reduction has now turned its attention to developing an
implementation plan outlining the strategy’s coordination, operational and legal
support needs. During a meeting on 10 August, Prime Minister Henry and my Special
Representative discussed the way forward and the support that BINUH would
continue to provide to the task force in order to ensure the full implementation of the
strategy.
19. Progress continued in the implementation of Peacebuilding Fund projects on
community violence reduction and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
including capacity-building for the National Commission. Despite delays, a
community violence reduction project aimed at fostering socioeconomic development
in gang-affected areas was rolled out in the Port-au-Prince neighbourhood of La
Saline. To date, 13 community-based platforms, comprising 141 members (78 men
and 63 women), have been identified and assessed, with the goal of strengthening
4/26

21-12899

S/2021/828

their role in reducing community violence. In addition, potential beneficiaries have
been identified to either receive vocational training or take part in a series of planned
income-generating projects, of which seven have been approved. The aim of the
projects is to improve infrastructure in the targeted areas while offering much -needed
work opportunities in these vulnerable neighbourhoods.
20. Meanwhile, the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration project has
continued to support the Government’s efforts to develop a framework on weapons
and ammunition management that complies with international standards. A workshop
took place from 8 to 10 August during which 25 police officers (23 men and 2
women), were trained in the registration and control of weapons and ammunition. In
addition, the interministerial task force on weapons and ammunition management
finalized its revision of the draft weapons and ammunitions law, with technical
assistance from the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and
Development in Latin America and the United Nations Institute for Disarma ment
Research. Aligned with regional and international instruments, the text now provides
a comprehensive framework on weapons and ammunition management for Haiti.
21. Following the completion of the UNDP-managed project, the United Nations
Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America will
continue to provide technical assistance to the Government in finalizing the weapons
law, including a planned baseline assessment to inform the drafting and
implementation of a national action plan in line with the Roadmap for Implementing
the Caribbean Priority Actions on the Illicit Proliferation of Firearms and Ammunition
across the Caribbean in a Sustainable Manner by 2030, developed by the Caribbean
Community. Despite the postponement of the mission owing to uncertainty in the
aftermath of the President’s assassination, BINUH has continued to facilitate the
implementation of the Institute-assisted baseline assessment in Haiti. To expedite the
process, the Institute is exploring virtual working sessions with the newly nominated
Government focal point.

IV. Security and the rule of law (benchmark 3)
22. Amid leaks related to the investigation into the assassination of President Moïse,
and concerns expressed by the Office of the Ombudsperson over both its integrity and
seeming lack of due process, the dean of the Port-au-Prince Court of First Instance
appointed an investigating judge on 23 August to continue the probe initiated by the
Central Directorate of the Judicial Police. Despite unanimous calls from across the
political spectrum for the case to be thoroughly investigated and prosecuted, public
confidence in the judicial system is low and allegations of politicization have cast
doubts over the integrity of the process.
23. The decision in mid-September by the acting Public Prosecutor of Port-auPrince to first invite the Prime Minister to his office f or questioning and then request
that he be banned from leaving the country, prompted by the release of telephone
records from the night of the late President’s death, has raised further concerns.
Judicial actors have questioned the prosecutor’s actions, wh ich, taken in the midst of
an ongoing investigation, are deemed to contravene the Haitian Code of Criminal
Procedure. Citing “serious administrative oversights”, the Prime Minister replaced
the acting Public Prosecutor on 14 September amid disagreements wi th the Minister
of Justice and Public Security, Rockefeller Vincent. Shortly thereafter, the Council of
Ministers approved an executive order naming the current Minister of the Interior,
Liszt Quitel, as Minister of Justice and Public Security ad interim.
24. Against this backdrop, various national stakeholders – including the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Religion in a letter dated 3 August – requested the United
21-12899

5/26

S/2021/828

Nations to support the ongoing investigation. Meanwhile, several human rights and
civil society groups have called on the Government to broaden the request for
international investigative assistance to include the probe into the assassination of
Monferrier Dorval, the former head of the Port-au-Prince Bar Association,
assassinated in August 2020 and other emblematic cases.
25. The General Inspectorate and the Judicial Police of the Haitian National Police
have respectively launched separate administrative and criminal investigations into
the troubling lapses in the President’s security apparatus. Dozens of police officers
have been interviewed in connection with the investigation of the assassination. As a
result, 30 rank-and-file officers and 4 heads of units assigned to the presidential
security, including President Moïse’s chief security offic er and the head of the
General Security Unit of the National Palace, have been suspended, with 20 currently
under arrest and some provisionally replaced in their substantive positions. The timely
conclusion of these investigations should help clarify the c ircumstances of the
assassination and expose security shortcomings, which will be remedied through an
ongoing review of the dedicated presidential security units.
26. Against the backdrop of the coronavirus pandemic, the 14 August earthquake
further stretched the capacity of the national police, which was called upon to secure
access for humanitarian assistance convoys and provide additional security in the
earthquake-affected areas while continuing to fight gang activity and investigate the
assassination of President Moïse. The mounting demands on the police are taxing the
relatively small force, which continues to contend with hazardous and poor working
conditions. This is resulting in increased absenteeism and attrition of the force. During
the first eight months of 2021, 36 police officers were killed. As at 3 September, the
Haitian National Police stood at 14,881 officers, including 1,580 women (10.6 per
cent), 77 officers fewer than in my previous report, while 633 recruits, including 133
women (21 per cent), are scheduled to complete their basic training in D ecember.
27. Recognizing these challenges, the national police leadership outlined several
urgent priorities that require the support of international partners – particularly with
regard to operational planning, community policing, tactical interventions in urban
areas and the upgrading of its information technology infrastructure. In addition to a
grant administered by UNDP for a $200,000 project to enhance training and
operational support to the police, long-term contributors to police development in
Haiti remain engaged. In addition to the ongoing efforts of the Bureau of International
Narcotic and Law Enforcement Affairs to build national police anti -kidnapping
investigative capacity, a $3.5 million project to assist the police with the development
and implementation of a 24-month community-based anti-gang strategy, a $1 million
project to rehabilitate prisons and a nearly $1.5 million project to support specialized
police units, the United States has further increased its assistance in response to the 1 4
August earthquake through the provision of additional logistical support, including the
urgent provision of medical equipment for prisons, non-lethal personnel protection
equipment, vehicles and generators. In addition, following the sunsetting of a proj ect
which oversaw the creation of the National Police Academy, as well as its competency based training for mid-level and senior police managers, Canada will begin
implementation of an almost $10 million gender-sensitive project to fight corruption
and impunity while improving police management practices. Canada is also funding
an 18-month $2.5 million project to promote the integration and retention of women
through the strengthening of the teaching methods at the Police Academy.
28. The situation of the judiciary has deteriorated further owing to the failure to
formally appoint the newly elected members of the Superior Council of the Judiciary
by 3 July. Several magistrates’ associations have expressed concern over the emerging
institutional vacuum following the death of the head of the Court of Cassation in June
and the assassination of President Moïse, noting the risk of a complete paralysis of
6/26

21-12899

S/2021/828

the judiciary, as the new members of the Superior Council were to be formally
appointed by a presidential decree and subsequently take their oath of office.
29. In spite of this situation, efforts towards justice reform continued. Through a
series of consultations held on 14 June and 1 July, the Minister of Justice and Public
Security relaunched efforts to establish the technical committee expected to engage
national stakeholders and judicial actors on the penal and criminal procedural codes
in order to facilitate their entry into force in June 2022. The committee will now have
to review, disseminate and train judicial professionals on the two codes.
30. In the meantime, measures introduced to reduce pretrial detention have yet to
yield results, and hearings have yet to resume in most jurisdictions. A steering
committee against prolonged pretrial detention was created on 22 June. Together with
the establishment of coordination forums of justice actors in the 18 jurisdictions of
Haiti, it will play a critical role in fostering cooperation and information exchange
among judicial stakeholders to fast-track the holding of judicial hearings to reduce
pretrial detention.
31. On 22 August, the Ministry of Justice announced the relocation of the Port -auPrince Tribunal from its current site near the gang-controlled neighbourhood of
Bicentenaire. The decision followed more than two years of advocacy by civil society
organizations to enable hearings to be held in a safer location in the capital. Together
with the revitalization of the coordination forum of justice actors in Port -au-Prince,
the relocation of the capital’s tribunal could allow judicial actors to resume their work
and contribute to reducing pretrial detention in the national penitentiary, the country’s
most populous prison.
32. Currently, the pretrial detention rate in Haiti remains among the highest in the
world and continues to exacerbate overcrowding in its prisons. As at 1 September,
11,253 individuals were in detention in the country, including 409 women, 232 boys
and 26 girls, of whom 9,216 (82 per cent) were awaiting trial.
33. Several instances of unrest were recorded in prisons across Haiti following the
President’s assassination and the 14 August earthquake. Attempted mutinies were
reported in Port-de-Paix (North-West Department), Hinche and Mirebalais (Centre
Department), and Petit-Goâve (West Department) on 7 and 8 July. Attempted prison
breaks were noted in Anse-à-Veau (Nippes Department), Jacmel (South-East
Department), Jérémie (Grand’Anse Department) and Les Cayes (South Department)
following the earthquake. In most instances, the national police quic kly brought the
situation under control. However, an attempted prison break in Mirebalais resulted in
the deaths of three inmates and one prison officer. During the incident, four inmates
and one prison officer were injured, while one female detainee was r aped. In addition,
28 prisoners are reported to have escaped from the Jérémie and Les Cayes prisons on
15 August. Two weeks later, on 1 September, 11 inmates escaped from the Petit-Goâve
prison. In the ensuing days, four were killed and five re-arrested by the police.
34. Despite three Prisons Administration Directors having been replaced since the 25
February prison break at the Croix-des-Bouquet penitentiary, prison security remains a
challenge owing to several factors, including substantive underfunding, chronic
overcrowding, deplorable detention conditions, dilapidated infrastructure, weak
management and staffing shortages. In an effort to improve prison conditions, national
authorities, with the assistance of the United Nations and other international partners,
are developing a resource mobilization plan to implement six priority actions derived
from the recommendations outlined in the joint report by BINUH and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) of 30 June on
detention conditions in Haitian prisons. In parallel, the European Union has already
launched two 24-month projects of approximately €445,000 each to support the Prison
Administration Directorate in improving conditions for women and juvenile inmates.
21-12899

7/26

S/2021/828

V. Human rights (benchmark 4)
35. The human rights situation has continued to deteriorate. Much of the
degradation was the result of an increase in gang violence in the Port -au-Prince
metropolitan area, and especially in the Martissant neighbourhood and the Cité Soleil
municipality, where numerous clashes between gangs, together with attacks on
civilian populations, have led to the displacement of some 19,000 people since 1 June.
In addition, no effective action has been taken to ensure accountability in embl ematic
cases, which include several massacres and the high-profile cases of Monferrier
Dorval and Emmanuel Constant, alias “Toto”.
36. The raids launched by gangs terrorized entire communities and deprived
residents of their dwellings and economic and social rights. The mission documented
that gangs set fire to at least 43 residences in Martissant, as well as to a dozen houses
in Cité Soleil. Students from Martissant were unable to finish the school year because
of the forced closure of schools owing to violence. On 5 July, an ambulance delivering
medicine to the Grand-Goâve (West Department) health centre was attacked, resulting
in the death of one nurse. Random attacks on Route Nationale 2 led to the deaths of
at least 9 people and to injuries to at least 18 others in July and August. In addition,
the destruction by fire of the capital’s Toussaint Brave and La Piste displacement
sites, which hosted people displaced by the 2010 earthquake, has left an additional
1,870 individuals without shelter.
37. The reporting period was also characterized by a further curbing of civic space
as several journalists, human rights defenders, political activists and other citizens
were either targeted because of their professional or civic activities or simply caught
in the crossfire of inter-gang violence. In addition to the assassination of President
Moïse, Antoinette Duclaire, a political activist, and Diego Charles, a journalist, were
killed. Overall, a total of 20 human rights defenders, journalists and justice operators
(15 men and 5 women) were attacked, threatened or intimidated from 1 June to
31 August, representing a sharp increase from the 6 instances documented by BINUH
from 1 March to 31 May.
38. Even if the vast majority of threats to human rights defenders and journalists are
attributed to gang members, authorities have, to date, failed to adopt adequate
measures to ensure the safety of citizens. As a result, the special procedures of the
Human Rights Council have, twice in 2021 to date, expressed concerns regar ding the
security situation in the country and the impunity with which gangs act to intimidate
human rights defenders.
39. The President’s assassination gave rise to a series of threats against public
officials and the media. Two court clerks and one justice of the peace reported having
received death threats in an attempt to coerce them to modify official records related
to the assassination investigation. In addition, a media outlet and journalists perceived
to have been critical of the late President were physically and verbally attacked in the
days that followed his killing. Such threats endanger democratic life in Haiti and pose
serious threats to the rule of law and to fundamental rights.
40. Impunity in the emblematic cases of Grand Ravine (2017), La Saline (2018) and
Bel-Air (2019) continued, as authorities did not take steps to support these
investigations. Inexplicable delays in deciding on an application, submitted on
11 September 2019, for the recusal of the investigative judge in charg e of the La
Saline case continued to contribute to the lack of progress in that case. Meanwhile,
Jimmy Cherizier, alias “Barbecue”, the leader of the “G9” gang alliance and a prime
suspect in both the La Saline and Bel-Air killings, continues to evade justice despite
frequently appearing in public and inciting his followers to violence, as recently
witnessed in the Port-au-Prince neighbourhood of Pont-Rouge on 26 July.

8/26

21-12899

S/2021/828

41. Likewise, little significant progress was made in the investigation of the murder
in August 2020 of former Port-au-Prince Bar Association President, Monferrier
Dorval, as the public prosecutor did not facilitate interviews with individuals
requested by the investigative judge, who subsequently resigned in September. Also,
the second trial of Emmanuel “Toto” Constant, who was found guilty in absentia in
2000 for his involvement in the 1994 Raboteau massacre, is still pending, as the
Gonaïves public prosecutor did not include his case in the trials organized in August.
Constant has been in detention in the Artibonite Department since his deportation
from the United States in June 2020.
42. Despite the granting on 22 May by the United States of temporary protected
status to Haitian nationals for an additional 18 months and the temporary closure of
the border between Haiti and the Dominican Republic from 7 to 15 July, the reporting
period saw an increase in the number of individuals deported to Haiti, with 8,015
deportees (6,940 men, 857 women, 178 boys and 40 girls) between 1 May and
31 August, according to the International Organization for Migration (IOM). The
14 August earthquake has caused an increase in international migration, with several
Florida-bound boats departing the southern regions of Haiti. Meanwhile, on
18 September, United States authorities launched an operation to repatriate some
14,000 Haitian migrants gathered in Del Rio, Texas. An average 400 people are
expected to be returned to Haiti every day over the course of the coming months.
Upon arrival, migrants receive assistance from the National Migration Office in the
form of cash, food and hygiene kits. These distributions are supported by IOM.
43. In the context of a project funded by European Civil Protection and
Humanitarian Aid Operations, OHCHR and IOM, representatives fro m these agencies
gathered from 11 to 14 June in Ouanaminthe (North-East Department) to meet
organizations supporting Haitian migrants and collect information about alleged
human rights violations and the responses from State and civil society organizations .
On 1 July, the Minister for Social Affairs and Labour validated the standard operating
procedures for the identification of and support for victims of trafficking in persons,
an important step forward in the fight against human trafficking.
44. With the support of OHCHR and France and, a coalition of 33 non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) submitted a report on 9 July examining the human rights record
of Haiti under the universal periodic review, for which the next review of the country is
scheduled for early 2022. The United Nations in Haiti also submitted a compilation of
information for the universal periodic review and encouraged the Inter-Ministerial
Committee on Human Rights and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Religion to submit
the national report before 11 October. Lastly, despite its endorsement by the Committee,
the national action plan on human rights for the 2019–2021 period is still awaiting
approval by the executive. The ratification by Haiti of the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, both
accepted by Haiti in the context of the universal periodic review, is also still pending.
45. Meanwhile, OHCHR continued to engage national authorities on the issue of
establishing a country office to support national efforts to address long -standing
human rights issues and strengthen civic space.

VI. Unemployment, youth and vulnerable groups (benchmark 5)
46. The World Bank forecasts that, as a result of the cumulative impact of multiple
crises since 2018, 60 per cent of the population of Haiti will be at or below the poverty
line in 2021. While official figures show that year-on-year inflation is decreasing, the

21-12899

9/26

S/2021/828

poorest households and groups continue to be adversely affected by the depreciation
of the Haitian gourde against the United States dollar.
47. During the reporting period, Haitians also experienced frequent fuel shortages
and increased prices for basic food items. The country’s deteriorating socioeconomic
situation contributed to a 41 per cent increase in Government expenditure from
October 2020 to June 2021.
48. Despite the country’s severe budgetary constraints, there has been little progres s
in tackling loss of fiscal revenue that results from illicit transfer of funds to accounts
outside of the country. The extent of financial leakages due to money laundering is
such that, in its report of June 2021, the Financial Action Task Force placed H aiti on
the list of countries under increased monitoring. To address the country’s
development financing constraints, the United Nations country team supported the
Government’s launching of a process towards establishing an integrated national
financing framework. The initiative includes efforts to identify innovative financing
mechanisms across the public and private sectors.
49. As part of a new United Nations approach in Haiti aimed at moving away from
project approaches to support the institutionalization of integrated public policies, the
United Nations country team, based on the comparative advantages of relevant
agencies, is focusing its efforts on key policies. For example, a team of experts from
seven resident and non-resident United Nations entities was formed to support, under
the overall leadership of the Ministry of Social Affairs and Labour, the Government
task Force on the operationalization of the national policy for social protection and
social progress. The aim is to promote and expand social protection to reduce
economic, social and institutional inequalities and injustice, even in the face of
persistent multidimensional crises and limited national systems.
50. On social protection, the United Nations country team also continues to support
the Government in the establishment of a national vulnerability registry, the extension
of the existing database (which currently covers only 25 per cent of the country), the
translation of policies into effective programmatic initiatives and resource
mobilization. Lastly, the World Bank allocated $75 million to the Adaptive Social
Protection for Increased Resilience (ASPIRE) national social assistance programme,
which aims to alleviate poverty and inequality while paving the way for long -term
protection against hunger during the 2021–2027 period. Following the same
approach, a similar process has been initiated to support the operationalization of the
national policy for food sovereignty, food security and nutrition. Relevant United
Nations agencies are mobilizing expertise to support government efforts, under the
overall coordination of the National Commission for Food Security. These efforts are
directly contributing to greater coherence across humanitarian and development
activities and their linkages to peace, by contributing to the reduction of risks,
vulnerabilities and humanitarian needs.
51. Discussions between the Government, the United Nations and development
partners on approaches to enhance development effectiveness and impact and
revitalize existing aid coordination frameworks have made progress. The
development partners coordination group (Groupe de concertation des Chefs de
mission), chaired by my Deputy Special Representative and Resident Coordinator,
agreed to reorient development assistance priorities and focus on some of the
intractable obstacles to the development of Haiti, including issues related to impunity,
corruption and the transformation and modernization of the economy to further
advance inclusion. The group also agreed to prioritize support for national efforts
regarding integrated national planning and the institutionalization of public policies
to ensure a better alignment between national priorities and development support. In
order to align development assistance to national priorities and increase impact, the
10/26

21-12899

S/2021/828

Government and development partners agreed on the critical importance of
revitalizing the dormant Aid Effectiveness Committee, which is scheduled to meet
during the last quarter of the year.

VII. Basic social service delivery and resilience (benchmark 6)
52. The 7.2-magnitude earthquake that hit the southern peninsula of Haiti on
14 August severely affected the Grand-Anse, Nippes and South departments, with the
city of Les Cayes and surrounding rural, hard-to-reach areas being the most affected.
The earthquake was followed by a series of some 1,000 aftershocks, ranging in
magnitude from 4.2 to 5.2, all at depths of around 10 km, creating significant concerns
as buildings and infrastructures already compromised by the initial tremor are
vulnerable to even weak aftershocks.
53. Even though it proved less catastrophic than the 2010 earthquake, the impact of
the 14 August earthquake has been devastating. At least 2,248 people have been
reported dead, over 12,763 injured, and over 137,000 houses damaged or completely
destroyed. In addition, it is estimated that 53 health facilities were damaged and 6
were destroyed, while 308 schools were heavily damaged or destroyed, delaying the
start of the school year by several weeks and affecting 100,000 children and teachers.
Fifty-three water supply pipe systems are severely damaged. In total, over 800,000
people have been affected and 650,000, including 260,000 children, are in need of
humanitarian assistance. Just two days after the earthquake, on 17 August, Tropical
Storm Grace dumped extremely heavy rains in the south-western parts of the country,
adding to the plight of the victims and briefly impeding search and rescue operations.
54. Through the Civil Protection Directorate, the Government of Haiti is exerting
strong leadership in leading and coordinating the response of line ministries and
humanitarian partners, under the overall leadership of Prime Minister Henry. The
United Nations and partners’ collaboration and multidimensiona l support for the
Directorate over many years has shown to have improved readiness to prepare for and
respond to emergencies, thus illustrating the transformative potential of sustained,
consistent investment in targeted national capacities.
55. The Government and partners have mobilized rapid response teams and
established coordination sub-offices in the most affected departments to carry out
search and rescue operations, deliver food assistance and medical supplies and clear
roads, as well as bridges damaged by the earthquake. They are assisted in these
endeavours by international rapid response teams, including the United Nations
Disaster Assessment and Coordination, the World Health Organization (WHO)
Emergency Medical Team Coordination Cell, a European Union civil protection team,
a United States disaster assistance response team and the support from the Caribbean
Disaster Emergency Management Agency and the International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
56. On 24 August, the humanitarian community, under the leadership of the
Government of Haiti, launched a $187.3 million flash appeal, the funding of which is
urgently needed to provide vital relief assistance to 500,000 of the most vulnerable
people identified as being in need of assistance in the affected areas. The appeal, which
prioritizes shelter, water and sanitation, emergency health care, education, food,
protection and early recovery support, reflects both the scale of the needs and the
significant logistical challenges linked to providing an effective large-scale
humanitarian response in hard-to-reach areas. Although a limited number of spontaneous
displacement sites have been formed, the Government is advocating for the construction
of semi-temporary housing near the living quarters of homeless families.

21-12899

11/26

S/2021/828

57. In parallel to the relief effort, and in order to quickly move towards recovery
and reconstruction, the Government launched, on 23 August, the process for the
evaluation of the post-earthquake reconstruction needs, the results of which will
provide the basis for the development of a reconstruction framework. In this context,
the Government has requested the activation of the tripartite global agreement
between the United Nations, the World Bank and the European Union f or post-crisis
assessment and recovery planning. The process has been placed under the overall
leadership of the Prime Minister’s Office and the steering of the Ministry of Planning
and External Cooperation. It will be supported by the three institutions, together with
other partners, such as the Inter-American Development Bank.
58. Overall, development deficits in Haiti continue to fuel humanitarian needs and
instability. Moving away from emergency aid towards longer-term sustainable
development and stability remains a priority for the United Nations in country, with the
aim of reducing vulnerabilities, risks and humanitarian needs while strengthening
community resilience. Political turmoil, the surge in gang violence, deteriorating
socioeconomic conditions – including food insecurity and malnutrition – all contribute
to the worsening of the humanitarian situation. Despite increasing needs, funding
shortfalls remain a challenge, with the total humanitarian funding at only $71 million
(30 per cent of the $235.6 million requirement in the humanitarian response plan).
Meanwhile, food insecurity remains a key concern, with 4.4 million Haitians – nearly
40 per cent of the population – facing high acute food insecurity, including 1.1 million
classified in the emergency and 3.1 million in the crisis phases. Furthermore, 217,000
children are suffering from severe and moderate acute malnutrition, predominantly in
the Port-au-Prince metropolitan area (West Department). Acute malnutrition in children
under 5 years old increased by 61 per cent in 2021 in Haiti.
59. In recent months, the persistent gang violence in Port-au-Prince has affected
1.5 million people, 1.1 million of whom are in need of assistance, and caused the
displacement of thousands of people. Almost 8,000 live in difficult conditions on
organized and spontaneous sites, while the rest have found other lodging solutions.
Protection remains a major concern in the sites for internally displaced persons, where
cases of gender-based and physical violence have been reported. A government-led
task force, supported by the United Nations and humanitarian partners, has developed
a joint relocation strategy. A Central Emergency Response Fund allocation will
support the rehousing of some of the displaced while ensuring their minimum
standards of services in the interim. Humanitarian partners are assisting the affected
population through the provision of meals and access to safe water, sanitation
facilities and critical hygiene kits, as well as schooling, psychosocial support, basic
protection services and treatment for malnutrition, among other activities.
60. As evidenced by the 14 August earthquake, Haiti continues to be highly
vulnerable to natural hazards, although such events only become disasters when
measures to reduce their impacts are not put in place. This earthquake is a vibrant
reminder of the need for Haiti to prioritize, over the long term, disaster risk reduction
and climate change adaptation. To improve disaster risk management and crisis
response, the Government, with support from the United Nations Environment
Programme, is finalizing its 2021–2030 environmental action plan, which is expected
to promote accelerated mainstreaming of environment into resilient and sustainable
development. The institutionalization of the national risk and disaster management
system and plan is another priority for coordinated United Nations support. To further
its implementation and better inform planning, as well as response efforts at the
national and local levels, the United Nations country team supported the creation of
a georeferenced disaster response database, thereby providing the country with
detailed multi-risk maps and the capacities to update them.

12/26

21-12899

S/2021/828

61. The third wave of the COVID-19 pandemic peaked in late June and is now
subsiding in the country. As at 18 September, official figures stand at 21,244 confirmed
cases, including 596 deaths. The United Nations and other partners continue to support
the Government response, in line with WHO guidelines. Hence, the coun try team
supported the provision of medical kits and equipment to treatment centres, the
donation of electric generators to run oxygen plants, the distribution of oxygen
cylinders, the payment of salary premiums to Ministry of Public Health and Population
personnel involved in the response and the acquisition of medicalized ambulances and
testing equipment. Moreover, following the decision of authorities to close schools on
11 June because of the rapid rise in cases, the World Food Programme (WFP) switched
its school feeding activities to the distribution of take-home rations.
62. Vaccination against COVID-19 began in Haiti in July, following the reception
of 500,000 doses of the Moderna vaccine donated by the United States through the
COVAX initiative. As at 15 September, 37,934 persons, mainly health workers and
adults with comorbidities, had received at least one vaccination dose, of whom 15,685
are fully vaccinated. As a perception survey conducted by the State University of
Haiti, with United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) support, indicated that 78 per
cent of Haitians are currently not in favour of vaccination, a communication campaign
and community outreach efforts are ongoing to generate demand and enable the
scaling up of the campaign.
63. The last confirmed case of cholera was detected in Haiti in January 2019. In
2021 to date, the Ministry of Public Health and Population has reported 10 suspected
cases, all of which tested negative. Excluding the period in which cholera surveillance
waned owing to COVID-19, Haiti has not detected a single confirmed case for some
two and a half years. These developments are evidence of the effectiveness of the
2013–2022 National Plan for the Elimination of Cholera in Haiti developed and
implemented by the Ministry of Health with the support of the Pan-American Health
Organization (PAHO)/WHO, UNICEF and other partners.

VIII. Sexual exploitation and abuse
64. During the reporting period, BINUH registered one new allegation of sexual
exploitation dating from the deployment of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH). The alleged victim is receiving assistance while an
investigation is carried out.
65. The network on protection from sexual exploitation and abuse distributed flyers
throughout 14 displaced persons sites in Port-au-Prince, and the three departments
affected by the earthquake. The network also produced a video in sign language on
sexual exploitation and abuse. The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)
supported the production of a film in Creole on the trauma experienced by survivors,
and WFP launched a toll-free telephone hotline to facilitate the reporting of cases.
66. With respect to assistance to other victims, a project funded by the trust fund in
support of victims of sexual exploitation and abuse implemented by UNDP and the
Association of Volunteers in International Service Foundation was launched on
9 August and will run until 31 December 2022. The aim of the project is to provide
educational, nutritional and health support to children born of sexual exploitation and
abuse, as well as psychosocial and livelihood support to their mothers. BINUH is
working with IOM to address the lifesaving needs of victims and their children,
notably by securing urgent medical care and livelihood support through the Central
Emergency Response Fund.

21-12899

13/26

S/2021/828

IX. Observations
67. The assassination of President Moïse was an attack on democracy and the
dignity of a sovereign people. I call upon the leaders of Haiti to demonstrate the
political will required to bring all the perpetrators of this crime to justice, in a credible
and transparent manner, with respect for due process. The recent history of Haiti has
been marked by numerous high-profile criminal cases that have not been thoroughly
investigated or prosecuted. The United Nations is committed to supporting the efforts
of national authorities to undertake justice reforms in order to address impunity and
strengthen accountability, including through increasing their capacity to investigate,
prosecute and adjudicate serious crimes.
68. The President’s assassination has further exposed the institutional fragility of
Haiti and cast a harsh light on the consequences of the absence of a fully functioning
Parliament and judicial authority. In the present situation, it is imperative for Haitian
stakeholders to engage in substantive discussions on building governance frameworks
that can address the root causes of instability in the country while ensuring the
protection of human rights. I also urge the Government to adopt the national action
plan on human rights, which has been pending since 2019, and to support the
establishment of a stand-alone OHCHR office in Haiti to safeguard continued
collaboration with State authorities on human rights issues.
69. I am encouraged by Prime Minister Henry’s active efforts to engage actors
across the spectrum to reach a political agreement capable of restoring institutional
stability. Now is the moment for stakeholders to show the necessary political
commitment and work together to reinvigorate democracy in Haiti through the
organization of participative elections in a conducive environment.
70. I am gravely concerned at the mounting insecurity in the Port -au-Prince
metropolitan area. This alarming phenomenon calls for im mediate remedial action. A
renewed high-level engagement of the Government, with increased support for the
Haitian National Police, will be essential to effectively coordinate and implement
initiatives aimed at improving public safety. However, an overstre tched and
underresourced police force alone cannot address the security ills of Haiti. I therefore
urge the Government not only to ensure the police continues to reform its organization
and functioning in line with modern policing principles and standards, but also to
tackle the political patronage of armed gangs and articulate and implement a more
holistic approach to addressing the scourge of gang violence within the framework of
the national strategy for community violence reduction.
71. A sustained commitment to implementing the reform of the penal and criminal
procedure codes remains critical to providing the Haitian justice system with
additional tools to help resolve the chronic challenge of prolonged pretrial detention
and prison overcrowding. In this respect, the swift operationalization of the Board of
the Legal Aid Council and the opening of all 11 decentralized legal aid offices will
be key to increasing access to justice and creating conditions to fast track the review
of pretrial detention cases. I also urge national authorities to help the prisons
administration take concrete steps to improve prison supplies of basic goods, and to
prevent and sanction acts of torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.
72. The United Nations joins the Haitian people and authorities in mourning the
victims of the 14 August earthquake. We also mourn our colleague, Dr. Ousmane
Touré, who tragically lost his life in the collapse of a hotel. The additional
humanitarian needs created by the earthquake compound an already dire humanitarian
situation. With some 4.4 million people facing food insecurity throughout the country
and 19,000 displaced by gang violence in parts of the capital, it is critical that
humanitarian funding is provided to respond to all needs, including those that existed
14/26

21-12899

S/2021/828

prior to the latest disaster to befall Haiti. I therefore urge Member States to ensure
that both the $187.3 million flash appeal and the regular humanitarian response plan
are fully funded. I further call upon national authorities to fulfil their protection
responsibilities towards those most in need, including by ensuring that they can be
reached by aid workers, at all times.
73. I am encouraged by the increased leadership of the Civil Protection Directorate
in steering and coordinating the response to the earthquake, as witnessed by the
Deputy Secretary-General during her recent visit to Haiti. Building on lessons learned
from the responses to the 2010 earthquake and Hurricane Matthew in 2016, it will be
essential for the international partners of Haiti to rally behind and support the
leadership and coordination efforts of the Government as the country swiftly moves
towards recovery and reconstruction. Both national and local institutions, structures
and systems should be supported, and Haitian expertise, capacities and knowledge
should be relied upon to ensure the articulation of a contextualized response that will
allow the country to build back better.
74. The urgency with which the current crises in Haiti oug ht to be addressed should
not preclude Member States from continuing to support the country’s sustainable
development agenda and tackle, with Haitian partners, the structural challenges and
governance and development deficits feeding instability, insecurity and growing
humanitarian needs. The recent impetus among the country’s development partners to
rethink their strategy is a recognition that aid efforts since 2010 – which total some
$14.7 billion to date – have yet to deliver the expected results, and that a novel
approach is required to address the systemic and operational impediments to
significant, tangible progress on the major political, human rights and development
challenges that are holding Haiti back.
75. I would like to reiterate the commitment of the United Nations to contributing
to the stability and prosperity of Haiti. I take this opportunity to also express my
sincere gratitude to my Special Representative for Haiti, Helen Meagher La Lime, to
my Deputy Special Representative, Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian
Coordinator, Bruno Lemarquis, and all United Nations personnel in the country for
their tireless work and dedication.

21-12899

15/26

S/2021/828

Annex
Benchmark indicators, targets and baselines
Symbol

Equivalent

Symbol

Target achieved, on time/with delay
(3 targets, 8.3 per cent)

Serious challenges causing marked delays
to achieving target by the timeline
(2 targets, 5.6 per cent)

On track to achieve target by the timeline
(4 targets, 11.1 per cent)

No progress (14 targets, 38.9 per cent)

Challenges delaying achievement of
target by the timeline (12 targets,
33.3 per cent)

No update on progress was possible during
the reporting period (1 target, 2.8 per cent)

Benchmark

Target

Target timeline

1. National
political and
socioeconomic
actors,
including civil
society, are
engaged in
inclusive
cooperation
and consensusbuilding,
resulting in
improved
functioning of
State
institutions and
good
governance.

1.1.1. Political
dialogue leads to
consensus
regarding required
reforms and next
steps, including
adequate female
representation.

Original:
December
2020

16/26

Equivalent

Baseline as at December 2019 Update as at 6 August
if not otherwise specified
(or as otherwise specified)

Political actors
currently converge
over the need for
structural reforms but
lack consensus on
transitional
arrangements: no
comprehensive
dialogue process is
taking place.

Dialogue efforts to reach
minimum consensus, including
by civil society, continued but
did not yield results owing to
deep political polarization.

1.2.1. Established N/A
transitional
arrangements and
road map.

The Government
remains in an acting
capacity; the mandate
of the Lower House
and part of the Senate
expired on 13 January
2020, while
parliamentary
elections scheduled
for October 2019 have
been postponed.

A new Government assumed
office on 20 July 2021.
Dialogue efforts remain
fractured without achieving a
clear road map for holding of
elections.

1.2.2. Adoption of N/A
a new Constitution
for Haiti.

The 1987 Constitution
remains in effect.
Political conditions
have not allowed for
progress in recent
constitutional reform
initiatives.

Most stakeholders, including
the ruling Parti haïtien Tèt
Kale and its allies, rejected the
2 February and 19 May 2021
drafts by the Independent
Consultative Committee. A
third draft, put forward by the
Committee on 3 September, is
currently being reviewed by
stakeholders.

Adjusted:
December
2022

Trend

21-12899

S/2021/828

Benchmark

Target

Target timeline

1.3.1. Adoption of December
a new electoral
2020
legal framework
that preserves
existing provisions
relating to
women’s
representation.

Baseline as at December 2019 Update as at 6 August
if not otherwise specified
(or as otherwise specified)

The draft electoral law Protracted political crisis
of November 2018 is delayed the October 2019
pending in Parliament, elections, followed by a
amid plans for a new constitutional crisis in January
draft to be developed. 2020 when the mandates of all
parliamentarians (except for
10 remaining Senators) and
mayors expired.

Trend

Target
achieved
with
delay.

A new electoral decree was
issued on 5 July 2021 with
provisions to improve female
representation on the
provisional electoral council
and in candidate nomination.
1.4.1. Government October 2020
investment as a
percentage of total
expenditure
increases by 5 per
cent, from 3.72 per
cent in 2018–2019
to 3.91 per cent for
2019/20, adjusted
for inflation.
2. State
institutions,
local
authorities,
communitybased civil
society, youth
and women’s
organizations
are engaged in
consultation,
cooperation,
decisionmaking
processes and
programmes
that reduce
community
violence, in
particular
associated with
gangs and
sexual and
gender-based
crimes.

21-12899

Government
investment was
3.72 per cent of total
expenses in 2018/19.

Initial momentum to increase
investments was offset by
persistent and unforeseen
structural, security and
COVID-related expenditures.

2.1.1. Adoption and Strategy
A national strategy is The Government initially
implementation of drafted and
currently being drafted focused on a law
the national
adopted by
by the National
enforcement-centred approach
disarmament,
December
Disarmament,
when the draft strategy was
demobilization and 2020, and
Demobilization and
submitted in May 2020. It
reintegration
implementatio Reintegration
shifted to a holistic approach
strategy. Levels:
n commences Commission with
following the failure of a
(1) national
in January
support from the
major police operation in
disarmament,
2021.
United Nations
March 2021, leading to the
demobilization and
Integrated Office in
establishment of a dedicated
reintegration
Haiti (BINUH).
task force and the subsequent
strategy is drafted;
adoption of the strategy on
(2) national
5 July 2021. The United
disarmament,
Nations Development
demobilization and
Programme (UNDP), the
reintegration
United Nations Office for
strategy is adopted;
Project Services (UNOPS),
(3) national
the United Nations Population
strategy is
Fund (UNFPA) and BINUH
implemented.
contributed to its design and
finalization.

17/26

S/2021/828

Benchmark

18/26

Target

Target timeline

Baseline as at December 2019 Update as at 6 August
if not otherwise specified
(or as otherwise specified)

2.2.1. Number of
December
community
2020
violence reduction
and disarmament,
demobilization and
reintegration
community-based
projects and
interventions
coordinated
through the
National
Disarmament,
Demobilization
and Reintegration
Commission.

None.

The inter-agency (UNDP,
UNOPS, UNFPA and BINUH)
programme was delayed
owing to protracted
negotiation with
implementing partner NGOs.
As at August 2021,
employment generating
projects have been launched
in six at-risk neighbourhoods,
reaching a total of 550 people.
In addition, 13 communitybased platforms, comprising
141 members, including
63 women, have been
evaluated.

2.3.1. Adopt and
December
implement relevant 2021
laws and
frameworks on
weapons and
ammunition
management.
Levels:
(1) redrafting of
law on ammunition
and weapons
management;
(2) establishment
of a national
baseline on small
arms and light
weapons;
(3) adoption of law
on ammunition and
weapons
management.

A draft weapons and
ammunition
management law
passed the Senate but
requires further
revision before it can
be adopted.

A draft law on weapons and
ammunition was finalized on
30 June 2021, with support
from the United Nations
Regional Centre for Peace,
Disarmament and Development
in Latin America and the
Caribbean, UNDP and BINUH.
The text is now awaiting a
decision by the executive as to
how it will be adopted.

2.4.1. A percentage December
of the state budget 2021
is allocated for
comprehensive
care and protection
of victims of
violence through
gender-responsive
budgeting.

No specific budget has While the decree promulgating
been allocated to the
the 2020–2021 budget allocates
implementation of the 0.4 per cent of the general
gender-based violence budget to the Ministry of
national action plan.
Women’s Affairs and Rights,
no specific budget has been
allocated to the implementation
of the 2017–2027 gender-based
violence national action plan.

Trend

21-12899

S/2021/828

Benchmark

Target

Target timeline

2.4.2. Proposed
December
new legal
2021
framework for
gender-based
violence is adopted
and implemented,
including the
provision for
ensuring State
funding for
prevention and
response to genderbased violence.

Senate adopted several The proposed legal framework
articles of the
on gender-based violence has
proposed new legal
not yet been adopted, although
framework on
a proposal is being reviewed by
violence against
the Ministry for the Status of
women and girls.
Women and Women’s Rights
for presentation to the Council
of Ministers.

2.4.3 Spotlight
programme is
launched and
implemented.

Spotlight programme
was approved on
17 December 2019.

National authorities delayed
the launch of the Spotlight
programme because of the
impact of the COVID-19
pandemic. Implementation
started in September 2020,
with the aim of expanding
access to multidimensional
services for survivors of
violence, including police and
justice services. An official
launch ceremony was held in
October 2020, in the presence
of the Prime Minister, the
Minister in charge of the status
and the rights of women, the
Resident Coordinator and the
country directors of several
United Nations agencies.

December 2019:

Monthly average from
September 2020 to July 2021:

June 2020

2.5.1. A 5 per cent December
reduction of area- 2020
based crime in
zones with
decreased presence
of State authorities
and identified
hotspots, including
Cité Soleil,
Martissant, La
Saline, Croix des
Bouquets and BelAir as pilot areas.
Target:
Cité Soleil
8.55 incidents per
month

21-12899

Baseline as at December 2019 Update as at 6 August
if not otherwise specified
(or as otherwise specified)

Cité Soleil
9 incidents
Martissant
10 incidents
La Saline
3 incidents
Croix des Bouquets
24 incidents
Bel-Air
4 incidents

Trend

Cité Soleil: 1.8 incidents
Martissant: 1.7 incidents
La Saline: 0.27 incidents
Croix des Bouquets:
16.3 incidents
Bel-Air: 2 incidents.
While the number of reported
incidents has decreased as
compared with previous
periods, the methodology used
is unreliable owing to
significant underreporting due
to high levels of insecurity and
violence.

19/26

S/2021/828

Benchmark

Target

Target timeline

Baseline as at December 2019 Update as at 6 August
if not otherwise specified
(or as otherwise specified)

Trend

Martissant
9.5 incidents per
month
La Saline
2.85 incidents per
month
Croix des Bouquets
22.8 incidents per
month
Bel-Air
3.8 incidents per
month
3. The
3.1.1. At least
December
national police, 7 per cent of the
2020
corrections
national budget is
services, justice allocated to the
and
national police
anti-corruption each fiscal year.
institutions
3.2.1. A functional December
operate under
2020
improved legal departmental
office
of
the
and
General
management
frameworks, as Inspectorate of the
Haitian National
well as
Police is
oversight
established in Capmechanisms.
Haïtien.

6.6 per cent of the
national budget is
allocated to the
national police, which
has been the same
since 2017.

The share of the national
budget allocated to the Haitian
National Police has remained
constant, at 6.59 per cent in
the 2020/21 budget.

The departmental
office of the General
Inspectorate of the
Haitian National
Police is not yet
functioning.

The departmental office of the Target
General Inspectorate of the
achieved,
Haitian National Police in
on time.
Cap-Haïtien is fully functional
and operating since
30 November 2020. With the
support of BINUH, the General
Inspectorate has recruited and
trained 18 investigators,
including 3 women. The
equipment for the
operationalization of the office
was purchased by UNDP.

3.2.2. Adoption of December
a new national
2021
anti-corruption
strategy.

2009–2019 national
anti-corruption
strategy came to an
end; no new national
anti-corruption
strategy has been
developed.

The Government has yet to
develop and adopt a new
anti-corruption strategy.

3.3.1. Increase the
ratio of police to
the population to
1.40 per 1,000
inhabitants.

1.33 per 1,000
inhabitants.

As at 3 September 2021, the
Haitian National Police had an
overall workforce of 14,881
police officers, equating to
1.25 per 1,000 inhabitants as
related to the 2021 projected
population.

December
2021

Nonetheless, progress was
achieved with the 8 August
2019 graduation of the
thirtieth promotion with

20/26

21-12899

S/2021/828

Benchmark

Target

Target timeline

Baseline as at December 2019 Update as at 6 August
if not otherwise specified
(or as otherwise specified)

Trend

656 police cadets, including
140 women. A new class of
634 cadets, including
133 women, started its basic
training on 16 May 2021.
Upon its graduation at the end
of the year, the ratio will
increase to 1.3 per 1,000
inhabitants.
3.3.2. Increase the
percentage of
women police
officers to 11 per
cent.

21-12899

December
2021

10.5 per cent of
Haitian National
Police officers are
women.

As at 1 June, women represent
10.7 per cent of all Haitian
National Police officers.
United Nations advisers are
engaging their national
counterparts on the importance
of achieving the gendersensitive recruitment goal of
12 per cent female
representation in line with the
Haitian National Police
Strategic Development Plan
2017–2021. An advocacy
campaign to encourage women
to join the Haitian National
Police is ongoing. Training
also continues for the Haitian
National Police on gender
equality issues.

3.3.3. Legal aid
December
offices established 2021
and functioning in
13 jurisdictions.

No legal aid offices
have yet been
established under the
new legal aid law.

The Board of the Legal Aid
Council was established on
5 May. Two legal aid offices
were subsequently established
in Petit-Goâve (West
Department) and Les Cayes
(South Department) in June.

3.4.1. 6 prisons
certified in
accordance with
international
standards.

4 prisons were
certified as at July
2019.

A training programme on
prison certification tools was
delivered to key staff of the
Office of the National
Ombudsperson in November
2020 to support the Prisons
Administration Directorate in
the prison certification
process. However, the Office
did not have the opportunity to
certify additional places of
detention (4 have been
certified to date) owing to
other priorities and
impediments related to the
socioeconomic and security
context.

December
2021

21/26

S/2021/828

Benchmark

Target

Target timeline

3.5.1 By 2020,
December
70 per cent or less 2020
of detainees in
pretrial detention
(disaggregated by
gender and age).

Baseline as at December 2019 Update as at 6 August
if not otherwise specified
(or as otherwise specified)

1 January–
31 December 2019:
75 per cent of
detainees in pretrial
detention.

Trend

As at 26 August, 82 per cent
of the 11,275 individuals
detained in Haitian prisons
(9,233 persons, including
371 women, 219 boys and
21 girls) are in pretrial
detention.
The continued backlog is due
to the recurrent judiciary strike
throughout 2020 and
temporary hiatus of the Portau-Prince tribunal –
inaccessible owing to its
location in a high-security risk
area. The Port-au-Prince
jurisdiction holds the highest
number of detainees.

4. State
4.1.1. National plan December
institutions, in of action for the
2021
collaboration
implementation of
with an
recommendations
independent
accepted by the
national human Government, in
rights
particular of the
institution
Human Rights
(Office of the
Council universal
National
periodic review,
Human Rights adopted and 50 per
Ombudsperson) cent of
and civil
recommendations
society
progressively
organizations, implemented by
protect,
the Government,
promote and
including on
ensure respect gender issues.
for human
4.2.1. The national December
rights and
strategy 2019–
2021
fundamental
2024 of the Office
freedoms,
women’s rights of the National
Human Rights
and gender
Ombudsperson is
equality, and
progressively
uphold
accountability implemented,
including the
for human
integration of
rights
gender-sensitive
violations.
perspectives.

22/26

The 2019–2021 action Although it was approved by
plan, which is
the Inter-Ministerial
intended to implement Committee on Human Rights,
recommendations
the 2019–2021 National plan
issued in the 2016
of action on human rights has
universal periodic
yet to be endorsed by the
review of Haiti, awaits executive. The Government is
endorsement by the
taking steps to implement
executive.
some of the recommendations
of the universal periodic
review.

No action yet taken to In accordance with its strategic
implement the
plan, and with the support of
strategy.
the United Nations system, the
Office of the Ombudsperson
developed an action plan for
the 2020–2021 period and
launched a campaign on the
right to health, including
organizing radio broadcasts on
gender-based violence and
diversity and integrating
gender-sensitive perspectives.
The COVID-19 pandemic and
recurrent security issues
hampered the implementation
of these plans.

21-12899

S/2021/828

Benchmark

5. State
institutions,
local
authorities and
the private
sector provide
access for
young persons,
women and
vulnerable
groups to
decent

21-12899

Target

Target timeline

Baseline as at December 2019 Update as at 6 August
if not otherwise specified
(or as otherwise specified)

Trend

4.3.1. Number of December
cases of serious
2021
human rights
violations or
abuses taken to
trial.

Under the United
Nations Mission for
Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH),
an estimated 77 per
cent of cases were
investigated, and
12 per cent were
prosecuted. Of the
12 per cent of cases
being prosecuted, all
cases are still at trial,
so no judicial decision
has been taken yet.

From September 2020 to June
2021, the Mission documented
213 human rights violations;
only 126 were further
investigated by the General
Inspectorate of the Haitian
National Police. During the
same period, the Inspectorate
completed 131 investigations,
some of which had been
previously initiated. None of
the eight cases transferred to
prosecutors’ offices have gone
to trial as at the publication of
the present report.

4.4.1. Ten reports December
published by
2021
Haitian civil
society
organizations
monitoring human
rights, including
on gender issues.

During the two-year
mandate of
MINUJUSTH, a total
of 47 reports were
published by civil
society organizations.

National civil society
Target
organizations submitted at
achieved,
least eight reports to
on time.
international human rights
mechanisms. Several
organizations released reports
and engaged on numerous
human rights issues, including
the right to health of persons
with disabilities and the rights
of persons deprived of liberty.
Women’s civil society
organizations engage as part of
the Spotlight programme to
advocate for human rights, in
line with the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against
Women and the universal
periodic review
recommendations.

5.1.1. The textile
industry employs
63,000 people.

The textile industry
currently employs
54,000 people.

As at 30 August 2021, the
textile industry employed
51,309 people.

December
2021

Textile exports have fallen
owing to lower demand from
importing countries and
reduced availability of
supplies, as well as the partial
or complete closure of factories
during the initial months of the
COVID-19 pandemic.

23/26

S/2021/828
Baseline as at December 2019 Update as at 6 August
if not otherwise specified
(or as otherwise specified)

Benchmark

Target

Target timeline

employment
opportunities,
including jobs,
education and
training,
contributing to
reduce
socioeconomic
grievances and
address drivers
of instability
and inequality.

5.2.1. At least two
measures are
adopted by
national and local
authorities to
encourage
integration of
women in high
value chains in
sustainable
agriculture.

December
2021

0 measures

In May 2021, the Central Bank
(Bank of the Republic of
Haiti) reiterated its
commitment to integrate more
women entrepreneurs in the
formal financial sector and
announced that it would create
a $10 million guarantee fund
for women entrepreneurs.

5.3.1. Haitian
authorities
conceive and
implement a
programme of
economic and
fiscal reforms, in
collaboration with
relevant
international
financial
institutions.

December
2021

The lack of a
Government ratified
by Parliament means
that Haiti is currently
unable to commit to
economic reforms.

No further action undertaken.
The combination of the acute
political instability,
institutional fragility and low
capacity has made it
particularly difficult for
national authorities to commit
to economic reforms, as
demonstrated by the lack of
progress in their negotiation
with International Monetary
Fund on a possible staffmonitored programme.

6. State
institutions are
reinforced to
effectively
implement
policies and
programmes
that ensure the
delivery of
quality basic
services in the
most
underserved
communities
and increase
their resilience
to climaterelated threats,
including
through
disaster
management
and risk
mitigation.

6.1.1. Conduct of December
Haiti’s fifth
2021
Population and
Housing Census,
including a second
phase dedicated to
promoting a
culture of use of
statistical data and
strengthening of
the national
statistical system.

All preparatory
activities prior to the
main census
enumeration,
including mapping, a
pilot census and
procurement of
equipment, have been
completed.

No change. The uncertain
sociopolitical context has not
allowed for a date at which the
enumeration phase would be
launched.

6.2.1. Increase the December
proportion of the
2021
population using
an improved water
source to 79 per
cent.

73.4 per cent of the
population currently
uses an improved
water source.

No change as at 6 August
2021. 67 per cent of the
population have basic access
to improved water source and
10 per cent have limited access
to improved water, according
to WHO-UNICEF Joint
Monitoring Programme for
Water Supply, Sanitation and
Hygiene progress report 2021.

24/26

Trend

21-12899

S/2021/828

Benchmark

Target

Target timeline

Baseline as at December 2019 Update as at 6 August
if not otherwise specified
(or as otherwise specified)

6.2.2. 15 per cent July 2023 a
of the population
in rural area and
2 per cent of the
population in
urban area practise
free open
defecation.

Rural: 36 per cent

6.3.1. 30 per cent December
of the population
2021
facing severe acute
food insecurity
(IPC Phase
3+/acute).

35 per cent of the
population currently
facing severe acute
food insecurity (IPC
Phase 3+/acute).

Urban: 10 per cent

21-12899

31 per cent of population in
rural area and 8 per cent of
population in urban area
practise open defecation.
(source: WHO-UNICEF Joint
Monitoring Programme
progress report 2021).

6.4.1. 397 maternal July 2023 a
deaths per 100,000
living births.

According to the September
2020 IPC analysis, 46 per cent
of the population is currently
facing severe acute food
insecurity.
No change as at 6 August
2021.

6.4.2. Under-5
July 2023 a
mortality rate is
less than 81 per
1,000 living births.

81 per 1,000 living
births as stated in the
2017 Demographic
and Health Survey.

6.5.1. Eleven
December
operational
2021
emergency centres
(1 national,
10 departmental).

11 centres established, The capacity of the 11 centres
but 0 centres possess has been enhanced by the
an improved capacity installation of solar energy and
to coordinate disaster communications equipment.
response (defined as
Two centres have an updated
having received
database in place.
management training
and implemented key
equipment and tools,
including a standard
contingency plan and
consolidated operating
manual).

6.6.1. Track 1:
Incidence rate of
suspected cholera
cases less than
0.01 per 1,000
inhabitants (target
of national
elimination plan
for 2022).

0.06 per 1,000
inhabitants.

Original:
December
2022

Trend

No change as at 6 August
2021.

No new cholera case has been
confirmed since February
2019.

Adjusted:
February
2022
3 years
without cases.

25/26

S/2021/828

Benchmark

Target

Target timeline

6.6.2. Track 2:
20 community
projects
implemented in
cholera-affected
areas.

December
2020

Baseline as at December 2019 Update as at 6 August
if not otherwise specified
(or as otherwise specified)

Trend

5 projects were
20 out of the 20 community
completed in 2019
projects have been identified.
under a pilot initiative. The implementation process is
For 20 community
ongoing, with 50 per cent of
projects planned as
construction designs complete.
part of a project
While significant progress was
expansion, 18
made towards achieving this
communities have
target, the timeline associated
completed
with its full implementation
consultations to
had to be adjusted following a
identify projects,
pause in programme
while 2 communities implementation due first to the
are yet to start
nationwide period of turmoil
consultations.
and violence in late 2019, and
then to the impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic. In both
instances, UNDP and UNOPS
project staff were prevented
from accessing the zones of
implementation. Nevertheless,
remote consultations continued
during this forced downtime,
and the construction phase of
the project is now back in full
swing. The extension was
approved by the Advisory
Committee of the Haiti cholera
multi-partner trust fund.

Abbreviation: N/A, not applicable.
a
Note that this target is based on the national mortality, morbidity and service utilization survey statistical tool, which is
released every five years. Intermediate updates will be provided based on other sources.

26/26

21-12899
