A/72/888–S/2018/539

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
6 June 2018
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-second session
Agenda item 39
The situation in Afghanistan

Security Council
Seventy-third year

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 68/11
and Security Council resolution 2405 (2018), in which the Secretary-General was
requested to report every three months on developments in Afghanistan.
2.
The report provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, including political, humanitarian, development and human rights
efforts, since the issuance of the previous report, on 27 February 2018 ( A/72/768–
S/2018/165).

II. Relevant developments
3.
The impasse between the Presidential Palace and the former Governor of Balkh
Province, Mohammad Atta Noor, concluded with Mr. Noor leaving office on
22 March. In anticipation of the forthcoming elections, several political movements
and parties joined forces to lobby for changes to the electoral system. The
Independent Election Commission announced that 20 October 2018 was the new date
on which the parliamentary and district council elections would be held and launched
a nationwide voter registration process. However, electoral preparations were marred
by slow decision-making and a series of violent attacks targeting election-related
facilities, which lowered the turnout for the voter registration campaign and weakened
public trust in the electoral process. The President, Mohammad Ashraf Ghani,
presented a comprehensive offer of direct negotiations with the Taliban during the
second meeting of the Kabul Process for Peace and Security Cooperation, receiving
broad acclaim from Afghan leaders and strong support from the international
community. However, the Taliban announced its 2018 spring offensive without
responding directly to the Government’s offer of talks. Following the announcement,
the Taliban intensified its military operations, launching a series of attacks against

18-08745 (E)

110618

*1808745*

A/72/888
S/2018/539

district administrative centres. The security situation remained highl y unstable, with
several mass-casualty incidents in urban areas. Complex and suicide attacks became
the leading cause of civilian casualties. Overall civilian casualty figures remained
high but steady. Afghanistan withdrew its reservation to the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and
acceded to its Optional Protocol. The United Nations presented its “One United
Nations” framework to the President, aimed at strengthening its added value to the
people of Afghanistan. The humanitarian situation remained serious, with continuing
high levels of displacement, constraints on humanitarian access and drought
conditions further exacerbating humanitarian challenges. Afghanistan and Pakistan
agreed on the Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for Peace and Solidarity.

A.

Political developments
4.
In the previous report, it was noted that the political sphere had been dominated
by an extended stand-off between the President and the Jam’iyat-i Islami political
party, following the dismissal in December 2017 of Mohammad Atta Noor, a member
of that party, from his long-held position as Governor of Balkh Province. Mr. Noor ’s
refusal to leave office led to a stalemate of several months, as the two sides negotiated
the terms of his departure. The impasse ended without violence on 22 March, when
the former Governor stood down in favour of his chosen successor, fellow Jam ’iyat
affiliate Ishaq Rahguzar, after the President and Mr. Noor agreed to a deal. Tensions
between the President and the Jam’iyat-i Islami political party persisted, however, as
the party joined forces with other political movements to lobby for changes to the
electoral system.
5.
In anticipation of the upcoming elections, opposition politics gained further
momentum. On 2 May, Mr. Noor, along with the Second Chief Executive Officer,
Mohammad Mohaqeq, travelled to Ankara and met the First Vice -President, Abdul
Rashid Dostum, to discuss the consolidation and expansion of the Coalition for the
Salvation of Afghanistan, which was established in June 2017 as an association of
political figures mostly from the northern region. The following day, the group
announced the formation of a new alliance, the National Coalition of Afghanistan,
formally expanding the geographical and ethnic diversity of the previous coalition to
include some prominent figures from the Pashtun belt in the south, south -east and
east of the country.
6.
Faced with an increasingly mobilized political opposition, the Presidential
Palace continued to reach out to the First Vice-President, who remains under
indictment for the alleged sexual assault of a political rival in 2016 and who has
resided in Turkey since May 2017. Supporters of the First Vice -President continued
to press for his return ahead of the start of the candidate nominations for the
parliamentary elections. On 8 May, a delegation including the founder of Hizb -i
Islami, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, and the Minister of Labour and Social Affairs,
Faizullah Zaki, travelled to Ankara, reportedly to disc uss the preparations for
Mr. Dostum’s return to Afghanistan.
7.
The President and his supporters also made efforts to strengthen their alliance
with the Hizb-i Islami (Gulbuddin) political movement and particularly with its
founder, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, a former insurgent who returned to Kabul in April
2017 after signing a peace agreement with the Government. On 14 March, the
Government convened a meeting of representatives of security institutions and line
ministries to discuss the implementation of the peace agreement of 2016.
Subsequently, the Government and Hizb-i Islami (Gulbuddin) began the process of
vetting a further 160 prisoners for release under the agreement. In May, the
Government allocated additional land to the Hizb-i Islami leadership in Kabul,

2/16

18-08745

A/72/888
S/2018/539

Nangarhar and Laghman Provinces, and amended the draft land allocation decree to
include Hizb-i Islami affiliated returnees to Afghanistan as a priority category for
humanitarian land allocation. The Government also took steps to increase the
representation of the Gulbuddin faction in leadership positions, most notably through
a reshuffle of provincial governors in late February, which rewarded several of
Mr. Hekmatyar’s associates.
8.
Meanwhile, Jam’iyat-i Islami continued to lobby for changes to the electoral
system to include an element of proportional representation. Although it had
originally emerged in the context of negotiations over Mr. Noor, the demand gained
traction and quickly attracted the support of other political movements. In March, a
group of 27 political parties, represented by Jam’iyat, Junbesh-i Milli and two
factions each of Hizb-i Islami and Hizb-i Wahdat Islami, formed a contact group to
lobby both the Government and the international community for changes to the
electoral law. On 5 April, at a first meeting with the contact group, the President
undertook to seek legal guidance on the issue from the Supreme Court and the
Independent Commission for Overseeing the Implementation of the Constitution. At
a second meeting on 7 May, the President reiterated his stance that relevant
institutions needed to decide on the matter. The group maintained its position
throughout the reporting period, despite concerns that the proposed changes could
cause further delays in the electoral calendar and that reforms made so close to an
election could diminish the credibility of both the reform and the election.
9.
A further political complication arose with the Government ’s announcement on
3 May of the long-debated roll-out of electronic national identity cards (e-tazkeras).
The announcement triggered an immediate backlash from political figures. The move
prompted particularly strong criticism from non-Pashtun leaders, many of whom
objected to the inclusion of the word “Afghan” to define citizenship, arguing that the
adjective has historically been used to denote Pashtuns. The Chief Executive,
Abdullah, who had opposed issuing electronic identity cards until the ethnic
controversy was resolved, responded with a speech criticizing the Government on a
range of issues including the lack of electoral reform.
10. The Independent Election Commission continued preparations to hold
parliamentary and district council elections. On 1 April, the Commission announced
that 20 October 2018 would be the new election date, postponed from the previously
announced date of 7 July. Voter registration began on 14 April, marking the first full
registration of voters since 2003. When completed, the voter registration process is
designed to lead to a comprehensive voter registry with polling station-specific voter
lists intended to reduce fraud and facilitate operations. In coordination with the
Independent Election Commission, the Afghanistan Central Civil Registration
Authority began to scale up the issuance of the paper-based national identity cards
(tazkeras), which are the basis for voter registration. In an effort to promote better
coordination between electoral stakeholders, the Government has held regular high level meetings between the different government institutions involved in the electoral
process and the Independent Election Commission, as well as the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and key donor countries. On 27 March,
the fifth national election forum was held to encourage engagement be tween the
Independent Election Commission and political stakeholders. Provincial election
forums were conducted in 31 provinces on 30 April and 1 May. Throughout the
process, UNAMA engaged with senior political party leaders to facilitate dialogue
with the Independent Election Commission.
11. Nonetheless, many challenges continued to arise in relation to the electoral
preparations. Difficulties persisted in recruiting Commission staff, with
approximately 140 key positions at both the headquarters and the pr ovincial levels
remaining vacant. Operational problems continue to affect the distribution of identity
18-08745

3/16

A/72/888
S/2018/539

documents and voter registration stickers. Most notably, the placement of stickers
indicating eligibility to vote on identity documents caused security c oncerns,
particularly following reports that insurgents were threatening citizens whose identity
documents bore stickers. On 12 May, the Presidential Palace announced that copies
of the documents could be used for voter registration purposes, leaving peopl e free to
show their original documents without stickers if stopped by insurgents. On 13 May,
however, four commissioners told the media that the decision had been illegal under
the Election Law, and the acting Chief Electoral Officer resigned over the iss ue. On
16 May, the Independent Election Commission voted to implement a compromise
solution, allowing the issuance of duplicate identity documents for the purposes of
voter registration.
12. The apparent divisions within the Independent Election Commission and
tensions between the Commission and the Presidential Palace further exacerbated
public concerns regarding the credibility of the electoral preparations. Voter
registration figures have been substantially lower than Commission targets, affected
by security concerns and a lack of institutional capacity in many provinces. As at
17 May, nearly 1.8 million voters had registered, of whom 28 per cent were women.
In an attempt to remedy the slow start to the voter registration campaign, the
Commission announced on 10 May that it would extend voter registration in urban
centres by an additional month, while simultaneously initiating registration in rural
areas. However, the slow start to registration, the poor public information campaign
and minimal outreach undertaken exacerbated concerns regarding the competence and
independence of the Independent Election Commission.
13. The Government took an important step towards advancing a peace process
during the second meeting of the Kabul Process for Peace and Security Cooperation,
held on 28 February, at which the President offered a comprehensive proposal for
direct peace talks with the Taliban, without preconditions. In the proposal, he
promised to consider issues such as political inclusion, a ceasefire, constitutio nal
review, prisoner releases, the removal of leaders from sanctions lists and the
reintegration of refugees and former combatants as part of the peace negotiations. The
Government’s offer was praised by a wide variety of political figures and received
strong support from the international community. In the final declaration of the
meeting, participants endorsed the Government’s offer and made reference to the
possibility of renegotiating contested aspects of the international community ’s future
role in Afghanistan, long a sticking point in the negotiations between the Government
and the Taliban. However, the Taliban did not respond formally to the offer, despite
reports of internal debates within the group on how to respond. On 25 April, the
Taliban announced its annual spring offensive campaign, this year named
“Al-Khandaq”, without mentioning the Government’s peace offer of 28 February.
14. In April, following a suicide attack in a stadium during a wrestling match in
Helmand Province, local civil society actors began erecting “peace tents” in the
provincial capital. Within days, the movement began to spread across the country,
reaching a total of 20 provinces. The protesters called on all combatants to lay down
their arms and negotiate a peace deal. The movement was unprecedented as a
nationwide, self-generated, civic movement demanding peace and has so far avoided
being co-opted by either the Government or the Taliban. Neither the Government nor
the Taliban, however, has heeded the calls for a cessation of violence and the opening
of dialogue. Following an apparent loss of momentum, on 11 May the Helmand
protesters announced that they would march to Kabul and appealed to all sides again
to lay down their arms and stop killing civilians during the Muslim hol y month of
Ramadan.

4/16

18-08745

A/72/888
S/2018/539

B.

Security
15. The highly unstable security situation continued to dominate political,
humanitarian and development conditions in Afghanistan during the reporting period.
UNAMA recorded a total of 5,675 security incidents between 15 February and
15 May, a 7 per cent decrease compared with the same period in 2017. During the
reporting period, the eastern region was the most affected, followed by the southern,
northern, and south-eastern regions, which accounted for 82 per cent of recorded
incidents in total. Armed clashes continued to make up the bulk of conflict -related
incidents, accounting for 64 per cent of all incidents, followed by improvised
explosive devices, which accounted for 15 per cent of all incidents. However, there
was a notable increase in targeted assassinations and suicide attacks, by 35 per cent
and 78 per cent, respectively, when compared with the same period in 2017. The
number of reported air strikes by international military forces and the Afghan Air
Force remained high, representing 5 per cent of all incidents, an increase of 18 per
cent since the previous report and of 24 per cent since the same period in 2017.
16. The conflict consolidated along increasingly discernible battle lines with
fighting concentrated in a few provinces. Nangarhar, Helmand, Kunar, Kandahar,
Faryab and Ghazni Provinces accounted for a total of 60 per cent of security incidents.
Despite fierce contestation in some areas, there was no significant change in territorial
control between the Government and the Taliban during the reporting period. Mass casualty suicide attacks in urban centres continued to account for a high number of
casualties.
17. On 25 April, the Taliban announced its annual spring offensive, this year named
“Al-Khandaq”. In the announcement, the group made direct reference to the South
Asia strategy of the United States of America, vowing to target international military
forces and their supporters within Afghanistan, and invoked as justification a number
of specific grievances, including the presence of foreign troops, civilian casualties,
the destruction of property and “illegitimate activities”. Unlike last year’s declaration,
this year’s announcement focused almost entirely on the Taliban’s military strategy,
with few references to the group’s political and governance objectives. The
announcement was accompanied by an immediate spike in conflict -related incidents,
with over 50 incidents recorded in 21 provinces on the same day as the announcement,
suggesting a significant degree of command and control and an ability to match stated
strategy with operations.
18. In subsequent weeks, the Taliban increased the frequency of its attacks against
district administrative centres, temporarily overrunning Raghistan and Kohistan in
Badakhshan Province, Qal‘ah-ye Zal in Kunduz Province, Talah wa Barfak in
Baghlan Province, Bal Chiragh in Faryab Province and Anjiristan, Deh Yak and
Jaghatuy in Ghazni Province. For the first time since 2016, on 14 May the Taliban
also launched a large-scale assault on a provincial capital, Farah City in the west of
Afghanistan, besieging key government buildings inside the city. The attack prompted
heavy armed clashes, which lasted for several days before the Taliban was eventually
repelled by Afghan National Defence and Security Forces with international air
support.
19. The Government continued to reform the Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces in accordance with its four-year road map on security sector reform. During
the reporting period, the Government completed the transfer of the Afghan Border
Police from the Ministry of the Interior to the Ministry of Defence and renamed it the
Afghan Border Forces, in line with its new focus on combat operations. The
Government also continued to scale up the Afghan Special Forces as part of a plan to
double their number under the four-year road map. During the reporting period,

18-08745

5/16

A/72/888
S/2018/539

2,000 additional commandos joined the special operations battalions. Efforts also
continued to increase the size of the Afghan Air Forc e, which is expected to double
by 2023 under the road map. In addition, the Government brought forward the
retirement of senior military officials under the provisions of the Inherent Law of
2017, with a retirement order for a second group of 61 Afghan National Army generals
issued by the President on 12 May.
20. During the reporting period the Government began preparations for the
establishment of a new security force, the Afghan National Army Territorial Force.
The Force is expected to comprise about 36,000 personnel and will mainly be
responsible for defending areas cleared of insurgents by military operations. Around
5,000 soldiers have been recruited in a pilot phase to be rolled out in four provinces
and have commenced training under the auspices of the Ministry of Defence.
21. Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province (ISIL-KP) maintained
its presence in Nangarhar, Kunar and Jowzjan Provinces. Armed clashes between the
Taliban and ISIL-KP were reported in Nangarhar and Kunar Provinces, as the two
groups continued a months-long struggle for control over territory. The group also
claimed responsibility for 11 mass-casualty suicide attacks in the reporting period,
including attacks in Kabul on 30 April and 9 May. In the attack carried out on
30 April, a suicide attacker targeted a checkpoint of the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces, followed by a second attack approximately 30 minutes later. The
second suicide attacker was reportedly posing as a journalist and detonated his vest
among a group of journalists who were reporting on the first incident. In a worrying
development, these attacks, mostly against Shia targets, appeared desig ned to foment
sectarian strife.
22. Three incidents involving United Nations personnel were reported, i ncluding
one case of intimidation and two criminal incidents.

C.

Regional cooperation
23. Since the previous report, there have been significant steps towards
consolidating a common international approach on peace and stability in Afghanistan.
On 28 February, the Government hosted the second meeting of the Kabul Process for
Peace and Security Cooperation, with the participation of 26 countries, as well as the
European Union, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the United Nations. In
his statement at the event, Mr. Ghani announced that the Government is open to peace
talks with the Taliban. In a joint declaration at the conclusion of the event, participants
unanimously welcomed the President’s offer and agreed to greater regional and
international cooperation on peace and reconciliation and counter-terrorism.
24. This consensus on peace in Afghanistan was further strengthened at a
conference held in Tashkent on 27 March, which was attended by high -level
representatives of 23 countries, as well as the European Union and the United Nations.
The participants reiterated their support for the offer by the Government of
Afghanistan to hold direct talks with the Taliban. In the final conference declaration,
participants expressed support for an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process,
leading to an inclusive peace agreement between the Government and the Taliban.
The opposition of the international community to all manifestations of terrorism
without distinction was also stressed. In a further effort to sustain the international
momentum towards a peace process, Indonesia hosted a trilateral meetin g of religious
scholars from Afghanistan, Indonesia and Pakistan on 11 May. The scholars issued a
statement calling on all fighting factions to lay down their arms, endorsing a peace
process and condemning terrorist tactics such as suicide bombings as un -Islamic. The
Taliban was invited to send clerics to the conference but declined and, following the

6/16

18-08745

A/72/888
S/2018/539

conference, issued a statement dismissing the conference as an initiative of the United
States of America and noting that it had failed to pass a fatwa agains t jihad in
Afghanistan.
25. Afghanistan has taken steps towards developing closer regional economic
cooperation. On 23 February, the Afghan segment of the Turkmenistan -AfghanistanPakistan-India natural gas pipeline was officially inaugurated at a ceremony in Herat
City, attended by the President of Afghanistan, Mohammad Ashraf Ghani, the
President of Turkmenistan, Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedov, the Prime Minister of
Pakistan, Shahid Khaqan Abbasi, and the Minister of State for External Affairs of
India, M.J. Akbar. Speaking at the ceremony, Mr. Ghani remarked that the pipeline
represented an important milestone for regional economic connectivity. On 19 April,
the senior officials meeting of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process was held in Istanbul.
At the meeting, the participating countries, led by Afghanistan and Turkey as the
Co-chairs for 2018, agreed to a seventh confidence-building measure on agriculture
under the Heart of Asia framework and discussed ways of reinvigorating regional
cooperation through practical measures related to the confidence-building measures.
26. Following months of heightened tensions, Afghanistan and Pakistan finalized
an agreement on the Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for Peace and Solidarity. On
6 April, the Prime Minister of Pakistan, Shahid Khaqan Abbasi, visited Kabul for the
third round of talks on the Action Plan. During the visit, Mr. Abbasi held separate
meetings with Mr. Ghani and the Chief Executive, Abdullah, to discuss the Afghan
peace process, the regional political and security situation, bilateral trade, the return
of refugees, border violations and the fight against terrorism. At the conclusion of the
visit, the two sides agreed to seven key principles within the framework of the Action
Plan. However, the finalization of the framework was temporarily delayed following
cross-border fighting on 15 and 16 April. Soon after the incidents, military officials
of Afghanistan and Pakistan met to defuse tensions and agree to a ceasefire. On
1 May, at a ceremony attended by Mr. Abbasi, Pakistan formally reopened the Ghulam
Khan border crossing point between Khost Province in Afghanistan and North
Waziristan in Pakistan, which had remained closed since 2014. The opening of the
crossing, the third largest official crossing between Afghanistan and Pakistan, is
expected to increase cross-border trade. On 14 May, the Action Plan was finalized in
Islamabad by the two countries’ delegations, led by the Deputy Foreign Minister of
Afghanistan, Hekmat Khalil Karzai, and the Foreign Secretary of Pakistan, Tehmina
Janjua, respectively. Under the Action Plan, six working groups for cooperation were
operationalized in different fields.

III. Human rights
27. On 12 April, UNAMA released a report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict for the first quarter of 2018. 1 The Mission documented 2,258 civilian
casualties (763 people killed and 1,495 injured) between 1 January and 31 March
2018, reflecting levels of harm similar to the same periods in 2016 a nd 2017. UNAMA
attributed 67 per cent of all civilian casualties to anti -government elements (50 per
cent to the Taliban, 11 per cent to ISIL-KP, 4 per cent to unidentified anti-government
elements, including self-proclaimed ISIL-KP, and 2 per cent to fighting between
anti-government elements), 18 per cent to pro-government forces, 11 per cent to
unattributed crossfire, and 4 per cent to other incidents, including explosive remnants
of war and cross-border shelling. For the first time, suicide and complex attacks
became the leading cause of civilian casualties, surpassing ground engagements. The
__________________
1

18-08745

United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, “Quarterly report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict: 1 January to 31 March 2018”.
7/16

A/72/888
S/2018/539

Mission also noted that civilian casualties from attacks by anti -government elements
deliberately targeting civilians more than doubled compared with the first quar ter of
2017, accounting for 39 per cent of all civilian casualties and 59 per cent of the
civilian casualties attributed to anti-government elements. Consistent with the trends
observed in 2017, anti-government elements continued to direct attacks against the
minority Shia Muslim population, causing 154 civilian casualties (49 people killed
and 105 injured), nearly all from suicide and complex attacks for which responsibility
was claimed by ISIL-KP.
28. The use of improvised explosive device tactics (includ ing complex, suicide and
non-suicide attacks) caused 1,018 civilian casualties (311 persons killed and
707 injured), comprising 45 per cent of all civilian casualties. Ground engagements
accounted for 663 civilian casualties (161 persons killed and 502 inj ured), amounting
to 30 per cent of all civilian casualties. UNAMA continued to document high numbers
of civilian casualties from aerial strikes: 142 civilian casualties (67 persons killed and
75 injured), with women and children comprising more than half o f those casualties.
The Mission documented 583 child casualties (155 children killed and 428 injured),
accounting for 25 per cent of all civilian casualties. Casualties among women
decreased by 24 per cent, resulting in a total of 60 women killed and 157 i njured, with
more than half of those casualties caused by ground engagements.
29. On 7 May, the Mission released a special report entitled “Airstrikes in Dasht-eArchi district, Kunduz Province, 2 April 2018” on airstrikes carried out by the Afghan
Air Force during an outdoor religious ceremony in a Taliban-controlled area in
Kunduz Province. The report notes with concern the indiscriminate nature of the
attack, which resulted in at least 107 casualties (36 persons killed and 71 injured),
most of whom were children, and calls on the Government to conduct an impartial
investigation. On 16 May, the President issued a public statement apologizing for the
incident, expressing condolences and offering compensation. On 10 May, the Mission
released a special report entitled “Election-related attacks and abuses during the
initial voter registration period”. In the report, it is noted that, since the
commencement of voter registration on 14 April, there had been 23 verified election related security incidents, resulting in 271 civilian casualties (86 persons killed and
185 injured), the majority of whom were women and children, including an attack on
22 April in a mostly Shia-inhabited area of Kabul that had caused the deaths of
60 civilians and injured 13 others, responsibility for which was claimed by ISIL-KP.
The report further documented the abduction of 26 civilians and incidents involving
threats, intimidation and harassment. It was also noted that around 75 per cent of
election-related security incidents occurred in schools or mosques used for electionrelated purposes, disrupting education activities.
30. From 1 January to 31 March, the country task force on monitoring and reporting
verified 11 incidents of attacks against schools and related personnel (five by t he
Taliban, three by ISIL-KP, two by undetermined anti-government elements and one
by a pro-government militia), compared with 13 incidents in the previous quarter. Of
concern were two incidents of threats by the Taliban against education facilities that
led to widespread school closures in the provinces of Kunduz (342 schools) and Logar
(29 schools). In addition, the task force verified the military use of three schools (one
by ISIL-KP and two by the Afghan National Army), compared with seven schools in
the previous quarter. The task force verified 17 incidents of attacks against hospitals
and related personnel, including eight attacks against health-care workers, five threats
of attacks and four attacks on health-care facilities (five by the Taliban, seven by
ISIL-KP, one each by an undetermined armed group and the National Directorate for
Security, one jointly by the Afghan National Police and the National Directorate for
Security, one jointly by the Afghan Special Forces and international military forces

8/16

18-08745

A/72/888
S/2018/539

and one by a pro-government militia), compared with seven incidents in the previous
quarter.
31. The Mission verified the recruitment and use of 19 boys by anti -government
elements, compared with five during the previous reporting period. As at 31 March,
the Ministry of Justice reported 140 children detained in juvenile rehabilitation
centres on national security-related charges, including for their association with
armed groups, compared with 171 in December 2017. The task force verified one
incident of sexual violence against a boy. The task force also verified 13 incidents of
denial of humanitarian access (six each by ISIL-KP and the Taliban and one by the
Afghan National Police), compared with six in the last quarter.
32. The Government continued its efforts to address violence against women. On
3 March, the President signed a decree amending the Elimination of Violence against
Women Law of 2009, aimed at aligning some of its sentencing provisions with the
revised Penal Code, and a decree amending the Penal Code, ensuring the applicability
of the Elimination of Violence against Women Law, with regard to crimes of violence
against women. On 4 March a presidential decree exempted crimes of violence
against women from eligibility for non-custodial sentencing options. On 28 March,
the Government released its fifth report (March 2016 to March 2017) on the
implementation of the Elimination of Violence against Women Law of 2009,
recording 4,290 cases of violence against women. International Women ’s Day was
marked in Afghanistan with over 30 events nationwide. In coordination with its
partners, UNAMA organized 14 events, highlighting women’s rights and the
importance of women’s role in peace and security and decision-making processes.
33. On 17 April, Afghanistan acceded to the Optional Protocol to the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
fulfilling one of the Government’s key voluntary pledges pursuant to its candidature
for membership of the Human Rights Council. On the same date, Afghanistan also
withdrew its reservation to the Convention, fulfilling another long -standing pledge.
34. UNAMA continued to promote the role of civil society through a series of
seminars and workshops in 15 provinces. On 30 April, UNAMA launched a
compilation of 34 provincial road maps for peace, a product of the Afghan People ’s
Dialogue on Peace, facilitated by UNAMA with civil society, the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission and the Afghan High Peace Council. The
Dialogue offered opportunities for developing consensus on the primacy of a political
solution to ending the conflict and led to the echoing of calls for peace, development
and justice. Civil society activists and media personnel continued to face threats and
attacks. UNAMA documented three incidents that killed 11 and injured 6 journalists
and media personnel, including a targeted attack in Kabul on 30 April in which
9 journalists were killed and 6 were injured.

IV. Implementation of the Kabul Process and coordination of
development assistance
35. In line with its commitments at the conferences held in London and Brussels,
on 2 April, the Government finalized an action plan fo r implementing its policy of
10 January to increase the number of women working in the civil service. The
Independent Administrative Reform and Civil Service Commission has also taken
measures to standardize the structures of government ministries and agencies based
on functional and needs assessments conducted at the national and subnationa l levels.
Following this process, the Commission identified 17,700 vacant positions, including
8,700 for teachers, and held competitive exams through a countrywide mass recruitment process for 225,670 eligible candidates. The first results of these exams
18-08745

9/16

A/72/888
S/2018/539

were announced in May. In a further effort to strengthen the civil service, a new
administrative procedure decree and amendments to the Civil Servants Law were
approved in March. The Government also made progress on improving access to
information. On 3 March, the President endorsed a new Access to Information Law
through a decree. Among other amendments to the Access to Information Law of
2014, under the new law an independent commission for access to information was
established and protections for whistle-blowers were introduced.
36. In February, the President, together with the Afghanistan Land Authority,
launched the national independent development programme for land administration
to establish a comprehensive land register database, which will provide a basis for
addressing land usurpation. The Government also continued work on its new land
allocation decree, which will govern the allocation of land to returnees and internally
displaced persons. Following extensive consultation with stakeholders, includi ng
UNAMA, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN -Habitat), a
draft of the decree was discussed by the Council of Ministers on 4 Mar ch and is
pending finalization.
37. On 15 May, UNAMA released its second annual report on anti-corruption
efforts. The report commended the Government for implementing several key
anti-corruption reforms in 2017 and early 2018, including the launch of its
anti-corruption strategy in October 2017, strengthened anti-corruption measures in
the new Penal Code, the increasing capacity of the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre
and the adoption of a more transparent national budget. However, the report also
highlighted significant gaps in the institutional anti-corruption framework and
provided recommendations for further reforms to bring Afghanistan more fully into
compliance with the United Nations Convention against Corruption. The Government
made some progress in drafting an anti-corruption law. On 1 April, following a long
delay in the drafting process, the President instructed the Ministry of Justice to
finalize the law. On 14 May, the draft law was discussed by the High Council for Rule
of Law and Anti-Corruption in the presence of civil society and the international
community.
38. The Government took steps towards implementing its new Penal Code, which
came into force on 14 February. According to the Ministry of Justice, 5,000 copies of
the Code were printed, of which 1,219 copies have been distributed to courts and
prosecution offices countrywide. The remaining copies were distributed to other
government offices and international stakeholders. In response to the high demand
for copies, several international donors initiated the procurement of an a dditional
10,000 copies to be made available to the Ministry of Justice for distribution. In April,
international donor agencies finished planning a 26 -week training programme, to be
rolled out jointly by the training departments of the Supreme Court, the Attorney
General’s Office and the Ministry of Justice. In April, UNAMA started a survey on
the implementation of the new Penal Code at the subnational level. The results of the
survey and accompanying observations will be shared with relevant institutions and
the international community to further guide capacity-building efforts.
39. Since the previous report, the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre has tried an
additional seven cases, bringing the overall caseload to 34 cases involving
142 accused persons since the Centre was established in 2016. The number of cases
tried in absentia, owing to a lack of capacity among the security institutions to enforce
court summons, has remained high.
40. In response to the expectation expressed by the President that the Unit ed Nations
should “deliver as one”, under the Government’s leadership, the United Nations in
Afghanistan has undertaken a comprehensive review of its work. On 16 April, the
10/16

18-08745

A/72/888
S/2018/539

President met representatives of the United Nations entities to discuss the progres s
made under the “One United Nations” framework for Afghanistan. At the meeting,
the President was briefed on the progress made in the six thematic areas under the
framework: education; food security, nutrition and livelihoods; health; return and
reintegration; rule of law; and normative work. A paper describing the approach was
presented. The President emphasized that poverty reduction was a key objective for
the Government.
41. During April and May, UNAMA supported the Government and donors with the
preparations for the ministerial conference on Afghanistan, to be hosted by the United
Nations jointly with Afghanistan in Geneva on 28 November. UNAMA, donors and
the Government identified key issues for the conference agenda and steps to be taken
by the Government prior to the conference. In order to formulate an update to the
deliverables under the Self-Reliance through Mutual Accountability Framework,
which expire at the end of 2018, UNAMA hosted a joint workshop with donors and
government representatives to assess the existing deliverables.

V. Humanitarian assistance and returnees
42. To date in 2018, 75,643 people have been newly displaced by conflict, with
40,301 displaced between 15 February and 15 May, a decrease of 65 per cent
compared with the same period in 2017. Particularly high levels of displacement were
recorded in Kunduz Province, with more than 13,000 displaced people, and Faryab
Province, with more than 10,000 displaced. Many displaced families have been forced
to move multiple times and have no immediate prospect of returning to their areas of
origin in safety and dignity. Humanitarian partners provided 121,684 people displaced
by conflict with life-saving assistance during the reporting period.
43. Trauma care remains a priority in terms of humanitarian needs, particularly
given the recent increase in the number of suicide attacks in densely populated areas.
The provinces with the highest requirements for trauma care are Kandahar, Kunduz,
Nangarhar and Takhar. During the reporting period, the 15 partners of the health
cluster provided consultations to 496,834 people, of whom 56 per cent were women
and girls.
44. In mid-April, the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock officially
declared a drought. The main planting season, spanning from October 2017 to
February 2018, was severely compromised by the La Niña weather effect, which saw
a precipitation deficit of 70 per cent in most of the country. The low level of
precipitation was the main factor behind a forecast reduction in wheat production
from 4.2 million metric tons in 2017 to 3.5 million metric tons in 2018. Humanitarian
partners estimate that more than 2 million people will be affected by the drought
across two thirds of the country, with 1.4 million severely affected people in need of
emergency food, water, hygiene, sanitation and nutrition support to survive. Drought related migration has begun in some provinces, while depleted food stocks were
reported in Badghis and Ghor Provinces. More than half a million people may have
to leave their homes, if they are not provided with food and water in their villages in
time. Based on existing humanitarian stockpiles and available resources, the
humanitarian community is only able to support 90,000 people for a period of two
months with half-food rations. Overall, partners have estimated that $136 million is
required to provide a comprehensive response to 1.4 million people for a period of
six months, which includes possible migration movements. Almost two thirds of that
amount is required to support food needs alone.
45. A total of 220,123 Afghan citizens — including spontaneous returnees,
deportees and refugees — returned to their home country during the reporting period.
18-08745

11/16

A/72/888
S/2018/539

From mid-February to 15 May, 11,413 people arrived from Pakistan (11,035
spontaneous arrivals and 378 deportees) and 202,644 from the Islamic Republic of
Iran (84,478 spontaneous arrivals and 118,166 deportees), according to the
International Organization for Migration (IOM). UNHCR resumed its voluntary
repatriation programme from Pakistan on 1 March after the winter pause and assisted
in the return of 5,722 people. In addition, UNHCR repatriated 311 refugees from the
Islamic Republic of Iran and 33 from other countries during the reporting period.
46. The total number of returnees from Pakistan was 75 per cent lower than in the
previous year, and similar to 2014 levels, when the lowest return figure was recorded.
The lower number of returns this year is linked to the improved protection conditions
in Pakistan, along with the decision by the Federal Cabinet of Pakistan to extend the
validity of the proof-of-registration cards, which provide temporary legal stay to
1.4 million Afghan refugees living in Pakistan, until June 2018. The authorities of
Pakistan have begun the issuance of Afghan Citizen Cards to over 878,000
undocumented Afghans who have applied to register since August 2017. The cards
will remain valid until 30 June 2018, and holders are required to return to Afghanistan
to register for civil documentation, including a passport and a visa for Pakistan, before
returning to Pakistan. An estimated 400,000 Afghans remain undocumented in
Pakistan, and are vulnerable to the threat of deportation should the protection
environment deteriorate.
47. Constraints on humanitarian access continued, with a total of 70 incidents
affecting the United Nations and its humanitarian partners from 15 February to
15 May. Since January, 13 aid workers have been killed, 9 injured and 21 abducted.
Compared with 2017, there have been more direct armed attacks on health-care
facilities. Access to communities in need of assistance in contested areas and areas
under the control of anti-government elements remained a persistent challenge for
humanitarian partners.
48. Seven cases of polio have been confirmed this year, with poliovirus transmission
currently limited to five districts in Kandahar, Kunar and Nangarhar. One subnational
and two nationwide polio vaccination campaigns were conducted during the reporting
period, aiming to reach more than 6 million and 9.9 million children, respectively.
Inaccessibility owing to vaccination bans and active conflict remains a major concern,
with the number of inaccessible children increasing from 60,000 in February to
110,000 in March, 130,000 in April and more than half a million in May. Permanent
transit vaccination teams placed around inaccessible areas and major transit routes
vaccinate over 1.1 million children every month.
49. The United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) scaled up clearance
activities in support of the national plan and has renewed its focus on risk education.
In support of IOM and UNHCR, UNMAS continued to provide risk education to
returnees through border points, reaching 84,769 men, women and children in the first
quarter of 2018. In the first quarter of 2018, victim-operated improvised explosive
devices, referred to as “pressure-plate improvised explosive devices” in previous
reports, were a leading cause of conflict-related death and injury of civilians in
Afghanistan. There were 274 civilian casualties due to landmines (including victim operated improvised explosive devices, in use in Afghanistan since 2010, and earlier
emplaced anti-personnel and anti-tank mines) and explosive remnants of war during
the first quarter of 2018, a 54 per cent decrease compared with the same period in
2017. In the first quarter of 2018, 89 per cent of victims of explosive remnants of war
were children, an 8 per cent increase from 2017.
50. To support the Government in addressing the increasing humanitarian access
constraints caused by the presence of victim-operated improvised explosive devices,
UNMAS co-led a task force, with the Directorate of Mine Action Coordination, to
12/16

18-08745

A/72/888
S/2018/539

define procedures and training requirements for the Government to be able to safely
clear improvised explosive devices abandoned by parties to the conflict, and enable
greater access for civilians and humanitarian actors.
51. As of 1 May, humanitarian activities in Afghanistan had received $129.3 million
in funding, of which $98.2 million was for activities included in the Humanitarian
Response Plan. The number of people targeted for assistance is 2.8 million people.

VI. Counter-narcotics
52. In May, the Ministry of Counter-Narcotics released a socioeconomic report on
opium cultivation in Afghanistan in 2017, with technical support from the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. The report provides a comprehensive analysis of
the causes and consequences of opium poppy cultivation in Afghanistan. The report
recommends measures for building resilience to opium poppy cultivation in rural
communities, including a mix of alternative development and law enforcement
interventions to reduce opium poppy cultivation.
53. The Government, supported by international partners, continued its counternarcotics operations during the reporting period. From 1 March to 30 April, Afghan
law enforcement authorities conducted a total of 612 counter-narcotics operations,
leading to seizures of 541 kilograms of heroin, 1,157 kilograms of opium,
32 kilograms of methamphetamine, 5,639 kilograms of hashish, 2,390 3,4 methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) K-tablets, 184 kilograms of solid
precursor chemicals and 883 litres of liquid precursor chemicals. Eight heroin
manufacturing laboratories were also dismantled. In total, 685 suspects were arrested
and 86 vehicles, 28 weapons and 212 mobile phones were seized. One officer of the
Counter-Narcotics Police of Afghanistan was killed while carrying out counternarcotics operations during the reporting period.

VII. Mission support
54. As at 30 April, the Mission’s vacancy rates were 17 per cent for international
staff and 6 per cent for national staff, compared with the approved rates of 14 per cent
and 7.5 per cent, respectively. The proportion of female staff, despite special measures
granted for the Mission to recruit and retain more national female staff, remained very
low. As at 30 April, the percentage of women in each category of staff stood at: 32 per
cent for international staff, 38 per cent for United Nations Volunteers, 11 per cent for
National Professional Officers and 7 per cent for Local level staff. Between
1 February and 30 April 2018, UNAMA conducted 224 road and 13 air missions, as
well as 736 reverse outreach missions during which district re presentatives visited
UNAMA field offices.

VIII. Observations
55. As noted in the previous report, a series of brutal attacks in early 2018 made the
task of bringing about a negotiated settlement to the conflict both more difficult and
more urgent. The National Unity Government’s offer to the Taliban, made at the
second meeting of the Kabul Process, to hold talks without preconditions presented a
constructive way forward. The resounding international support for the offer
expressed at the conferences held in Kabul and Tashkent provides further impetus to
the peace negotiations. Ultimately, however, peace in Afghanistan must be made by
and between Afghans. In that respect, I am heartened by the emergence of a genuine

18-08745

13/16

A/72/888
S/2018/539

civic peace movement, in which citizens across Afghanistan have joined forces to
advocate an end to war. I urge all parties to heed the call of the Afghan people, whose
enduring desire for peace can be fulfilled only through inclusive negotiations.
56. Ensuring an inclusive and credible electoral process while a significant
percentage of the population lives in parts of the country that are insecure and where
the reach of State authority is limited remains a fundamental challenge. The peaceful
conduct of elections at all stages is critical in enabling people to exercise their right
to vote without fear or threat of insecurity. Of concern are the ongoing attempts to
disrupt the electoral process through violent means, including tactics such as attacks
on election-related facilities, abductions of electoral staff and intimidation and
harassment of registered voters. I condemn the suicide attacks targeting a national
registration centre in Kabul on 22 April and a voter registration site in Khost Province
on 6 May, each of which caused dozens of civilian casualties. Apart from the direct
harm that they inflict on the population, such attacks represent an assault on the
fundamental right of citizens to vote. The commitment and courage demonstrated by
the people of Afghanistan, who continue to register as voters in the face of such
threats, is heartening. I call on all parties to respect the constitutional rights of the
Afghan people and to enable the conduct of elections that are worthy of their courage.
57. Operational challenges continue to be faced in the preparations for the elections.
Slow decision-making and protracted debates over electoral issues risk delaying the
timetable for parliamentary and district council elections, while undermining public
confidence in the electoral process. I encourage the electoral management bodies to
streamline their decision-making processes, take necessary decisions swiftly and
strengthen coordination with other institutions and with civil society in all aspects of
electoral preparations. Apart from allowing Afghans to elect parliamentary and
district council representatives of their choice, credible and inclusive elections can
serve as an important step in Afghanistan’s ongoing democratic consolidation. To
ensure the sustainability of Afghanistan’s electoral institutions, it is vital that the
independence of the electoral management bodies is respected.
58. The fragmented political environment in Afghanistan poses another challenge
for the country, not only for the forthcoming elections, but also more generally for
governance and reconciliation. Political will and unity are very much n eeded in order
to hold credible elections and advance the peace process. Progress in that regard will
also help to pave the way for much-needed reforms to take hold. I call upon all Afghan
political actors to ensure a commonality of purpose and a joining o f efforts for the
success of those essential processes.
59. The conflict continues to inflict an unacceptable toll on the citizens of
Afghanistan. I am deeply concerned by the continued rise in civilian casualties from
the indiscriminate use of suicide improvised explosive devices by anti-government
elements. This tactic has now become the leading cause of civilian casualties,
surpassing combined casualties by all parties from ground engagements in the first
quarter of 2018. I note with concern that the number of civilian casualties from attacks
by anti-government elements deliberately targeting civilians more than doubled
compared with the first quarter of 2017 and call upon anti -government elements to
put an immediate stop to the indiscriminate use of suicide improvised explosive
devices. Consistent with the disturbing trends observed in 2016 and 2017,
anti-government elements continued to carry out direct attacks against the minority
Shia Muslim population, causing 154 civilian casualties, nearly all from suicide and
complex attacks claimed by ISIL-KP. Recalling the obligations of all parties to avoid
civilian casualties under international human rights and humanitarian law, I call on
anti-government elements to cease these atrocious attacks against civili an targets.

14/16

18-08745

A/72/888
S/2018/539

60. Protecting women from violence and holding perpetrators to account are
essential to ensuring women’s meaningful participation in socioeconomic, political,
peace and security processes. The Government and the Afghanistan Independent
Human Rights Commission regularly monitor the implementation of domestic laws
on crimes of violence against women. I encourage the full implementation of the
national strategy and action plan on the elimination of violence against women, as
well as the finalization of the Government’s third periodic report to the Committee
on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, all of which would provide an
important demonstration of its commitment to protecting the rights and lives of all
women.
61. With the accession to the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the Government
is fulfilling one of the voluntary pledges made in support of its candidacy for
membership of the Human Rights Council. The United Nations stands ready to
provide the necessary technical support in establishing a national preventive
mechanism for the prevention of torture, in line with the Government ’s commitments
under the Convention. Following the withdrawal of its reservation to the Convention,
Afghanistan now recognizes the competence of the Committee against Torture to
conduct confidential enquiries into allegations of the systematic use of torture on its
territory. The United Nations will continue to assist Afghanist an in its efforts to
eliminate the use of torture in government-run detention facilities.
62. The rise in the recruitment and use of children by parties to the conflict, which
increased three-fold compared with the previous reporting period, is deeply
concerning. As the recruitment and use of children during armed conflict is one of the
six grave violations identified by the Security Council, I call upon all parties to the
conflict to put an immediate stop to the recruitment and use of children and urge the
Government to adopt the measures necessary to establish referral and rehabil itation
mechanisms for victims.
63. The Government of Afghanistan continued to pursue important reforms. The
promulgation of the Access to Information Law, which contains additional protections
for whistle-blowers, represents a welcome step towards promoting accountable
governance. As the Government implements its anti-corruption strategy, continuous
constructive engagement with local institutions, civil society and international
partners will remain crucial, as combating corruption in Afghanistan will require the
sustained and concerted efforts of all stakeholders. In line with the recommendations
of the UNAMA anti-corruption report, I encourage the Government to take further
steps towards institutionalizing the necessary anti-corruption reforms, in accordance
with the guidance on implementing the United Nations Convention against
Corruption.
64. I am deeply concerned by the ongoing drought in Afghanistan, which has
exacerbated the humanitarian situation. The low levels of precipitation experienced
throughout the planting season are now threatening the survival of more than 2 million
people who depend on agriculture for their livelihoods. Migration due to the drought
has already been reported, and more than half a million people may be displaced if
they are not provided with timely and adequate food and water supplies in their home
villages. As humanitarian partners scale up their assistance to more than 1.4 million
of the most vulnerable people, I call upon donors to respond to the urgent appeal by
the United Nations for an additional $137 million to meet the basic needs of the
drought-affected population.
65. The United Nations is committed to maintaining its strong and enduring
relationship with the people and the Government of Afghanistan. The One United
Nations framework developed by the United Nations system in Afghanistan, brings
18-08745

15/16

A/72/888
S/2018/539

its work into closer alignment with the priorities of the Government, while reflecting
the global objectives of the United Nations. I welcome the strong commitment of the
United Nations agencies, funds, and programmes to continue their close collaboration
with local institutions to enhance the quality of service delivery to all Afghans.
66. I thank all United Nations personnel in Afghanistan and my Special
Representative for Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, Tadamichi Yamamoto, for their continued dedication under such
challenging conditions to fulfil our commitments in support of the people of
Afghanistan.

16/16

18-08745
