S/2017/1057

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 December 2017
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the forty-sixth submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of resolution 2165 (2014),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2191 (2014), paragraph 5 of resolution 2258 (2015) and
paragraph 5 of resolution 2332 (2016), in which the Council requested the
Secretary-General to report, every 30 days, on the implementation of the resolutions
by all parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on data available to entities of the
United Nations system 1 and from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, as
well as from other Syrian and open sources. Data from agencies of the United
Nations system on their humanitarian deliveries have been reported for the period
from 1 to 30 November 2017.

II. Major developments
Box 1
Key points: November 2017
1.
Military activities and instances of significant military escalation that were
reported in September and October continued to be reported in many areas, in
particular activities targeting areas held by Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) in Dayr al-Zawr Governorate, as well as fighting in Idlib Governorate and the
besieged eastern Ghutah enclave in Rif Dimashq Governorate.
__________________
1

17-22479 (E)

Inputs provided from the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the United Nations Children’s Fund, the International Organization for Migration, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East, the United Nations Population Fund, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic, the
United Nations Mine Action Service, the Department of Political Affairs and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat.

181217

*1722479*

S/2017/1057

2.
The increase in fighting in besieged eastern Ghutah, along with the lack of
access for commercial and humanitarian goods that worsened in early October,
resulted in rapidly deteriorating conditions for the estimated 393,300 people who
were trapped in the area. Although only eight people were evacuated in November,
some 500 others, including 137 children, required urgent medical evacuations. Of
those on the list for medical evacuation, nine people died in November, reportedly
owing to a lack of medical evacuation and adequate treatment.
3.
Some 34,000 people have reportedly returned to Raqqah city, most of them to
the eastern and western outskirts. Despite the fact that districts were opened for
civilian returns by the Kurdish Self Administration, following its demining efforts,
humanitarian partners estimate that more than 200 people had to seek treatment for
traumatic injuries sustained in Raqqah city owing to mine explosions that occurred
after the cessation of military activities in the area.
4.
Military operations in Dayr al-Zawr Governorate continued to impact civilians.
Air strikes in Dayr al-Zawr reportedly hit unofficial camps and gathering points for
internally displaced persons across the Governorate, many of them along the
Euphrates River in ISIL-controlled areas between Mayadin and Albu Kamal. In the
first three weeks of November, some 124,000 people were displaced from Dayr
al-Zawr into Hasakah Governorate.
5.
Military operations in the northern and eastern countryside of Hama Governorate
continued to impact civilians. Heavy fighting between Government forces and
non-State armed opposition groups resulted in the displacement of more than 90,000
people to various locations in Idlib Governorate between 1 October and 26 November.

-

6.
In November, United Nations humanitarian assistance reached millions of
people in need from within the Syrian Arab Republic, including some 2,688,245
people who received food assistance through regular deliveries; 902,000 people
were reached through cross-border convoys; and 228,950 people were reached
through five humanitarian inter-agency cross-line convoys. Humanitarian
inter-agency cross-line convoys reached 28,700 people in the besieged locations o f
Duma and Nashabiyah in Rif Dimashq, out of a total of 419,920 people besieged in
the Syrian Arab Republic.

3.
The United Nations-led intra-Syrian talks resumed in Geneva on
28 November, with the eighth round focusing on the 12 Living Intra -Syrian
Essential Principles, which offer a vision of a future State that can be shared by all
Syrians, and on a process and a schedule for drafting a new constitution and for
holding United Nations-supervised elections pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015). On
11 November, the Presidents of the Russian Federation and the United Sta tes of
America issued a statement confirming that the political solution to the conflict
must be forged through the Geneva process pursuant to Security Council resolution
2254 (2015) and confirming the importance of de-escalation areas, including to help
to facilitate unhindered humanitarian access.
4.
Three of the four de-escalation areas — southern Syria, northern rural Homs
Governorate, and Idlib — continued to witness an overall reduction in violence
impacting civilians compared with the period prior to the memorandum on
de-escalation of 4 May. However, pockets of violence in some parts of those
de-escalation areas have been reported, and the situation in the fourth de -escalation
area of eastern Ghutah, in Rif Dimashq, dramatically deteriorated over the course of
November. Intensive air and ground-based strikes were reported daily beginning
14 November, along with ongoing armed clashes between various non-State armed
opposition groups. At the same time, there were reports of regular rocket and mortar
2/20

17-22479

S/2017/1057

fire from the enclave into Damascus. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) received reports of scores of civilian
casualties in both eastern Ghutah and Damascus city as a result of the fighting.
5.
The increase in fighting in besieged eastern Ghutah, along with the lack of
access for commercial and humanitarian goods that worsened in early October,
resulted in rapidly deteriorating conditions for the estimated 393,300 peo ple who
are trapped in the area. Prices for basic food commodities significantly increased
and cultivation of crops was minimal owing to the limited freedom of movement
resulting from the ongoing fighting. A nutrition sector survey conducted in eastern
Ghutah in November showed a deterioration in the nutrition situation among
children under the age of 5. The proportion of children with global acute
malnutrition was estimated to be 11.9 per cent, a five-fold increase over the 10
months since the previous nutrition survey was conducted in January. Although 8
people were evacuated in November, some 500 others, including 137 children,
required urgent medical evacuations, which have not been carried out owing to the
lack of permission from the Government of the S yrian Arab Republic. Of the people
on the list for medical evacuations, nine reportedly died in November as a result of
a lack of medical evacuation and adequate treatment. While some 21 commercial
trucks were allowed to enter the area on 26 November, prices for basic goods
remained prohibitively high.
6.
Civilians in the area around besieged Yarmouk, and the hard -to-reach areas of
Yalda, Babila and Bayt Saham, in Rif Dimashq Governorate, south of Damascus
city, have witnessed the gradual closure of entry points in recent months. Of the
three functioning entry points, two were closed in October. Since 12 November, the
last and only remaining crossing point into Yalda, Babila and Bayt Saham has been
subject to temporary closure and severe access restrictions, leading to a sharp
increase in prices. The humanitarian situation in Yarmouk is becoming increasingly
dire, given that goods previously brought in from Yalda, Babila and Bayt Saham are
no longer available.
7.
Some 34,000 people have returned to Raqqah city, most of them to the eastern
and western outskirts. Humanitarian partners have reported that service delivery
remains limited in the Ma’mun neighbourhood of the city. Electricity and waste
management services are reportedly unavailable, and around 60 pe r cent of the
sewage system is damaged, as is around 40 per cent of the water system. The single
greatest protection concern, however, remains the prevalence of unexploded
ordnance and landmines. Despite districts having been opened for civilian returns
by the Kurdish Self Administration following its demining efforts, humanitarian
partners estimate that more than 200 people had to seek treatment for traumatic
injuries sustained in Raqqah city owing to mine explosions that occurred after the
cessation of military activities in the area.

17-22479

3/20

S/2017/1057

Figure I
Key dates, November 2017

12 November
Last crossing point into
Yalda, Babila and Bayt
Saham restricted

14 November
Escalation in fighting in
eastern Ghutah

Mid-November
Humanitarian access
to north-eastern
Syrian Arab Republic
restricted

28 November
Eighth round of intraSyrian talks in Geneva

8.
Airstrikes in Dayr al-Zawr reportedly hit unofficial camps or gathering points
for internally displaced persons across the Governorate, many of them along the
Euphrates River, in areas controlled by Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant between
Mayadin and Albu Kamal. In the first three weeks of November, some 124,000
people fled from Dayr al-Zawr into Hasakah Governorate. Airstrikes have also
reportedly resulted in people fleeing across the border into Iraq. In total, over
400,000 people are reported to have been displaced from Dayr al-Zawr Governorate
as a result of the fighting over the past few months.
9.
Large numbers of internally displaced persons continued to arrive in Idlib
Governorate, with over 75,000 new arrivals during the month of November. Man y
of them had been displaced from Hama, where fighting continued between the
Government and non-State armed opposition groups, with smaller numbers arriving
from Raqqah and Dayr al-Zawr. Some 15,000 people were reported to be staying out
in the open, despite the recent drop in temperatures as winter approaches. During
the same period, administrative changes took place in Idlib with the announcement,
on 2 November, of a “salvation government”, which would manage areas in the
north-western part of the Syrian Arab Republic that were under the control of non State armed opposition groups.
10. In Aleppo city, over 300,000 people were reported to have returned to the city
since the evacuation of eastern Aleppo in 2016. The United Nations and its
non-governmental organization (NGO) partners are present in Aleppo to respond to
relief needs, including through the provision of food assistance to over 530,000
people in Aleppo city. The health sector has rehabilitated 4 primary health -care
facilities, while 12 more are in the process of rehabilitation so as to be brought back
into service. Water and sanitation assistance is also being provided in the form of
maintenance for the drinking water network and pumping stations. Some 184
schools are also being rehabilitated to allow students to return to school.
11. During the reporting period, at least 30,000 Syrians remained stranded along
the Syrian-Jordanian border in the area known as the berm. The last cycle of partial
aid assistance to that area was halted over five months ago, on 15 June, with the
food security and health situation of many of those stranded, notably children,
having continuously deteriorated. The United Nations has continued to urgently call
for emergency humanitarian access to make possible the delivery of food and
essential non-food assistance in the immediate term, until longer -term solutions for
this population are found. Meanwhile, critical health assistance and water supplies
continued to be provided from the Jordanian side of the berm to this commu nity.

4/20

17-22479

S/2017/1057

Protection
12. Air and ground-based strikes continued to kill and injure civilians and damage
and destroy civilian infrastructure in significant numbers throughout the month.
Explosive weapons continued to be fired into populated areas, indiscriminately
killing and injuring civilians, destroying and damaging vital infrastructure and
leaving thousands of communities in areas littered with explosive remnants of war
that continue to kill and injure civilians and impede humanitarian access long after
their primary use. The large number of civilian casualties and the scale of civilian
destruction are strong indicators of continuing violations of the prohibition on
launching indiscriminate attacks and of the fundamental rules of distinction,
proportionality and precaution. Children are particularly affected by the fighting
and, in some incidents reported by OHCHR, they have constituted the majority of
the casualties.
13. Fighting continued to affect civilian infrastructure, including medical
facilities, schools, markets and places of worship. On the basis of information
received by OHCHR, civilian casualties occurred in various Governorates (see
annex), in possible violation of international humanitarian law. OHCHR has
documented incidents allegedly perpetrated by parties to the conflict, including
Government forces and their allies, non-State armed opposition groups and Security
Council-designated terrorist groups.
14. Despite the call of the Human Rights Council in its resolutions S-18/1 and
19/22 for the Syrian authorities to cooperate with OHCHR, including through the
establishment of a field presence with the mandate to protect and promote human
rights, OHCHR reporting remains limited since the Government has not granted it
access to the country.
15. The United States Department of Defense publicly reported that in November,
as part of its “Operation Inherent Resolve”, the United States -led multinational
Combined Joint Task Force carried out 141 strikes against ISIL targets in Dayr
al-Zawr and Hasakah Governorates. Over 93 per cent of those were reported to have
been in Dayr al-Zawr. In addition, on 14 November, the Combined Joint Task Force
publicly reported that it had conducted air strikes in Dayr al -Zawr, near Mayadin, on
3 November, and near Albu Kamal on 5 November.
16. The Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation publicly reported
operations in eastern Syrian Arab Republic during November, in particular in the
vicinity of Dayr al-Zawr. The Ministry reported missile strikes in the area of Albu
Kamal and the settlement of Qat‘ah.
17. The United Nations and its health partners received credible reports of five
attacks that affected health-care facilities and personnel in November. On
8 November, a hospital in Kafr Batna subdistrict, in Rif Dimas q, was reportedly hit
by artillery shelling. The attack damaged several departments of the facility.
According to initial reports, at least five people were killed and one person was
wounded. The facility continued to deliver services with restricted capac ity. On
18 November, Damascus Hospital (Mujtahid) was reportedly hit by a mortar,
causing minor injuries to three patients and two resident doctors, as well as material
damage. Another mortar landed in the street near the perimeter of the hospital,
causing one death and 20 injuries. On 13 November, a primary health -care centre
supported by an international NGO in Atarib subdistrict, Aleppo, was reportedly
impacted by a nearby air strike. The attack resulted in moderate structural damage
to the facility, which temporarily went out of service. On 13 November, an
ambulance station belonging to a local NGO in Hamra subdistrict, north -eastern
Hama, was reportedly seriously damaged by air strikes. At least two ambulances

17-22479

5/20

S/2017/1057

were destroyed and a third ambulance was da maged. The facility is no longer
functional and was moved to another location. On 2 November, an ambulance
belonging to the local ambulance service in Dana subdistrict, Idlib, was reportedly
destroyed by an improvised explosive device.
18. Educational facilities also continued to be affected by the fighting. On
21 November, in Damascus city, one mortar struck the Zainab Fawwaz School in the
Duwayla'ah area of Damascus city, reportedly killing one teacher and killing and
injuring students. On 15 November, in Aleppo Governorate, an explosive device
reportedly exploded near al Khansa’a School in Qabbasin town, injuring two
people. On 15 November, artillery shelling on the town of Kafr Batna in eastern
Ghutah reportedly hit a primary school. Schools were suspend ed on 14 November in
eastern Ghutah until further notice.
Humanitarian access
Box 2
Key points: humanitarian access
1.
In November, United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued to
reach millions of people in need, including from within the Syrian Arab Republic, in
cooperation with the Syrian authorities. Regular programming from within the
country resulted in the delivery of humanitarian assistance to millions of people in
need, including some 2,688,245 million people who received food assistance during
the month through more than 1,595 deliveries.
2.
In November, five humanitarian inter-agency cross-line convoys delivered
much-needed assistance to 228,950 people. The total number of people reached
under the October–November plan through 30 November was 338,950, or 28 per
cent of the overall number of people to whom access had originally been requested
under the plan. In November, humanitarian inter-agency cross-line convoys reached
200,250 people in the hard-to-reach locations of Talbisah, Tulul al-Humr and
Rastan, and just 28,700 people in the besieged locations of Duma and Nashabiyah in
eastern Ghutah, out of a total of 419,920 people besieged nationwide.
3.
Cross-border activities remain a vital part of the humanitarian res ponse in the
Syrian Arab Republic. Since the adoption of Security Council resolution 2165
(2014) in July 2014, assistance has been delivered from Turkey to millions of
Syrians in various parts of Aleppo, Idlib, Ladhiqiyah and Hama Governorates, and
from Jordan to Dar‘a, Qunaytirah and Suwayda’ Governorates. In November, 659
trucks in 26 consignments delivered life-saving assistance to more than 902,000
people in need in northern and southern areas of the S yrian Arab Republic. Although
access impediments imposed by armed actors and local authorities have increased in
north-western Syrian Arab Republic, assistance continued at levels similar to those
of the past. Challenges for NGOs in receiving registrations or work permits in some
neighbouring countries continued, although there was some improvement.
4.
The removal and delisting of medical supplies from inter -agency cross-line
convoys by Syrian authorities remained a major challenge, with supplies sufficient
for more than 10,651 treatments removed or not allowed to be loaded in November
(see table 2). That brings the total number of medical items removed or not allowed
to be loaded to more than 640,000 since the beginning of the year.

19. The delivery of humanitarian assistance to people in need remained extremely
challenging in many areas of the country as a result of active conflict, shifting
conflict lines, administrative impediments and deliberate restrictions imposed on the
6/20

17-22479

S/2017/1057

movement of people and goods by the parties to the conflict. In particular, the
access of the United Nations and its partners to those people living in besieged and
hard-to-reach locations remained a critical concern.
20. The United Nations, in its inter-agency convoy plan for October and
November, requested access to 33 areas in besieged and hard -to-reach areas, seeking
to reach 1,206,000 people. Inter-agency convoys are prepared for areas with
multisectoral needs where access is limited, to ensure that United Natio ns support is
needs-based. In November, only five inter-agency convoys could be dispatched to
besieged and hard-to-reach locations, reaching 228,950 people in need (see table 1
for a list of inter-agency convoys sent in November). The total number of people
reached under the October–November plan was 338,950, or 28 per cent of the
overall number of people for whom access had originally been requested under the
bimonthly plan. That number does not include people reached by the supply
convoys of other humanitarian actors.
Table 1
Inter-agency cross-line humanitarian convoys, November 2017

Date

Location

Requested target
(number of
beneficiaries)

Number of
beneficiaries
reached

1 November

Talbisah

84 000

84 000

Multisectoral

1 November

Tulul al-Humr

8 750

8 750

Multisectoral

12 November

Duma

90 000

21 500

Food, health and nutrition

14 November

Rastan

107 500

107 500

Multisectoral

28 November

Nashabiyah

16 500

7 200

Type of assistance

Food, health and nutrition

21. Individual agencies continued to submit requests for single -agency deliveries
during the reporting period to locations throughout the country. Single -agency
deliveries are undertaken in areas where access is possible. There are therefore
fewer concerns about the ability of the United Nations to address assessed needs in
those areas. In November, the World Food Programme (WFP) submitted 1,595
official requests to the authorities to obtain facilitation letters for the transport of
food assistance to locations throughout the country, all of which were approved. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees submitted 87
facilitation letter requests for the movement of core relief items and livelihood kits,
of which 82 were approved and 5 rejected, citing security concerns. Both
international and Syrian NGOs continued to undertake needs assessments and to
provide support, including medical, educational, psychosocial and protection
services, in besieged and hard-to-reach locations, under extremely challenging
circumstances and in accordance with humanitarian principles.

17-22479

7/20

S/2017/1057

Figure II
United Nations inter-agency cross-line humanitarian operations, percentage of
people reached each month in besieged areas
100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%

January February

March

April

May

June

July

August September October November

22. Humanitarian access continues to be restricted by parties to the conflict in
besieged and hard-to-reach locations. In 2017, on average, only 27 per cent of
beneficiaries scheduled for assistance under specific requests have been reached
through inter-agency cross-line convoys each month. Bureaucratic impediments,
such as the non-issuance of facilitation letters by the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, continue to be a significant factor in those delays and non -deliveries,
despite the creation of a tripartite coordination mechanism to address such
problems. The mechanism met once during the reporting period, on 5 November, to
discuss issues related to the deployment of humanitarian convoys. Access was
restricted on 27 November, when an inter-agency convoy to Nashabiyah in besieged
eastern Ghutah had to turn back because of fighting, despite having received
security guarantees from all sides prior to its deployment. The convoy proceeded the
following day, on 28 November. During the reporting cycle, the ma jority of United
Nations system entities and United Nations partners continued to be unable to gain
access to the populations in need in areas of the country still controlled by ISIL.
23. United Nations operations in north-eastern Syrian Arab Republic were
temporarily suspended in mid-November owing to lack of approvals from both the
Government and the Kurdish Self Administration and disagreement between them
over planned dispatches and distributions of humanitarian assistance and over the
role of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent in areas under the control of the Kurdish Self
Administration. The frequent suspensions had an adverse impact on aid distributions
in the north-eastern part of the country. Although all WFP planned dispatches were
completed, the level of food distributions was lower than under planned levels,
owing to the temporary suspension of aid delivery. In Raqqah Governorate and
northern Dayr al-Zawr Governorate, food distributions reached around 100,000
people, 54 per cent of the 185,000 people to be reached in November under the
plan, while in Hasakah Governorate food distributions reached 14,000 people, only
7 per cent of the planned 192,000 people to be reached in the Governorate.

8/20

17-22479

S/2017/1057

Figure III
Inter-agency cross-line humanitarian operations, November 2017

228,950 people reached

People reached in hard-to-

People reached in besieged

Cross-line convoys

reach areas

areas

200,250

28,700

5

7.8 %

6.8 %

Proportion of people in hard-

Proportion of people in

to-reach areas reached

besieged areas reached

Airdrops

0

2

Number of people in hard-to-reach areas: 2.56 million
Number of people in besieged areas: 419,920

24. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), life -saving and lifesustaining medical items sufficient for more than 10,651 treatments were rejected or
removed from convoys in November by the Syrian authorities. Details regarding the
treatments and supplies removed are shown in table 2. Additional medical supplies
were scheduled to be delivered as part of the bimonthly inter -agency convoy plan,
but only five inter-agency convoys were able to proceed in November. Since the
beginning of 2017, WHO has submitted 11 single-agency requests to the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to gain access to 14 locations in six
Governorates. The Government has approved nine requests and rejected one. One
request remains unanswered.

__________________
2

17-22479

Airdrop operations to Dayr al-Zawr city were discontinued early in September, as military
developments enabled the United Nations and its partners to regain overland access.
9/20

S/2017/1057

Table 2
Medical supplies removed from humanitarian convoys, November 2017

Location

Number
of
treatments

Types of supplies

Talbisah and Tulul al-Humr

1 813

Analgesic kits, pneumonia kits type B, pneumonia kits
type A, antihypertensives, life-saving anti-epileptics,
tetracycline, dobutamine hydrochloride, ketamine
hydrochloride, oxytocin injections, atracurium besylate
phenobarbitone, amitriptyline hydrochloride, haloperidol,
gastro-resistant sodium valproate, ketamine
hydrochloride injections, carbamazepine, beclomethasone
dipropionate nasal spray, atracurium, psychotropic
medicines and medicines for other common symptoms in
palliative care (valporic acid, carbamazepine,
beclomethasone), medical equipment including
autoclaves, vertical defibrillators, anti-epileptics,
sterilizers, basic x-rays, ventilator for adults, minor
surgery tools.

Duma

3 440

Defibrillators, anti-epileptics, sterilizers, basic x-rays,
ventilators for adults, minor surgery tools, intravenous
therapy used for fluid replacement, anti-inflammatory
and synthetic corticosteroid. Items reduced in quantity
include pneumonia kits type B, latex examination gloves,
pneumonia kits type A, anticholinergics and
antispasmodics.

Rastan

1 588

Minor surgical kits, antiseptics, antihistamines,
decongestants (syrup), bronchodilators, M7 diagnostic
ultrasound and portable x-ray machines.

Nashabiyah

3 810

Psychotropic medicines or medicines for other common
symptoms in palliative care (valporic acid, carbamazepine,
haloperidol tabs, phenobarbitone 30 mg), medical kits
such as pneumonia kits type A and type B, Italian trauma
kits, medical consumables (syringes, intravenous
catheters, sterile surgical gloves), medical equipment
including ultrasound machines, sterilizers, bench-top,
hot-air, ventilator for adults; autoclaves.

Humanitarian response
25. In November, United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued to
reach millions of people in need through all available access modalities, including
(a) regular programming from within the Syrian Arab Republic, whereby
humanitarian deliveries reach those in need without crossing conflict lines, (b)
cross-line deliveries, whereby assistance from inside the country is delivered across
conflict lines; and (c) cross-border deliveries, whereby assistance is provided to
those in need from Jordan and Turkey (see table 3). In addition to the United
Nations and its partners, NGOs continued to deliver life -saving assistance to people
in need. The Government continued to provide basic services, both in areas under its
control and in many areas beyond its control. Local authorities in many areas
controlled by non-State armed opposition groups also continued to provide services,
when possible.

10/20

17-22479

S/2017/1057

Table 3
People reached by the United Nations and other organizations through all
modalities, November 2017
Organization

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
International Organization for Migration

Number of people reached

3 900
30 000

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

2 249 595

United Nations Children’s Fund

>4 000 000

United Nations Development Programme

157 111

United Nations Population Fund

329 387

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East

252 424

World Food Programme

>3 520 000

World Health Organization

1 027 597

26. During the reporting period, cross-border deliveries continued from Jordan and
Turkey into the Syrian Arab Republic under the terms of Security Council
resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016) (see figure IV).
In line with those resolutions, the United Nations notified the Syrian authorities in
advance of each shipment, including with regard to its content, destination and
intended number of beneficiaries.
27. Since cross-border operations began in July 2014, following the adoption of
resolution 2165 (2014), the United Nations has conducted more than 688 crossborder consignments, with more than 17,501 trucks (12,220 through Bab al -Hawa
and 1,686 through Bab al-Salam from Turkey; and 3,595 through Ramtha from
Jordan). The United Nations cross-border operations complement the critical role
played by international and Syrian NGOs that provide assistance and services to
millions more from neighbouring countries.
28. In November, for example, the United Nations and its implementing partners
delivered food assistance for more than 900,000 people through cross -border
deliveries from Jordan and Turkey. Moreover, WHO conducted health and medical
cross-border deliveries through Turkey, providing approximately 410,000
treatments. More than 473,000 people in the southern Syrian Arab Republic
benefited from improved access to clean water through maintenance operations for
water and sanitation systems. In addition, United Nations nutrition partners
continued to provide services to more than 6,000 children in Dar‘a and Qunaytirah
Governorates, treating nearly 2,800 children, who were screened for acute
malnutrition, in therapeutic and supplementary nutrition programmes. In terms of
preventive nutrition services, 3,850 children under the age of 5 received high energy
biscuits. In addition, 1,131 pregnant and lactating women benefited from
counselling on appropriate infant and young child feeding practices.
29. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic
continued its operations during the reporting cycle, monitoring 659 trucks used in
26 consignments by seven United Nations entities in November, confirming the
humanitarian nature of each and notifying the Syrian authorities after each
shipment. The Mechanism continued to benefit from excellent cooperation with the
Governments of Jordan and Turkey. The Mechanism is further supported by
additional monitoring mechanisms in place for the delivery of cross-border
assistance. The United Nations provides 48-hour notice to the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic for all shipments. Once in the country, the United Nations
17-22479

11/20

S/2017/1057

partners that deliver aid ensure that shipments arrive at warehouses. Indep endent
third-party companies contracted by the United Nations ensure the independent
verification of the arrival of assistance at the warehouses and further monitor
distribution and/or service provision.
Figure IV
Number of beneficiaries assisted by the United Nations and its partners by
cluster through cross-border humanitarian deliveries, November 2017
(Thousands)

30. During the reporting period, from 19 to 23 November, on sub -national
immunization days children under 5 years of age were treated with the bivalent oral
polio vaccine in hard-to-reach areas in most Governorates, with the exception of
Idlib, Dayr al-Zawr and Raqqah. Some 405,310 children were vaccinated,
representing a coverage rate of 24 per cent. A total of 1,313 mobile and 262 fixe d
teams participated in this campaign, and WHO covered the campaign’s operational
costs, including for transportation, vaccine delivery and incentives for field officers.
Children between the ages of 2 and 23 months were also reached with
supplementary inactivated polio vaccine, in particular in areas with large
populations of internally displaced persons in Rif Dimashq, districts of Damascus,
Homs and Aleppo and accessible areas of Dayr al-Zawr city.
31. Throughout November, the Russian Federation sent information bulletins to
the United Nations from the Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the
Syrian Arab Republic regarding the provision of bilateral relief assistance. Other
Member States also continued to provide bilateral and other forms of hum anitarian
assistance.
Humanitarian financing
32. As at 30 November, the humanitarian response plan for the Syrian Arab
Republic was just over 50 per cent funded, with $1.7 billion of the requested $3.35
billion received under the plan.

12/20

17-22479

S/2017/1057

Figure V
Humanitarian response plan funding, 30 November 2017
(Millions of United States dollars)

Unmet requirement:
$1.65 billion

Visas and registrations
33. A total of 77 new United Nations visa requests were submitted to the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in November. Of those, 3 6 were approved
in November, 1 was denied and 40 remain pending. Of the 134 new visa
applications submitted in September and October, 35 were approved in November
and 1 was denied. A total of 78 United Nations visa renewal requests were
submitted in November, of which 31 were approved and 47 remain pending. An
additional 27 requests for visa renewals were submitted in September and October,
all of which were approved.
34. A total of 23 international NGOs are registered with the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic to operate in the country. Other international NGOs are at
various stages of completing registration with the Government. Some 220 national
NGOs are authorized by the Government to operate through 315 branches
countrywide.
Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and premises
35. Programmes of the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes are
implemented in areas affected by frequent clashes among b elligerents, air strikes,
regular exchanges of indirect artillery fire and asymmetric attacks. ISIL is also
increasingly reverting to the practice of carrying out asymmetric attacks.
36. Since the start of the conflict, dozens of humanitarian workers have been
killed, including 22 staff members of United Nations system entities, 18 of whom
were staff members of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), along with 66 staff members and volunteers
of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and 8 staff members and volunteers of the Palestine
Red Crescent Society. Many staff members of international and national NGOs have
also reportedly been killed.

17-22479

13/20

S/2017/1057

37. A total of 27 staff members of the United Nations system (1 staff member of
the United Nations Development Programme and 26 UNRWA staff members) are
detained or missing.

III. Observations
38. Security Council resolution 2165 (2014), by which the Council authorized the
provision of humanitarian assistance by the United Nations and its implementing
partners through cross-border deliveries, is up for renewal. United Nations
deliveries ensure that people in north-western and southern Syrian Arab Republic
are consistently reached with life-saving humanitarian assistance. The humanitarian
nature of cross-border assistance is verified by the United Nations Monitoring
Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic and its delivery is confirmed on the
ground by third-party monitors. I call upon the Council to ensure that United
Nations cross-border assistance is re-authorized for another year in a manner that
continues to allow for safe, sustained, unimpeded and needs-based humanitarian
deliveries. Any failure to ensure cross-border humanitarian assistance will only
increase the number of people suffering and deepen the existing humanitarian crisis.
39. An updated humanitarian needs assessment released in November found that
the massive needs in the Syrian Arab Republic will continue into 2018, with some
13.1 million people in need across the country, including 5.6 million people in acute
need owing to a convergence of factors, including displacement, exposure to
hostilities and limited access to basic goods and services. Ong oing military activity
continues to result in the death and injury of civilians and the destruction of
infrastructure such as schools and hospitals — despite the presence of de-escalation
agreements in some parts of the country. Three million of those in n eed are reached
solely by regular cross-border aid deliveries. Civilians throughout the country must
be protected and provided with sustained assistance. As the conflict continues year
after year, the civilian population that is not regularly reached becom es increasingly
vulnerable.
40. Lack of safe, sustained and unimpeded humanitarian access is a critical
element compounding the fragility of civilian populations in the Syrian Arab
Republic. Some 400,000 civilians in besieged eastern Ghutah are particular ly
affected, following months of limited entry of goods into the enclave, in addition to
the recent escalation of fighting, including some of the heaviest air strikes on the
area since it was designated a de-escalation area on 4 May in Astana. There were no
significant developments in November to alleviate the situation of the population in
east Ghutah, despite the high level of need and active efforts by the United Nations
and some Member States. The United Nations was allowed to reach only 7 per cent
of the besieged population in eastern Ghutah with assistance during the month. Such
limited access means that needs are deepening by the day. The lack of access to
basic health services and adequate treatment for medical conditions, including
malnutrition, has also left hundreds in need of urgent medical care. There has been
no progress since I reported on this issue last month, resulting not only in deepening
needs, but also in the death of those for whom a solution could not be found in time.
41. I strongly re-emphasize that there is no military solution to the conflict in the
Syrian Arab Republic. An end to the conflict and the suffering of the Syrian people
remains the impetus that drove my Special Envoy for Syria to resume intra -Syrian
talks in Geneva late in November, with the hope that both delegations would engage
in serious negotiations on issues of direct relevance to millions of Syrians. Critical
steps towards achieving a solution include meeting fundamental obligations to
facilitate full, safe, rapid and unhindered humanitarian access and the release of

14/20

17-22479

S/2017/1057

persons arbitrarily detained, and clarifying the fate of the persons who have been
abducted or are missing. Road maps for a schedule and process to draft a new
constitution and United Nations-supervised elections, inter alia, are also required. I
continue to support my Special Envoy and the Geneva process as the only process
mandated by the Security Council to bring a conclusion to this war.
42. Seeking accountability for serious violations of interna tional humanitarian and
human rights law is an obligation for States and also is central to sustainable peace.
I reiterate my call for the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic to be referred to the
International Criminal Court. I also call upon all Member States, all parties to the
conflict, civil society and the United Nations system as a whole to cooperate fully
with the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most S erious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011.

17-22479

15/20

S/2017/1057

Annex
Incidents affecting civilians recorded by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in
November 2017*
Damascus Governorate
• On 7 November, a ground-based strike hit a café on Hamra’ Street in the
Salihiyah area of Damascus. At least three male civilians were allegedly killed
and at least 10 others wounded.
• On 20 November, ground-based strikes hit residential areas in the Bab Tuma
neighbourhood of the old city of Damascus, including a military checkpoint,
reportedly killing three people — two of whom are believed to have been
civilians — and wounding 14 others.
• On 20 November, ground-based strikes hit a building in a residential area of
the Jaramana neighbourhood, allegedly killing a 5-year-old boy and injuring
another boy from the same family.
• On 21 November, ground-based strikes hit a residential area in the Jaramana
neighbourhood, reportedly killing one male civilian and injuring another.
Rif Dimashq Governorate
• On 2 November, air strikes hit residential areas of Duma, reportedly killing six
civilians, including a woman, a girl and three other civilians working for the
Farmers Union, whose office was based in the building. Air strikes also
reportedly hit the building of the Local Council, which subsequently
suspended its activities.
• On 3 November, ground-based strikes hit a popular market located in Ayn
Tarma and allegedly killed a male civilian and injured nine other civilians. A
volunteer working as a first responder was allegedly wounded by shrapnel
projected by a subsequent ground-based strike.
• On 3 November, a market located in a residential area of Saqba was reportedly
hit by a ground-based strike, allegedly causing the death of one male civilian
and injuring at least five other civilians.
• On 7 November, two ground-based strikes hit residential areas of Saqba: the
first hit the centre of Jamaya Square and reportedly killed five civilians,
including two children and one woman, and injured a 16-year-old boy and at
least seven other civilians; the second struck Jouza Street and allegedly killed
one male civilian and injured four other civilians.
• On 7 November, ground-based strikes hit a residential area in Duma and
reportedly killed a 5-year-old boy.
• On 8 November, two air strikes hit a residential area of Irbin, allegedly killing

* In line with Security Council resolution 2258 (2015), the present description of developments on
the ground and the incidents that occurred during the month that the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights has been able to corroborate, relates to compliance with
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) by all parties in the Syrian Arab
Republic. The information is provided without prejudice to the work of the Task Force on the
Ceasefire of the International Syria Support Group. The reporting is not a comprehensive listing
of all violations of international humanitarian law and violations and abuses of internation al
human rights law that took place in the Syrian Arab Republic during the reporting period.
16/20

17-22479

S/2017/1057

two male civilians and injuring at least five other civilians.
• On 8 November, one air strike and seven ground-based strikes hit residential
areas in Duma, reportedly killing one male civilian and injuring an unknown
number of other civilians.
• On 14 November, ground-based strikes hit a residential area of Irbin, allegedly
killing two male civilians and injuring a boy who died the next day.
• On 14 November, four air strikes hit a residential area in Irbin and reportedly
killed a male civilian and injured at least four other civilians.
• On 15 November, air strikes and ground-based strikes hit residential areas in
Duma in the vicinity of a public market, allegedly killing two male civilians
and injuring more than 15 other civilians, including women and children.
• On 15 November, air strikes hit a residential area of Irbin and reportedly killed
four civilians, including two men from the same family and a child. At least
11 civilians, including two children and four women, were injured.
• On 16 November, air strikes and several ground -based strikes hit a residential
areas in Irbin. The strikes reportedly caused a residential building to collapse,
allegedly killing five male civilians and wounding more than 30 other
civilians, including women and children.
• On 16 November, three ground-based strikes hit a residential area of Bayt
Sawa and reportedly killed three children, including a girl and her brother, and
injured at least one other civilian.
• On 16 November, three air strikes hit residential area in Hamuriyah, allegedly
killing two civilians.
• On 17 November, several air strikes and a series of ground-based strikes
reportedly hit residential areas in Duma, allegedly killing nine civilians,
including four girls, two boys and one woman. The same day, at around 3
p.m., three air strikes hit a residential area in Duma where a team of first
responders had been operating, reportedly killing 3 first responders and
injuring 11 others. More than 120 civilians, including 30 children and 30
women, were allegedly injured in the incidents.
• On 18 November at around 3 a.m., two air strikes and ground -based strikes hit
a residential area of Mudayra, reportedly killing six civilians — two parents,
their two sons and their two daughters — when the building they were using as
shelter collapsed. At dawn, ground-based strikes hit in the vicinity of where
the first incident had occurred, allegedly injuring seven civilians, including a
first responder on the scene.
• On 26 November, an air strike hit a market located in a residential area of
Misraba, along with several ground-based strikes, destroying several
residential buildings and allegedly killing 16 civilians, including two girls ages
11 and 12, one boy and one woman, and injuring at least 50 civilians,
including women and children.
• On 26 November, several air strikes and ground-based strikes reportedly hit a
residential area in Mudayra, including the main road and the vicinity of the
main market, reportedly killing seven civilians, including two children and one
woman, and injuring at least 25 others.
• On 27 November, air strikes and a number of ground -based strikes reportedly
hit a residential area in Misraba, causing extensive destruction and allegedly

17-22479

17/20

S/2017/1057

killing at least nine civilians, including one woman, and injuring at least
25 people.
• On 28 November, a series of air strikes hit residential areas north of
Hamuriyah, hitting a former chocolate factory and a wood workshop,
triggering a fire. At least three civilians, including a boy and a girl, in
residential buildings that were struck were reportedly killed, and an additional
15 civilians were wounded, including at least one child.
Dar‘a Governorate
• On 11 November, a male civilian was reportedly killed when an improvised
explosive device detonated on a road between the opposition -controlled towns
of Karak and Rakham in western Dar‘a Governorate. The victim’s wife,
traveling in the same car, was reportedly wounded.
• On 23 November, armed men opened fire on a civilian bus on the road
between the towns of Duwayrah and Harran in the eastern part of the
Governorate, allegedly killing at least six civilians, including one woman.
Aleppo Governorate
• On 13 November, at approximately 2 p.m., three air strikes reportedly hit a
large local market in the centre of Atarib city, approximately 25 km west of
Aleppo city. The air strikes allegedly killed four women, two girls and one
boy, and injured at least a dozen other people. At the time of the incident, the
market was reportedly full of people. Reports indicate that the strikes also
caused severe damage to nearby houses, shops, vehicles and a police s tation.
The area is under the control of several armed opposition groups, including
Hay'at Tahrir Al-Sham, whose fighters control an area on the outskirts of the
city.
• On 22 November, the body of a young man was found in the bushes in
Jarabulus city in northern Aleppo Governorate. The man was a displaced
civilian from the subdistrict of Tibni in Dayr al-Zawr Governorate. He had
reportedly been held by Ahrar Al-Sham in Jarabulus two weeks earlier and
accused of being a member of ISIL.
Idlib Governorate
• On 4 November, four boys were reportedly killed, including a set of triplets,
and one other was injured in Kafr Sajnah in southern rural Idlib when
unexploded ordnance detonated outside their home. The injured boy reportedly
died of his injuries on 20 November.
• On 5 November, four civilians — a father, his daughter and two sons — were
allegedly killed when unexploded ordnance detonated in their neighbourhood
in Ariha city. The explosion reportedly resulted in the injury of seven other
civilians.
• On 6 November, one civilian woman and her son were reportedly killed
following the explosion of unexploded ordnance in the town of Sanjar, east of
Idlib city.
• On 10 November, a girl was allegedly killed and two other children (a boy and
a girl) injured as a result of unexploded ordnance detonating in the village of
Tall Salmu, near Abu al-Duhur airport in eastern Idlib Governorate.
• On 11 November, air strikes hit residential areas of the town of Tamani‘ah,
south of Idlib, reportedly killing two civilians, including a woman, and
18/20

17-22479

S/2017/1057

injuring four others, including two women. All victims were from the same
family.
• On 13 November, the explosion of a vehicle-borne improvised explosive
device in Idlib city allegedly injured 14 civilians, including five children and
four women.
• On 14 November, ground-based strikes hit Khan Shaykhun, reportedly injuring
four male civilians from the same family.
• On 17 November, a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device exploded in the
centre of Idlib city, near Mihrab Square. The explosion allegedly killed a
30-year-old male civilian and injured 11 other civilians, including four women
and two girls ages 5 and 9. Six of the victims were from the same family.
• On 23 November, an improvised explosive device exploded in the town of
Atimah town in northern Idlib, reportedly injuring a mother and her three
children, who had been harvesting olives.
Homs Governorate
• Around 1 p.m. on 19 November, ground-based strikes reportedly hit a mill in
the Khalidiyah neighbourhood in Government-controlled Homs city,
reportedly killing three male civilians working in the mill and injuring at least
14 others. The mill was put out of service.
Dayr al-Zawr Governorate
• On 1 November, air strikes hit residential areas of ISIL-controlled Albu Kamal
city in eastern Dayr al-Zawr and reportedly killed at least nine civilians from
two families, including two women and one girl, and injured nine other
civilians. Areas hit in the heart of Albu Kamal city were reportedly close to the
Aisha Hospital and Masriya roundabout.
• On 16 November, air strikes hit the Suh al-Rifa‘i desert area and allegedly
resulted in the killing of 11 displaced civilians — including two women and
five children — who had been stranded in their tents.
• On 17 November, a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device exploded near
a group of internally displaced persons in Syrian Democratic Forces -controlled
Faraj village in eastern Dayr al-Zawr, in an area between the Koniko gas field
and the Jafra oil field. At least 19 civilians were reportedly killed, including
one woman, two girls and one boy, and at least 27 other civilians were injured.
• On 23 November, air strikes hit a water crossing in Hasrat village in the
eastern part of the Governorate and allegedly killed 13 civilians, including
three women and two girls.
• On 26 November, air strikes hit the three-story Findi residential building in
Sha‘fah village in the ISIL-controlled Albu Kamal region of eastern Dayr
al-Zawr Governorate. The strikes reportedly killed 12 women and 9 children,
some of them internally displaced persons who had fled heavy shelling of
Qurayya and Asharah villages and were waiting for daylight to cross into ISIL controlled areas of the Governorate such as Susah and Abu Hammam.
• On 26 November, air strikes reportedly hit the scattered tents of internally
displaced persons in the desert area of Suh al-Rifa‘i in eastern Albu Kamal
region, approximately seven km from Sha‘fah. OHCHR received details of
nine civilians who had been killed, including five women and four children.

17-22479

19/20

S/2017/1057

Raqqah Governorate
• On 23 November, a 10-year-old boy reportedly died when unexploded
ordnance detonated in his vicinity close to the Old Mosque in the centre of
Raqqah city.
• On 25 November, two women from Raqqah city were allegedly killed when
unexploded ordnance detonated in a house located close to the Grand Mosque
in the Hasun neighbourhood of Raqqah city.
• On 26 November, two men were reportedly killed as a result of th e detonation
of unexploded ordnance in the Badu neighbourhood of Raqqah city.

20/20

17-22479
