A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/147
8 March 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 110 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/53/625/Add.2)]
53/147. Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 which guarantees the right to life, liberty and
security of person, and the relevant provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,2
Recalling also its resolutions 47/136 of 18 December 1992 and 51/92 of 12 December 1996, as well as
Commission on Human Rights resolution 1992/72 of 5 March 1992,3 and taking note of Commission
resolution 1998/68 of 21 April 1998,4
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/50 of 25 May 1984 and the safeguards
guaranteeing protection of the rights of those facing the death penalty annexed thereto and Council resolution
1989/64 of 24 May 1989 on their implementation, as well as the Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice
for Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 40/34 of 29
November 1985,

1

Resolution 217 A (III).

2

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1992, Supplement No. 2 (E/1992/22), chap. II, sect.
A.
4

Ibid., 1998, Supplement No. 3 (E/1998/23), chap. II, sect. A.
/...

A/RES/53/147
Page 2

Deeply alarmed at the persistence, on a large scale, of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions in
all parts of the world,
Dismayed that in a number of countries impunity, the negation of justice, continues to prevail and often
remains the main cause of the continuing occurrence of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions in
those countries,
Recalling, in this fiftieth anniversary of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime
of Genocide,5 article 6 of the Convention, and acknowledging in this context the historic significance of the
adoption by the United Nations Diplomatic Conference of Plenipotentiaries on the Establishment of an
International Criminal Court of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,6
Acknowledging the contribution of the Conference with regard to ensuring effective prosecution
concerning executions in serious violation of article 3 common to the four Geneva Conventions of 12 August
1949,7 without previous judgement pronounced by a regularly constituted court affording all judicial
guarantees that are generally recognized as indispensable,
Convinced of the need for effective action to combat and to eliminate the abhorrent practice of
extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, which represent a flagrant violation of the fundamental right
to life,
1. Strongly condemns once again all the extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions that continue
to take place throughout the world;
2. Demands that all Governments ensure that the practice of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions be brought to an end and that they take effective action to combat and eliminate the phenomenon
in all its forms;
3. Reiterates the obligation of all Governments to conduct exhaustive and impartial investigations
into all suspected cases of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, to identify and bring to justice
those responsible, to grant adequate compensation to the victims or their families and to adopt all necessary
measures to prevent the recurrence of such executions;
4. Notes the encouragement given to the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on
extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions to continue, within the framework of her mandate, to collect
information from all concerned and to seek the views and comments of Governments so as to be able to
respond effectively to reliable information that comes before her and to follow up communications and
country visits;
5. Reaffirms Economic and Social Council decision 1998/265 of 30 July 1998, in which the Council
endorsed the decision of the Commission on Human Rights, in its resolution 1998/68, to extend the mandate
of the Special Rapporteur for three years;

5

Resolution 260 A (III).

6

A/CONF.183/9.

7

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
/...

A/RES/53/147
Page 3

6. Takes note of the statement made by the Special Rapporteur before the General Assembly on 4
November 1998;8
7. Notes the important role the Special Rapporteur has played towards the elimination of extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions;
8. Notes that the Commission, in its resolution 1998/68, requested the Special Rapporteur, in carrying
out her mandate:
(a) To continue to examine situations of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions and to submit
her findings on an annual basis, together with conclusions and recommendations, to the Commission, as well
as such other reports as the Special Rapporteur deems necessary to keep the Commission informed about
serious situations of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions that warrant its immediate attention;
(b) To respond effectively to information that comes before her, in particular when an extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary execution is imminent or threatened or when such an execution has occurred;
(c) To enhance further her dialogue with Governments, as well as to follow up recommendations made
in reports after visits to particular countries;
(d) To continue to pay special attention to extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions of children
and women and to allegations concerning violations of the right to life in the context of violence against
participants in demonstrations and other peaceful public manifestations or against persons belonging to
minorities;
(e) To pay special attention to extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions where the victims are
individuals carrying out peaceful activities in the defence of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
(f) To continue to monitor the implementation of existing international standards on safeguards and
restrictions relating to the imposition of capital punishment, bearing in mind the comments made by the
Human Rights Committee in its interpretation of article 6 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights,2 as well as the Second Optional Protocol thereto;9
(g) To apply a gender perspective in her work;
9. Strongly urges all Governments to respond to the communications transmitted to them by the
Special Rapporteur, and urges them and all others concerned to cooperate with and assist the Special
Rapporteur so that she may carry out her mandate effectively, including, where appropriate, by issuing
invitations to the Special Rapporteur when she so requests;
10. Encourages Governments, international organizations and non-governmental organizations to
organize training programmes and to support projects with a view to training or educating military forces, law
enforcement officers and government officials, as well as members of United Nations peacekeeping or
observer missions, in human rights and humanitarian law issues connected with their work, and appeals to the
international community to support endeavours to that end;

8

See A/C.3/53/SR.34.

9

Resolution 44/128, annex.
/...

A/RES/53/147
Page 4

11. Urges the Special Rapporteur to continue to draw to the attention of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights such situations of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions as are of
particularly serious concern to her or where early action might prevent further deterioration;
12. Welcomes the cooperation established between the Special Rapporteur and other United Nations
mechanisms and procedures relating to human rights, as well as with medical and forensic experts, and
encourages the Special Rapporteur to continue efforts in this regard;
13. Calls upon the Governments of all States in which the death penalty has not been abolished to
comply with their obligations under relevant provisions of international human rights instruments, keeping in
mind the safeguards and guarantees referred to in Economic and Social Council resolutions 1984/50 and
1989/64;
14. Again requests the Secretary-General to continue to use his best endeavours in cases where the
minimum standard of legal safeguards provided for in articles 6, 9, 14 and 15 of the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights appears not to have been respected;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Rapporteur with an adequate and stable level
of human, financial and material resources to enable her to carry out her mandate effectively, including
through country visits;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue, in close collaboration with the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, in conformity with the High Commissioner’s mandate established by
the General Assembly in its resolution 48/141 of 20 December 1993, to ensure that personnel specialized in
human rights and humanitarian law issues form part of United Nations missions, where appropriate, in order
to deal with serious violations of human rights, such as extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions;
17. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit an interim report to the General Assembly at its fiftyfifth session on the situation worldwide in regard to extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions and her
recommendations for more effective action to combat that phenomenon.
85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998
