S/PV.8489

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8489th meeting

Tuesday, 26 March 2019, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Fachir
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Safronkov
Ms. Goolab
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2334 (2016) (S/2019/251)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-08508 (E)
*1908508*

S/PV.8489

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 9.45 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council
resolution 2334 (2016) (S/2019/251)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Israel to
participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/251, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2334 (2016).
I give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: On behalf of the Secretary-General,
I will devote my regular briefing on the situation in
the Middle East today to presenting the ninth report
(S/2019/251) on the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016), which covers the period between 15 December
2018 and 15 March 2019. Before I provide an update on the
developments related to the provisions of the resolution
that have taken place following the submission of the
written report of the Secretary-General to the Council,
I would like to address the situation on the ground in
the past 48 hours.
On 25 March, a rocket was launched from the Gaza
Strip, directly hitting a house in central Israel. Seven
2/24

26/03/2019

family members were injured, including three children.
Over the following 24 hours, at least 103 rockets and
mortars were fired from Gaza towards Israel, some of
which were intercepted by the Iron Dome system, while
others caused material damage to a house in Sderot or
hit uninhabited areas. The Israeli Air Force conducted
42 strikes on various locations in Gaza, while some
16 shells were fired by the Israel Defense Forces and
the Israeli navy towards the Gaza Strip. According
to local sources, seven Palestinians were injured as a
result of the strikes. Several buildings were destroyed,
including Hamas offices and security buildings. At 6
a.m. this morning, local time, a fragile calm seems to
have taken hold.
In the past 10 days there have been two rockets
attacks from Gaza targeting the Tel Aviv area, which
represents a very serious escalation. Since the early
hours of yesterday, my team and I have been working
intensely with Egypt and all concerned parties to
ensure that the situation does not spiral out of control.
As I have said many times in the Security Council, but
I will repeat it again here today, nobody has an interest
in a full military confrontation in Gaza.
A new conflict will be devastating for the
Palestinian people, it will have consequences for Israelis
who live in the vicinity of the Gaza perimeter, and it
is likely to have regional repercussions. This is why
I ask all participants today to join the United Nations
in condemning the continued indiscriminate firing
of rockets towards Israel. Such acts of provocation
only dramatically increase the risk of escalation and
ultimately damage our collective efforts to support the
people of Gaza and intra-Palestinian reconciliation.
We must also call on all sides to exercise maximum
restraint as the situation remains extremely tense.
Returning to the report under resolution 2334
(2016), I have to begin by saying that once again no
steps have been taken by Israel to “immediately and
completely cease all settlement activity in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem”, as
called for in paragraph 2 of the resolution. Since the end
of the reporting period, the Government announced the
construction of 840 new units in Ariel. This decision
was presented as a response to an attack on 17 March.
Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures also continued across the occupied West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. Since 15 March, an
additional seven Palestinian-owned structures have
19-08508

26/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

been demolished or seized by the Israeli authorities.
This has resulted in the displacement of nine people.
A water cistern in Susiya, three structures belonging
to communities in southern Hebron and an elementary
school building under construction in the Shuafat
refugee camp in East Jerusalem are among the
buildings demolished.
Resolution 2334 (2016) also calls, in paragraph 6,
“for immediate steps to prevent all acts of violence
against civilians”. However, even the brief period since
the submission of the written report, as witnessed by
recent events, has been characterized by escalating
violence. Beginning on 14 and 15 March, thousands
of Palestinians in Gaza demonstrated under the
slogan “we want to live”. They protested the dire
socioeconomic circumstances in Gaza and “the
injustice due to the Palestinian division and the Hamas
takeover of Gaza by force and violence”. Although the
protests were generally non-violent, Hamas security
personnel violently dispersed participants and many,
including women, children, journalists and human
rights activists, were beaten and hospitalized. Tens
of homes were raided in search of demonstrators.
Local human rights monitors reported that over 1,000
people, including children, were arrested and many
reportedly beaten. The crackdown was condemned by
all Palestinian factions.
Meanwhile, protests at the Gaza fence, which had
subsided for a couple of days, also resumed. At least 11
incendiary devices were launched from Gaza towards
Israel just since 15 March. In response, the IDF shelled
or conducted air strikes against targets in Gaza on four
occasions, causing no injuries. That, of course, does not
include the rockets fired in the escalation of the past
48 hours.
Tensions in the occupied West Bank also continued.
Four Palestinians were killed by Israeli security forces
in various security operations and other incidents, while
two Israelis, including one soldier and one civilian,
were killed by Palestinians. On 17 March, a Palestinian
stabbed an Israeli soldier near the Ariel settlement, took
his rifle and shot him and an Israeli civilian, killing both
and severely injuring another soldier. In the subsequent
search operations, 15 homes were raided, a temporary
security cordon was imposed on several villages and
three of the suspect’s family members were arrested.
Two days later, the suspect was killed by the Israeli
security forces in the village of Abwein.

S/PV. 8489

Another incident took place on 19 March, when
Jewish worshippers, accompanied by Israeli security
forces, entered Nablus on their way to visit Joseph’s
Tomb — a monthly practice that is consistent with
previous agreements between the parties. While the
details of the ensuing clashes remain disputed, two
Palestinians were killed by the Israeli security forces
and at least 27 others were injured.
In Bethlehem, on 20 March, a 26-year-old Palestinian
was shot and killed by the Israeli security forces and
another was injured while driving near a partial military
checkpoint under disputed circumstances. In Beit Sira
village, near Ramallah, a Palestinian man was similarly
shot and injured near a checkpoint. Israeli authorities
have launched investigations into both incidents.
On 24 March, two Israeli prison guards were
stabbed by Hamas inmates in Ktziot Prison, in southern
Israel. Following that, 12 prisoners were reportedly
injured in ensuing clashes between guards and inmates.
Resolution 2334 (2016), in paragraph 7, calls
upon the parties “to refrain from provocative actions,
incitement and inflammatory rhetoric”. Unfortunately,
such actions and rhetoric have continued. On 17 March,
both Hamas and the Palestinian Islamic Jihad praised
the attack near the settlement of Ariel and called it
a “heroic operation”, while Fatah social media sites
praised the perpetrator as a “heroic martyr”. Israeli
political leaders have also continued to call for targeted
assassinations of Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad
officials and for the annexation of the West Bank.
Resolution 2334 (2016), in paragraph 4, reiterates
the calls of the Middle East Quartet for
“affirmative steps to be taken immediately to
reverse negative trends on the ground that are
imperilling the two-State solution”.
No such steps were taken during the reporting period.
Meanwhile, the situation at Jerusalem’s holy sites
continues to be tense. On 17 March, the Jerusalem
Magistrate Court reinstated for 60 days an order to close
the building located in Bab Al-Rahmah — also known
as Mercy Gate — in the Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple
Mount compound, which has been closed by the Israeli
authorities since 2003 on security grounds. The Islamic
Endowment — the Waqf — echoed by the Palestinian
and Jordanian Ministries of Foreign Affairs, maintains
that Israeli courts lack jurisdiction over the holy site,
which lies in the territory occupied in 1967, and warned

19-085083/24

S/PV.8489

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

against any changes to the historical and legal status
quo. Israel, however, considers the establishment of a
mosque in the Mercy Gate area to be a violation of the
status quo. As of 20 March, the Jerusalem Magistrate
Court order had not been executed. Daily prayers
continue in the Mercy Gate area, while discussions
between Israel and Jordan are ongoing.
The past few days have not seen a resolution of the
funding crisis created by Israel’s decision to withhold
6 per cent of the revenues it collects on behalf the
Palestinian Authority, and the Palestinian leadership’s
refusal to accept any clearance transfers unless the
full amount is reinstated. The Palestinian Government
has begun implementing severe austerity measures
The measures include a 50 per cent salary cut for over
50 per cent of Palestinian Government employees,
overall ceiling on salary payments, the cessation
of promotions, appointments and bonuses and of
the purchase of property and cars, and a 20 per cent
reduction in operational expenses across the board,
including reduced expenses on travel, hospitality and
fuel. In addition, the Palestinian Authority plans to
borrow from domestic banks between now and July.
This will all have a substantial impact on the Palestinian
economy, resulting in reduced purchasing power and
further reduction in gross domestic product growth rate
both in West Bank and Gaza.
In closing, I would like to reiterate some
observations concerning the implementation of the
provisions of resolution 2334 (2006).
The expansion of Israeli settlements in the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, is continuing
unabated. The advancement, approval or tender of
more than 3,000 units in the occupied West Bank,
as indicated in the written report before the Council
(S/2019/251), is the largest batch since May 2018. This
includes the latest announcement of over 800 units in
the settlement of Ariel. I reiterate that the establishment
of settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, has no legal effect and
constitutes a flagrant violation of international law,
as stated in resolution 2334 (2016), and must cease
immediately and completely.
The demolition and seizure of Palestinian structures
also continues. The demolition of structures linked
to vital water connections in Area C communities in
the West Bank, which were already suffering water
shortages, is particularly troubling. I am concerned by
4/24

26/03/2019

the continued pressure being placed on Palestinians
in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
Such policies must be reversed and Israel should abide
by its obligations under international law.
I am saddened by the persistent violence that
continues to result in the tragic loss of Palestinian
and Israeli lives. Recent incidents in the West Bank
and Gaza highlight the mounting tensions across the
occupied Palestinian territory and the risk of a broader
escalation of the conflict. I call on the parties to reject
violence and to work to reduce tensions. There is no
justification for terror, and I call on all to join the
United Nations in condemning it unequivocally.
I am concerned that we may once again be facing
another very dangerous escalation of violence in Gaza,
with potentially catastrophic consequences. The past
two days have shown us how precariously close we
came once again to the brink of war. The indiscriminate
launching of rockets and mortars against Israeli towns
and villages violates international law and places
civilian lives at great risk. The launching of incendiary
and explosive devices towards Israel must also stop.
I also remain gravely concerned by the number
of deaths and injuries of Palestinians along the Gaza
perimeter fence. Israeli security forces have the
responsibility to exercise restraint, and lethal force
must be used only when strictly unavoidable in order
to protect life.
I strongly condemn the campaign of arrests and
violence inside Gaza against protesters, including
women and children. The brutal beating of journalists
and human rights workers and the raiding of homes
is particularly alarming. The long-suffering people of
Gaza have a right to protest without fear of reprisal, and
I call on all Member States to join the United Nations in
condemning such actions.
As I have repeatedly emphasized, the situation
in Gaza is untenable and the latest protests further
highlight the need for the return of a unified Palestinian
Government to Gaza. I call on all Palestinian
factions to engage in earnest with Egypt in order to
implement the 2017 Cairo agreement and end the
intra-Palestinian divisions. While the United Nations
is continuing its efforts to de-escalate the situation,
progress on the reconciliation track and the lifting of
closures on Gaza remain essential. I encourage Member
States to support those vital efforts.
19-08508

26/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The lack of resolution of the Palestinian Authority’s
funding crisis threatens to further destabilize an
already volatile situation. Both parties should continue
to implement their bilateral agreements and avoid
taking unilateral actions that undermine the twoState solution.
The situation in the Old City of Jerusalem also
remains a serious concern. I urge all parties to work
towards de-escalating of tensions. I encourage Israel
and Jordan to work together to uphold the status quo at
the Holy Sites, noting the special and historic role of the
Hashemite Kingdom as custodian of the Muslim and
Christian holy sites in Jerusalem.
Lastly, I remain deeply concerned by the lack of
progress towards the realization of a two-State solution,
in line with relevant United Nations resolutions, longstanding international parameters and prior agreements.
There is no viable alternative to the two-State solution.
Given the interconnected nature of conflicts throughout
the region and the Palestinian-Israeli conflict’s potential
to fuel extremist narratives, creating the conditions
for the parties to return to meaningful negotiations
remains critical.
What is needed first and foremost, however, is the
necessary leadership and political will to take concrete
steps in support of ending the occupation and realizing
a lasting peace. Until that can be found, another
generation of Israelis and Palestinians is destined to
spend their lives searching in vain for an elusive peace.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Fachir (Indonesia): I wish to thank Special
Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for the comprehensive
briefing. Let me also thank the Secretariat for the second
written report (S/2019/251) on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016). The report demonstrates
yet another sad reality — not a single element of the
resolution has been implemented by the occupying
Power, nor is there is any sign of future implementation.
On the contrary, the occupying Power has blatantly
dismissed the Council’s resolution.
Another bleak condition has been reported by the
independent international commission of inquiry on the
brutality of the occupying Power, including the use of
live ammunition at close range against civilians, even

S/PV. 8489

against children, medical personnel and persons with
disabilities. That is a blatant violation of human decency,
international humanitarian law and human rights.
Both reports present three main concerns to which
we must be alert.
First, there is a clear and worrying tendency towards
the effective annexation of Palestine by the occupying
Power. We have a long list of violations that have been
consistently and blatantly committed by the occupying
Power. They include the continued construction of
illegal settlements, the closure of the Temporary
International Presence in Hebron, the non-payment of
Palestinian revenues, incidents at Al-Haram Al-Sharif,
as well as violence committed by the authorities, the
security forces and settlers, to name just a few. That
goes against everything the United Nations has been
striving for since 1947. Let me reiterate in the strongest
terms Indonesia’s rejection and condemnation of any
such attempts.
Secondly, we must all step up our efforts to improve
the humanitarian and economic conditions of the
Palestinian people. That is even more pressing in view
of the diminishing commitments of some others with
regard to multilateralism and humanitarian assistance.
We are deeply concerned about the non-payment
of $139 million in Palestinian tax revenues by the
occupying Power. This constitutes the illegitimate
confiscation of other’s property and violates the Paris
Protocol on Economic Relations — a treaty that Israel
signed with the Palestinian Authority. It is unjust,
unfair, grossly unacceptable and definitely illegal.
We applaud the Palestinian people for their resilience
and determination to withstand such pressure in spite of
their dire economic, political and humanitarian crises.
We also fully respect the Palestinian Authority’s policy
of full transfer or nothing at all.
On the positive side, we applaud the effort of the
United Nations country team and other donors, through
its various initiatives and projects, among others the
Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism. Just last month,
Indonesia also committed to increasing its financial
support to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and building a
desalination project in Gaza.
My third point is that any future peace plan must
respect the agreed parameters based on relevant
United Nations resolutions. The two-State solution

19-085085/24

S/PV.8489

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

is the only realistic way to achieve a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace between the parties.
Indonesia also continues to encourage Palestine
in attaining national unity. We commend the
efforts of Egypt and Russia in support of national
reconciliation initiatives.
Upholding the status quo at the holy sites in
Jerusalem is important. The sealing by the occupying
Power this month of all gates to the Al-Aqsa Mosque,
as well as the Old City of Jerusalem, is a dangerous
measure that has further inflamed the tensions and was
probably designed with that aim. Those measures are
capable of further destabilizing the already complex
and fragile situation and triggering violence.
Instability in Palestine, particularly in Jerusalem,
will have a significant ripple effect in the region and
beyond. We therefore call upon the Security Council
to monitor those developments very closely so as to
avoid a potential escalation of conflict that could be too
costly if handled too late.
Allow me to clearly state Indonesia’s position on the
recent situation in the Golan Heights. Indonesia strongly
rejects the United States illegal move in recognizing
Israel’s sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan
Heights, as it is an escalatory and grave violation of
international law, the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and relevant Security
Council resolutions, in particular resolution 497 (1981).
This action will provoke and disrupt ongoing efforts to
create peace and stability in the region. It is therefore
entirely unacceptable by any standard. As stated in
resolution 497 (1981), Israel’s decision to impose its
laws, jurisdiction and administration in the occupied
Syrian Golan Heights is null and void and without
international legal effect. I consequently would like to
reaffirm Indonesia’s principled position in recognizing
the Golan Heights as an integral part of the Syrian Arab
Republic that was occupied by Israel in 1967.
In conclusion, Indonesia would like to reiterate
that peace in the Middle East can be achieved only if
the international community, especially the Security
Council, is united along all fronts. We must never forget
that our mandate is to save human lives and humankind.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his briefing in this periodic monthly meeting
6/24

26/03/2019

regarding the ninth report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) (S/2019/251).
The State of Kuwait fully supports his efforts to diffuse
the situation and prevent further escalation. We thank
the Secretary-General for presenting his second written
report, in line with that resolution, note S/2017/507 and
according to the practice concerning similar issues on
the Council’s agenda. We also look forward to receiving
at least two written annual reports.
We were not surprised that today Mr. Mladenov
repeated the same phrase for the ninth time in the
27 months since the adoption of resolution 2334
(2016), namely, that Israel took no steps during the
reporting period to cease its settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territories. In fact, the opposite is
happening. Israel, the occupying Power, continues to
expand its policies of annexing Palestinian territories
at a rapid pace and to undermine the two-State solution.
The latest reports of the United Nations highlight
the fact that the Israeli occupying Power is implementing
plans to build, expand, finance and authorize settlement
activities, including to build more than 6,000 residential
units in Area C and East Jerusalem. The international
community must therefore compel Israel to implement
resolution 2334 (2016), which states that Israeli
settlement activity is a flagrant violation of international
law and an obstacle to peace, and calls on Israel, the
occupying Power, to immediately and completely cease
all settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. It also stresses
the need to implement all other relevant international
resolutions, including resolutions 465 (1980) and 497
(1981), that consider Israeli settlement activities to be
illegal and illegitimate.
Over nearly a month, we have called for numerous
meetings to discuss the illegal unilateral decisions taken
by the Israeli Government, first when Israel refused
to renew the mandate of the Temporary International
Presence in Hebron, and then when we requested,
in cooperation with Indonesia, the convening of a
meeting on 8 March in order to discuss the economic
repercussions of Israel’s unilateral decision to retain
part of Palestinian tax revenue. As recalled by
Mr. Mladenov today, we may see another crisis across
the region in the coming weeks as a result of this
decision, which is contrary to the bilateral agreements,
including the Paris Protocol on Economic Relations,
and violates international law and the Fourth Geneva
Convention. In that regard, we stress the absolute right
19-08508

26/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of the Palestinian Authority to use its funds as it wishes,
including those related to social assistance for the most
vulnerable people and the martyrs’ families, as well as
the families of thousands of political prisoners held in
the occupation prisons.
With regard to Israeli hate speech, Israeli political
and military leaders continue their provocative
statements, in clear violation of resolution 2334 (2016),
which calls for an end to all provocations, incitement
and inflammatory rhetoric, which lead to an increase
in settler crimes against Palestinian civilians and their
property, including their holy sites, which are under the
protection of the Israeli security forces, and demonstrate
no respect for the sanctity of those sites. A case in point
was the recent closure of the Bab Al-Rahmah gate at
the Al-Aqsa Mosque, and the subsequent closure of the
entire Mosque, preventing worshippers from reaching
the Mosque squares. In addition, Israeli forces detained
a number of senior employees of the Islamic Waqf in
Jerusalem, preventing the head of the Council, who
is 80 years old, from entering the Mosque for a week.
We condemn once again all those violations by Israel,
the occupying Power, of the Islamic and Christian holy
sites, in particular its attempts to change the historic
and legal status of the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque, and to
divide it in time and place.
We will soon mark the first anniversary of the Great
March of Return in the Gaza Strip, which will coincide
with the issuance of the report by the independent
international commission of inquiry on the violations
concerning the Palestinian occupied territories. The
report concludes that Israeli soldiers have committed
violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law during the protests. The
report also stresses that the protests were civilian in
nature and with clear political objectives, and that some
of the violations committed amount to war crimes and
crimes against humanity.
Beginning with the first March of Return, we have
warned at each meeting since 30 March 2018 against
what I have just said, and against the inability of the
Security Council to end those crimes and the persistence
of Israel, the occupying Power, in implementing its
policies and illegal practices. We have stressed the
need to enforce General Assembly resolution ES-10/20,
on the protection of Palestinian civilians, as long as
the illegal occupation and siege persist. That could
be done through the options of protecting Palestinian
civilians that are detailed in the most recent report

S/PV. 8489

of the Secretary-General, as well as by urging the
international community to participate in protecting
those civilians and creating a practical and effective
mechanism to implement the General Assembly
resolution and the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General’s report.
Turning now to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), it is difficult for the international
community to continue to call for stability in the entire
Middle East region, and in the occupied Palestinian
territories in particular, without recognizing the vital
role that UNRWA plays in providing basic services to
almost 5 million Palestinian refugees. In that regard,
we commend the adoption by the Foreign Ministers of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation at its fortysixth session of a decision to create a fund to ensure
sustainable funding for UNRWA, in order to support
Palestinian refugees as part of the Islamic Bank for
Development. The fund will mobilize resources from
different counties and institutions in order to support
UNRWA’s humanitarian relief, health and education
services for Palestinian refugees.
With respect to the decision of the United States
to recognize Israel’s annexation of the Syrian Golan
and keep it under its sovereignty, we have followed
international reactions condemning any annexation of
territory by force, and rejecting any illegal measure to
further tensions in the region. We regret the decision
taken by the United States to recognize Israel’s
annexation and sovereignty of the Golan. We stress
Syria’s right to recover the entire Syrian Arab Golan,
in line with legitimate international resolutions. We
reject any decision that would perpetuate Israel’s
occupation of the Syrian Arab Golan or any other Arab
occupied territory.
Over the past five decades, Israel, the occupying
Power, has taken decisions to change the legal,
natural and demographic situation in the Golan.
Those attempts are illegal, null and void. They are a
violation of international conventions, the Charter
of the United Nations and relevant Security Council
resolutions, especially resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1975) and 497 (1981), whereby the Security Council
rejects any annexation of territory by force. Israel has
described the United States decision as historic, while
it is the only State to ignore and violate international
legitimate resolutions.

19-085087/24

S/PV.8489

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In closing, we call on the international community
once again to fulfil its commitments and take the
measures necessary to revive the peace process in
order to reach a two-State solution and put an end to the
Israeli occupation since 1967, with a view to achieving
a just, lasting and comprehensive peace, based on
relevant United Nations resolutions, including the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the road map.
Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, we thank Special Coordinator
Mladenov for his comprehensive briefing on the
situation on the ground, in the light of the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/251).
We heard with deep concern the details concerning
the dramatic deterioration of the situation, alerting us to
the dangerous direction in which the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict is headed, while systematically eroding the
prospect of sustainable peace at a critical juncture. As we
have been well warned, the taking of unilateral measures
in flagrant violation of international law, continuous
violence, incitement, provocation, financial pressures
and the lack of internal reconciliation in the midst of
a major humanitarian crisis are elements undermining
the conditions necessary to achieving peace. Given the
interrelated nature of conflicts in the Middle East, with
the Israeli-Palestinian as perhaps the most emblematic
and persistent of all time, the consequences of inaction
entail the risk of fuelling violence and extremism in the
region, while destabilizing it further and increasing the
suffering and despair of millions of people.
As we recently discussed, we must revitalize
our collective efforts and strengthen international
consensus, as we are aware that we share common
threats and challenges with regard to humanitarian
issues and to regional and international security, while
relying on international law, multilateralism and the
peaceful resolution of conflicts, and recognizing the
important mediation role played by the United Nations.
In that regard, over the past quarter we have noted
with dismay the continued expansion of settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, with the advancement, approval or tender of
more than 3,000 units and measures geared towards the
potential legalization of several outposts and homes,
including through steps to legalize them retroactively.
We also strongly condemn the violence of the
past several days directed against protestors in Gaza,
8/24

26/03/2019

including women and children, just as we condemn the
violence throughout the occupied Palestinian territory,
including the continued use of lethal force and the firing
of rockets, mortars and incendiary devices from Gaza
into Israel, including the events of yesterday in which
two children were injured and force was used against
medical personnel carrying out their tasks.
At our most recent meeting on this item (see
S/PV.8466), we expressed concern about the gap left
by the absence of the Temporary International Presence
in Hebron (TIPH), given the key role it played in
conflict prevention and the protection of Palestinians
in that sensitive area. Reports of an increase of violence
and harassment by settlers in the H2 area of Hebron
following the withdrawal of TIPH on 1 February justify
our collective concern.
We remain concerned about the fragile humanitarian
and economic situation that persists in Gaza, including
the acute energy crisis, and acknowledge and commend
the work of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in its
efforts to alleviate the suffering of the population. The
recent freezing of fiscal revenue collected on behalf of
the Palestinian Authority is an additional destabilizing
factor that could further exacerbate the situation. We
appeal to the leadership and political will of the parties to
urgently direct their renewed efforts towards achieving
a peaceful resolution to this perennial conflict through
fair negotiations, based on the relevant United Nations
resolutions and previous agreements and initiatives,
based on the two-State solution and the best interests
of their people — Israelis and Palestinians, who for
too many years have endured the suffering caused by
the conflict.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his sobering briefing.
The United States strongly condemns the rocket
attack on Israel from Gaza yesterday that injured
seven innocent civilians, and we reaffirm Israel’s right
to defend itself. I think that we can all agree on the
need for Israelis and Palestinians to work together,
with the support of the international community, to
improve conditions in Gaza and the West Bank, but this
malicious and insidious violence is a clear signal from
Hamas and others in Gaza who see such cooperation
and progress as counter to their aims.
Every one of us around this table has a responsibility
to condemn the rocket attacks, but we must also
19-08508

26/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

recognize that, in addition to terrorizing Israeli
civilians, Hamas has failed to provide for Palestinians
in Gaza and, most recently, has cracked down violently
on Palestinian protesters. Over the past few weeks,
thousands of Palestinians in Gaza have come out to
protest against Hamas and the dire economic and
humanitarian situation in Gaza. Hamas security forces
responded with sweeping arrests of and violence against
protesters, including women and children. Journalists
were brutally beaten, and 15 local journalists were
jailed. According to Amnesty International, “[t]he
crackdown on freedom of expression and the use of
torture in Gaza have reached alarming new levels”.
We agree that many factors have contributed to the
situation and Gaza, but the international community
needs to shine a light on Hamas’s injustices, such as
rocket attacks into Israel and encouraging and praising
violence against innocent Israelis, and also how it treats
its fellow Palestinian brothers and sisters.
As Council members are aware, yesterday
President Trump signed a proclamation recognizing
the Golan Heights as Israeli territory — a decision of
critical strategic and security importance to the State of
Israel. To allow the Golan Heights to be controlled by
the likes of the Syrian and Iranian regimes would be to
turn a blind eye to the atrocities of the Al-Assad regime
and the malign and destabilizing presence of Iran in
the region. The United States Administration has made
clear that there can be no peace agreement that does
not satisfactorily address Israel’s security needs in the
Golan Heights.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this briefing
dedicated to discussing the latest developments in the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question and the obstacles to achieving lasting peace
in that region. My delegation commends Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his excellent briefing, which
prompts several observations on the peace process and
the humanitarian situation in Gaza.
With regard to the peace process, in the light of
the latest developments Côte d’Ivoire notes with regret
that the hope of achieving lasting peace between the
Israeli and Palestinian sides is diminishing as the
crisis unfolds. The firing of rockets from Gaza into Tel
Aviv and the subsequent Israeli response raise fears of

S/PV. 8489

an escalation of violence that could further erode the
prospects of a definitive solution to the conflict. Given
that alarming situation, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its call
on all stakeholders to exercise restraint and to comply
strictly with the relevant United Nations resolutions
and their obligations under international law.
My country adheres to the international consensus
on the need for a resumption of the peace process,
which is an appropriate framework for finding mutually
acceptable solutions to key issues, such as the status of
Jerusalem, the lifting of the blockade on Gaza and the
security of the Palestinian population in Hebron. Côte
d’Ivoire therefore calls on all parties involved to engage
with resolve in a constructive dialogue, while calling
on them to refrain from any unilateral action that could
undermine the international community’s efforts to
find a peaceful solution to the Israeli-Palestinian crisis.
In that regard, Côte d’Ivoire supports all measures
and initiatives that could contribute to inter-Palestinian
reconciliation, in particular between Fatah and Hamas,
so as to enable the Palestinian Authority to exercise its
sovereign functions in both Gaza and the West Bank.
Lastly, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its commitment both to
the security of the State of Israel and to the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination,
and reaffirms its strong support for the two-State
solution, with each State coexisting peacefully within
the pre-1967 borders.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, Côte
d’Ivoire remains concerned about the unprecedented
crisis in Gaza, characterized by increasingly difficult
access to health care, continuing water shortages, a very
limited electricity supply and the irregular payment of
civil servants’ salaries, in addition to an unfavourable
socioeconomic situation marked by an unemployment
rate of more than 50 per cent of the working population.
In that light of that grim scenario, my country
calls once again on the Security Council to work in
cooperation with the relevant specialized United Nations
agencies and all partners to find the necessary means
to meet the basic needs of more than 5 million people
in distress. Here my delegation calls on international
partners to further mobilize in order to provide the
necessary financial support to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East. The goal is to help the Agency, which plays
a key role in the international humanitarian assistance

19-085089/24

S/PV.8489

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

mechanism, obtain the resources necessary to close its
budget deficit, estimated at more than $200 million.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the financing obtained by
the United Nations, which should help, on the one hand,
to provide more of the fuel needed to provide electricity
to Gaza and, on the other, to support programmes
allowing for the creation of approximately 15,000 new
temporary jobs in Gaza. We thank the generous donors,
which are thus contributing to combating poverty
and food insecurity in Gaza and the other Palestinian
territories. Here I would commend the establishment of
the Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism, whose activities
are carried out jointly by the Israeli Government,
the Palestinian Authority and the United Nations,
which gives grounds for hope for frank cooperation
between the key actors in the peace process and the
socioeconomic development process.
To conclude, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its support for
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov and wishes him every success
in carrying out his mission. We are convinced that there
can be no military solution to the various crises in the
Middle East, in particular in Palestine. My country is
of the view that only inclusive dialogue will be able
to bring about lasting peace and stability in a region
whose peoples have a legitimate aspiration to prosperity
and happiness.
Ms. Goolab (South Africa): I would like to join
others in thanking the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Mladenov, for his
briefing on the developments in the Middle East.
South Africa condemns the rocket attack from
Gaza aimed at Israel. These kinds of rocket attacks not
only place the lives of innocent civilians in danger but
also undermine the legitimate cause of the Palestinian
people. While recognizing Israel’s legitimate right to
security, we condemn Israel’s disproportionate use
of force.
These recent incidents have not occurred in a
vacuum. The people of Gaza have endured serious
hardship during the Israeli blockade on Gaza, and the
escalation of violence will only worsen their already
dire situation. The Security Council needs to also act
decisively and urgently on the lifting of the illegal
blockade of the Gaza Strip.
My delegation would also like to take this
opportunity to welcome the Secretary-General’s written
report on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016)
10/24

26/03/2019

(S/2019/251) and to express our hope that this practice
will continue with future reports. Just as we receive
reports on other matters on the Council’s agenda,
written reports on this issue are essential if the Security
Council is to effectively exercise its mandate in terms
of maintaining international peace and security in the
Middle East.
As reported by the Secretary-General, Israel has
continued unabated and with impunity to expand
settlements and to demolish and seize property in
the occupied territories. It is important to reiterate
that the establishment of settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, is a
flagrant violation of international law.
The continued expansion of settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territory undermines the prospects
for long-term peace; alters the conditions on the ground,
putting the two-State solution in jeopardy by eroding
the possibility of a contiguous and viable Palestinian
State; and contravenes a decision of the Council. Such
overt violations of a resolution adopted by the Security
Council would usually lead to severe measures against
the party responsible; however, on this issue the Council
remains silent. If the Council does not uphold its own
decisions, it loses its effectiveness and undermines its
core mandate of maintaining international peace and
security. In that regard, we once again call on all States
Members of the United Nations to fully implement the
provisions of resolution 2334 (2016).
My delegation wishes to express our grave concern
about the continued disregard for the prevailing and
long-standing Middle East peace process and attempts
to prejudge final-status issues, particularly with regard
to the borders and the status of Jerusalem, through
unilateral actions.
I wish to reiterate South Africa’s position in support
of a two-State solution. We would also like to emphasize
that the primary responsibility for peace rests with the
Palestinians and Israelis themselves. The guidelines for
negotiations should be based on the already established
international framework, which include General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map, to name but a few.
We remain concerned that more than 40 years after
the adoption of resolution 242 (1967), which called for
the withdrawal of Israeli troops from the territories that
it occupied after the 1967 war, including the Syrian
19-08508

26/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Golan Heights, Israel continues to illegally occupy the
Golan Heights and thereby violate Council resolutions.
International law should be upheld in this regard, and
we therefore call on Israel to respect the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of the Syrian Arab Republic.
As noted by the Secretary-General, the independent
international commission of inquiry on the protests in
the occupied Palestinian territory found reasonable
grounds to believe that in almost all of the cases it had
investigated, the use of live ammunition by the Israeli
security forces against protesters was unlawful. During
the period under investigation, 183 protesters, including
35 children, were killed and more than 6,100 injured
through the use of live ammunition. South Africa
strongly condemns this excessive and disproportionate
use of force by the Israeli security forces and calls
on Israel to refrain from the unwarranted use of live
ammunition in response to protests.
In conclusion, the ongoing protests in Gaza are
evidence of the dire and untenable situation of the
Palestinian people. The upcoming one-year anniversary
of the start of the Great March of Return is expected to
see tens of thousands of Palestinians protesting Israel’s
continued illegal occupation of Palestine. In this regard,
we call for all parties to ensure that the protests remain
peaceful and non-violent.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his comprehensive
and insightful briefing.
Poland strongly condemns yesterday’s rocket attack
from the Gaza Strip, which struck a residential building
in the Sharon region, injuring at least seven people,
including two infants. While recognizing Israel’s
right to defend itself, we call on all sides to exercise
maximum restraint in order to avert any escalation,
which could potentially lead to a full-scale war in the
Strip. In this context, yesterday’s events on the ground
are extremely worrying.
In 2016 the Security Council adopted resolution
2334 (2016) reaffirming its previous resolutions
regarding applicable international law and the
parameters of a peaceful solution to the PalestinianIsraeli conflict. Unfortunately, since then the conflict
has not seen significant positive advances towards
achieving peace. On the contrary, trends on the ground
have been negative: the closure of the Temporary
International Presence in Hebron, new tensions around
the Temple Mount and the Israeli decision on tax

S/PV. 8489

revenues, not to mention the issue of settlements, have
had negative consequences and only add to the already
extremely volatile security situation in Gaza as well as
in the West Bank.
Those developments on the ground clearly point to
a continuing need to continue the de-escalation process,
as the risk of miscalculation increases daily, especially
as we approach the first anniversary of the Great March
of Return, at the end of March.
Our priority is the resumption of meaningful
peace talks. We believe that a negotiated two-State
solution and the resolution of all final-status issues,
including that of Jerusalem, remain a realistic way
of fulfilling the legitimate aspirations of both parties
and achieving long-term peace. Unfortunately, as the
situation on the ground worsens, the two-State solution
is being questioned. The recent increase in violence,
in particular in the West Bank, proves that perpetual
occupation and conflict are paving the way for growing
frustration among the citizens and providing a fertile
breeding ground for extremism.
The humanitarian situation on the ground, in
particular in the Gaza Strip, has continued to deteriorate.
Basic needs continue to be unmet and many people lack
access to basic services, including health care. The
prevailing lack of decisive steps towards a return of
the legitimate Palestinian Government to Gaza, despite
Egypt’s best efforts to revive the process, is detrimental
to Palestinian aspirations to statehood, contributes to
the worsening of the humanitarian crisis and risks
escalation. Progress in the Palestinian reconciliation
process would undoubtedly contribute to improving the
situation on the ground.
Let me underline that the critical financial
shortfalls of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) are also cause for alarm, particularly since
80 per cent of the population of Gaza is dependent on
the Agency’s humanitarian services. In that regard,
I commend the mobilization of donors in 2018,
which helped to secure additional funding for the
Agency’s budget, as well as the imposition of austerity
measures by the Agency under the leadership of
Commissioner-General Pierre Krähenbühl.
However, it is vital to continue such efforts this
year, as UNRWA remains a key factor for stability
and security in the region. We strongly believe that
stopping UNRWA’s important activities could well

19-0850811/24

S/PV.8489

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

cause instability and create a vacuum that would only
serve the extremists.
Unfortunately, provocation, incitement and
inflammatory rhetoric continue on both sides. In our
opinion, such acts constitute a significant obstacle
to the reactivation of the peace process. Let me be
clear. Violence by all sides should be prevented and
condemned, as we expect the genuine commitment
of both sides towards a peaceful and negotiated twoState solution.
In conclusion. I would like to reiterate that Poland
fully supports the long-standing European position that
all settlement activity is illegal under international law.
Such settlements continue to undermine the practical
prospects and hope for peace.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): First of all, I would like to thank Special
Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing and for
the work that he and his team are doing. We welcome
the distribution of a written report (S/2019/251) in
accordance with the Council’s usual practice on the
basis of note 507 (S/2017/507), and we hope that that
practice continues.
The continuing settlement policy in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem is of the greatest concern
to us. Settlement activity, accompanied by forced
displacement, eviction and demolition, also targets
particularly symbolic places, such as the ancient cities of
Hebron or Jerusalem, and areas of strategic importance
for the prospect of a viable and contiguous Palestinian
State. In that regard, we remain very attentive to the
developments in Khan A1-Ahmar.
We strongly oppose the settlement policy and its
related measures. Settlement activity is illegal under
international law. It undermines the trust necessary for
the resumption of dialogue and jeopardizes any chance
of achieving a just and lasting peace based on the
coexistence of two States. The settlement policy also
leads to increased tensions and violence between Israeli
settlers and Palestinians. We condemn all recourse to
violence and call for the de-escalation of tensions and
for combating impunity for the perpetrators of such
acts of violence.
The date 30 March marks the first anniversary of
the Great March of Return. While recognizing Israel’s
right to ensure its security, we recall that Israel must
respect the fundamental right to peaceful demonstration
12/24

26/03/2019

and the principle of proportionality in the use of force.
Lethal force must be used only as a last resort. However,
it is not acceptable for demonstrations in Gaza to be
diverted by extremist elements. They must remain
strictly non-violent. We condemn in the strongest terms
the firing of rockets into Israeli territory. We once
again call for avoiding an escalation, as Mr. Mladenov
did so eloquently.
We also condemn the violence used by the Hamas
security forces against demonstrators in Gaza,
in particular journalists, staff of the Independent
Commission for Human Rights and human rights
defenders. The repression of demonstrations is
unacceptable and must stop. Hamas is required to
respect freedom of expression and the fundamental
right to peaceful demonstration.
We call on all parties to respect international
human rights law and international humanitarian law
and to ensure free access for humanitarian actors and
unconditional access to medical care, including care
that can be provided only outside the Gaza Strip. It is
essential that the international community support the
efforts of those humanitarian actors. In that regard, we
would like to acknowledge the indispensable role of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, whose mandate and work on
the ground Belgium will continue to support.
Recent months have been marked by a series of
unilateral decisions that call into question the Oslo
Accords. Israel’s decision not to renew the mandate of
the Temporary International Presence in Hebron has led
to an increase in violence in Hebron. Israel’s decision to
partially suspend the transfer of tax revenues owed to
the Palestinian Authority, followed by the Palestinian
Authority’s decision to no longer accept any tax
revenues, is likely to have a negative economic and
security impact.
Now more than ever, all parties concerned must
refrain from unilateral acts that are contrary to the
agreements concluded and to international law.
In accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolutions 242 (1967) and
497 (1981), Belgium recalls that the annexation of
territories occupied by force is illegal and that it does
not recognize Israel’s sovereignty over the territories
occupied by that country since June 1967, particularly
the Golan Heights.
19-08508

26/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I would like to conclude my statement by
emphasizing once again that there is no alternative
to the two-State solution, with borders based on the
lines of 4 June 1967 and the city of Jerusalem as the
future capital of the two States, in accordance with the
internationally agreed parameters. The vision must be
an independent, democratic, contiguous, sovereign and
viable Palestinian State, living in peace alongside Israel.
International law and the relevant Council
resolutions must be the basis for any credible
diplomatic initiative to achieve a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace. The Security Council plays a key
role as guarantor of any comprehensive, just and lasting
solution, in line with its previous resolutions and in full
respect for international law.
Belgium will continue to work in that direction in
the Security Council and jointly with our Palestinian
and Israeli friends.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Mr. Mladenov for his detailed briefing this
morning. We would like to welcome the presentation in
written format of the quarterly report (S/2019/251) on
the implementation of Security Council resolution 2334
(2016), which was requested of the Secretary-General
by a considerable number of members of the Security
Council and contributes to greater transparency in
dealing with this delicate topic.
We would like to touch on three specific aspects.
First, we note with concern the escalation of violence
in the past few days and weeks in a highly volatile
atmosphere that results in unpredictable consequences.
Peru emphatically condemns Hamas’s firing of rockets
and incendiary devices, which put the lives of the
Israeli population in jeopardy, cause material damage
and undermine the prospects for a political solution.
We also stress that, in accordance with international
humanitarian law, the legitimacy of Israel’s defence
depends on its compliance with the principles of
proportionality and caution. In that regard, in the
context of the first anniversary of the March of Return,
we call on all stakeholders to adopt the necessary
measures to prevent acts of violence and the loss of life.
We regret that the report once again shows increased
settlement activity, demolitions and expulsions in
occupied Palestinian territory, which are contrary to
international law, seriously undermine the territorial
integrity of the Palestinian State and diminish the
prospects of reaching a two-State solution. The Israeli

S/PV. 8489

authorities should order an immediate cessation of those
activities, in line with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016).
We also deplore the fact that the peace process has
stalled, due in part to the aggressive and confrontational
tone of various public declarations by senior Palestinian
and Israeli leaders and to actions such as the withholding
of legitimate Palestinian Authority funds. Given the
current precarious situation, we believe that the Council
must be clear in urging the parties to exercise restraint,
avoid further escalation and promote the resumption of
formal dialogue with a view to reaching the only viable
solution, that of two States coexisting within secure
and mutually recognized borders.
Finally, with regard to the situation in the Golan
Heights, Peru reaffirms its historical position, which
is that acquiring territory by force is inadmissible,
as outlined in the Charter of the United Nations, the
principles of international law and the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I would first like to express our gratitude to
Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov and his team
for their comprehensive report (S/2019/251) and their
ongoing efforts to achieve a lasting peace in the Middle
East, particularly with regard to the Palestinian question.
Equatorial Guinea would like to begin today by
expressing its concern about the growing disengagement
between Israelis and Palestinians, fuelled by actions and
policies that have fomented hatred between the parties
this year. Since the conflict began, more than half a
century ago, the Security Council, the United Nations
and the international community have spared no effort
to find a viable solution to the issue. It is regrettable that
all the efforts of recent years have failed to encourage
the parties to resume the stalled negotiations. Instead,
we have received only reports of deaths, injuries and
material and infrastructure damage. It is therefore
appropriate that as we seek to improve the situation in
Gaza, we should be vigilant with a view to ensuring
that the West Bank and East Jerusalem do not also end
up in the same unfortunate situation of frequent attacks
and outbreaks of violence that we have been seeing
since the final months of 2018.
Israeli and Palestinian leaders must realize that
the international world is watching them. We see their
actions and policies. Equatorial Guinea has never wanted
the security of the State of Israel to be compromised

19-0850813/24

S/PV.8489

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

for any reason. We continue to hope that the parties
can exercise the utmost restraint and avoid any further
loss of human life. In that regard, we urge the parties to
refrain from taking unilateral decisions that are likely
to promote extremism and inflame this already strained
situation. We also want to point out that more than any
other conflict, the history of this issue has shown us
that violence is not the ideal way to find a solution that
suits the parties and the international community.
With regard to the situation in the Gaza Strip, we
deplore the fact that despite all the efforts devoted to
resolving the crisis that the area is mired in, the lack
of drinking water and the repeated blackouts continue
to infuriate the population, greatly affecting the
region’s economy and its citizens’ living conditions. In
addition, Palestinians’ lack of regular access to fertile
land and fishing in the area also has adverse effects
on their development. However, where the security and
integrated organization of this Palestinian enclave are
concerned, we call on Fatah and Hamas to work on a
definitive agreement so that the Palestinian Authority
can function normally in Gaza, as it is doing in the West
Bank. In that connection, we thank Egypt, which has
the support of the United Nations and has been working
with the parties to that end.
Before concluding, I would like to underline the
importance of the taxes collected by Israel on behalf
of the Palestinian National Authority, which we believe
cover a significant part of the Palestinian budget. If
those funds cannot be used, some public services may
be affected, and we therefore urge the parties to resolve
the issue.
Lastly, Equatorial Guinea believes that a twoState solution that ensures the establishment of an
independent, sovereign and viable Palestinian State
within the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, living side by side in peace and security
with Israel, is the only way to put an end to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict and achieve a broad regional peace.
In that regard, the Security Council, the United Nations
and the international community should intensify their
efforts to put the necessary pressure on the parties to
overcome the obstacles preventing the resumption of
direct negotiations.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. We also
welcome the Secretary-General’s recent written report
14/24

26/03/2019

(S/2019/251) on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2334 (2016).
At the moment the international consensus on
taking forward the Middle East peace process is facing
challenges, and the efforts to facilitate the PalestinianIsraeli peace talks have shown no signs of progress.
China is deeply worried. In the meantime, the conflict
and confrontation in the Gaza Strip are escalating and
the construction of settlements in the West Bank has
continued. The incendiary rhetoric and violent acts
from the parties concerned are more frequent, and the
way the situation is evolving is extremely worrying.
We call on the Israelis and Palestinians to keep in
mind the big picture of the need to ensure the safety and
security of the population in the region and regional
peace and stability, maintain calm and exercise
restraint, move in the same direction, halt military
actions and work to help ease tensions effectively. The
Security Council and other stakeholders with influence
in the Middle East must remain united and work hard
to create the conditions needed for the stabilization of
the Palestinian-Israeli situation and a resumption of
dialogue. China appreciates the efforts that countries
such as Egypt and Russia are making to facilitate
internal Palestinian reconciliation.
The question of Palestine is at the core of the Middle
East issue and bears on the region’s long-term stability
and development. China wants to stress once again that
a two-State solution is the fundamental way to resolve
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. The international
community must build on the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the principle of land for peace and the Arab
Peace Initiative, and must scale up its efforts to facilitate
a resumption of talks so as to achieve a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution to the Palestinian question.
Any new initiative should contribute to the realization
of a two-State solution. Resolution 2334 (2016) should
be implemented effectively. All settlement activities
in the occupied territories should cease immediately,
as should the demolition of Palestinian homes and
the destruction of Palestinian property, and measures
should be taken to prevent violence against civilians.
The final status of Jerusalem is a complex and
sensitive issue that underpins the settlement of the
Palestinian question and has an underlying impact on
regional peace and tranquillity. The recent conflict at
the Al-Aqsa Mosque is worrying. All parties should
act with caution and support the principle of respecting
19-08508

26/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the city’s diverse history, upholding fairness and
justice, implementing the international consensus and
achieving peaceful coexistence. They should work in
accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions
and international consensus to reach a balanced solution
through negotiations, taking the interests of all sides
into account.
The Golan Heights is internationally recognized as
an occupied territory. The Security Council has adopted
several resolutions calling for Israel’s withdrawal
from the area. China opposes any unilateral action to
alter those facts and does not wish to see any further
escalation of regional tensions.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Mladenov for his informative
briefing on the situation in the Middle East and the
occupied Palestinian territories, and on the state of
Palestinian-Israeli relations. The Special Coordinator
makes it very clear that negative trends have the upper
hand today with regard to a settlement in the Middle
East, in which we see a logic based on violence whose
victims are the civilian population. The latest events
confirm the fragility and volatility of the situation.
We firmly condemn the firing of rockets from Gaza
towards Israeli towns, which has killed civilians, and
any kind of terrorism or indiscriminate attacks. We call
on all the parties to refrain from using force or taking
unilateral steps, including illegal settlement activity
and provocative rhetoric.
Today, when the Middle East and North Africa
continue to be troubled by acute conflicts in Syria,
Yemen and Libya, the lack of progress in the resolution
of the central problem of Palestine is deeply alarming.
The current status quo is not viable. We have no right to
put up with this state of affairs. There is an alternative.
It involves ramping up our collective efforts to relaunch
the negotiation process aimed at realizing a two-State
solution based on two States, Palestine and Israel,
coexisting in peace and security, within internationally
recognized borders.
We have a difficult issue on our agenda, that
of reviving the channels for dialogue. We urge the
Palestinians and Israelis to focus on a negotiating
track based on a generally recognized international
legal framework that includes the relevant Security
Council resolutions, the Madrid principles, including
the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the road map of the Middle East Quartet of

S/PV. 8489

international mediators. The Quartet’s 2016 report is
still relevant, with its clear outline of the steps needed
to overcome the negative trends that are obstructing a
Middle East settlement. Any viable plans to achieve a
comprehensive solution in the Middle East must start
from those multilateral decisions and take into account
the opinion of the Arab world as reflected in the Arab
Peace Initiative, adopted at the Arab League summit in
2002. That is a precondition for any peace process to
have effective results.
Russia will continue to take steps to restore
positive momentum and a positive agenda to the
Palestinian-Israeli question. Our proposal for holding
a summit in Russia between the leaders of Palestine
and Israel remains on the table. We believe that
regional players, particularly Egypt and Jordan, have
an important role to play. In our view, the most recent
intra-Palestinian meeting in Moscow in February
represented a contribution to the efforts to overcome
the schism in the Palestinian ranks. We emphasize once
again that international and regional steps to achieve
an intra-Palestinian reconciliation will have effect
only if they are undertaken in coordination with the
legitimate Administration of the State of Palestine led
by President Abbas.
We believe that it is essential to ensure that the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) can function fully.
It is a critical mechanism for reducing the burdens on
the Palestinian refugees in the Middle East who have
been forced to leave their homes because of war and
conflicts. For its part, Russia will continue to help
Palestinians both through its contributions to UNRWA’s
budget and bilaterally. We believe the Agency should
continue to be an important and effective mechanism
for helping Palestinian refugees until a lasting solution
to the refugee problem is found. We see no other way of
alleviating the situation of the refugees themselves or
of the countries hosting them.
History has shown that only a negotiated settlement
can guarantee that any resulting agreement will
last, which is why all our efforts must be focused
on relaunching a political dialogue between the
Palestinians and Israelis. In the framework of that
dialogue, we will have to work to resolve the complex
final-status issues that include the status of Jerusalem,
refugees and borders, as well as fundamental aspects
of security. The principle of multilateralism, mutually
respectful dialogue based on compromise and the quest

19-0850815/24

S/PV.8489

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

for negotiated solutions must define the paradigm for
solving the problems in relations between Israel and the
Arab world.
Unilateral steps, such as the recognition of Israeli
sovereignty over the Golan Heights, do not change the
status of those territories, which is determined by the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. The status
of those territories is the subject of direct dialogue
between Syria and Israel, which was under way
until very recently. Such an approach is determined
and clearly set out by Secretary-General and the
overwhelming majority of States, and fully corresponds
to the resolutions that have been adopted by consensus
in this very Chamber.
There is no doubt that no one party alone will be
able to solve the complex of problems in the Middle
East. Individual efforts need to be pooled; only a
broad and inclusive international coalition will be
able to overcome the threat of terrorism. Only active
international cooperation, based on common rules, will
allow us to resolve the many regional conflicts we face,
including that between Palestine and Israel. We call on
everyone to engage in that interaction and cooperation.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I must say that our
discussions with Nikolay Mladenov and the briefings
he presents belong to the most depressing exercises
undertaken by the Security Council.
As our South African colleague reminded us, this
organ was created for the maintenance of international
peace and security. We have international law as an
instrument for maintaining peace and security, and the
United Nations has created the instrument of Security
Council resolutions, which are binding law, for the
same purpose. What we have heard today in Nikolay
Mladenov’s briefing and around the table has been all
about the violation of international law and resolution
2234 (2016). We have heard nothing about steps that
have been taken to actually implement that resolution.
Today, just a few days before the Israeli elections,
a new element has been added. We have heard our
American colleague tell us that the United States is now
violating resolution 497 (1981) by recognizing Israeli
sovereignty over the Golan Heights. That comes a year
and a half after a violation of resolution 478 (1980), on
Jerusalem and the establishment of embassies there.
In a few minutes, we will hear our Israeli and
Palestinian friends deliver statements that will be full
16/24

26/03/2019

of accusations against one another and how each is
violating international law. I would ask them to do as
I have done by putting their speeches aside and telling
us how they are implementing resolution 2234 (2016).
What is the Israeli Government doing to implement that
resolution? How is it stopping the settlements? What
is it doing to agree with Jordan on how to ensure calm
on the Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount? I would
ask our Palestinian colleague to focus his statement on
how his Government will end the constant incitements
and provocations, the inflammatory rhetoric and, in
particular, the missile attacks on Israel. Germany
strongly condemns the latest incident, in which
innocent Israeli citizens have fallen victim to rockets
fired from Gaza.
Again, we appeal for respect for international
law, but not as a goal in and of itself. We believe that
international law is the best way to protect civilians and
allow them to live in peace and security and without
fear of Israeli bulldozers or Hamas rockets.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Like our German
colleague, I shall try to be brief because I think that
there have been a lot of common themes across the
Council today. While I share people’s dismay that so
many of these issues come back to us repeatedly, I think
that if there is any unity in the Council, it has been on
the condemnation of violence from both sides and the
need for both to make progress.
Mr. Mladenov asked us to be very clear about
the condemnation of the recent rocket attacks. Dual
British-Israeli citizens were injured in the latest rocket
attacks, so we have no hesitation in joining him and
others in condemning unreservedly what has happened
and such acts of terrorism and violence wherever they
occur. I note that there was another attack near the
Ariel settlement on 17 March.
Along with others, we support the Egyptian and
United Nations efforts to broker a ceasefire and restore
the situation to calm. Violence not only creates fear and
a cycle of violence among the Israeli and Palestinian
populations; it also undermines the humanitarian
situation in Gaza. We have been concerned by the
number of Palestinian deaths in the West Bank over the
past few weeks.
A number of colleagues mentioned the heightened
tensions at Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount. We
urge all parties to work together to restore calm and to
19-08508

26/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

support the status quo under the custodianship of the
King of Jordan.
The protests at the Gaza perimeter fence continue,
and we remain concerned about the volume of live fire
that has been used and is resulting in horrific injuries
and in fatalities. That is not to take away one iota from
Israel’s right to self-defence and it is not to undermine
or gainsay the fact that Hamas operatives cynically
exploit these protests, but it is worth repeating that this
perpetual cycle of violence serves no one’s interests.
As the German ambassador said, the emphasis ought to
be on what can be done to implement resolution 2334
(2016) and reduce the violence that we see every day in
the territories and in Israel.
I just want to join others who referred to the March
of Return. That anniversary will be with us shortly.
We urge all parties to demonstrate restraint and avoid
future violence. We continue to support the need for
an independent and transparent investigation into last
year’s events in Gaza, and we welcome the recent
decision by the Israeli Military Advocate General
to order five criminal investigations relating to 11
separate instances of Palestinian fatalities during the
Gaza protests.
It is customary to turn to the issue of settlements.
Our views on settlements remain well known. Suffice
it to say that we share the Secretary-General’s views on
the expansion of Israeli settlements in the occupied West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. We also remain gravely
concerned by the threat of evictions of Palestinians
from their homes in East Jerusalem and across the
West Bank. My Foreign Secretary wrote to the Israeli
Government to condemn the planned demolition of the
Palestinian village of Khan Al-Ahmar and we continue
to press Israel to abandon these plans entirely.
A number of Council members have referred to
the issue of the Golan Heights. The United Kingdom
views the Golan Heights as territory occupied by
Israel. Annexation of territory by force is prohibited
under international law, and that includes the Charter
of the United Nations. The United Kingdom does not
recognize Israel’s annexation in 1981 and we have no
plans to change that position.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.

S/PV. 8489

At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Nikolay
Mladenov for his briefing, which complements the very
comprehensive written report (S/2019/251) submitted
a few days ago by the Secretary-General. I take this
opportunity to welcome the circulation of that report
in response to a request by France and the majority of
the members of the Security Council. It is an important
step towards the submission of at least two reports per
year, which we have requested. We thank the SecretaryGeneral, the Secretariat and Mr. Mladenov. It is our
responsibility and the responsibility of the parties, as
we have just been reminded by my German colleague,
to oversee the implementation of resolution 2324
(2016). It is equally our joint responsibility to make
progress and find points of agreement with a view to
stepping outside our automatic pilot mode with regard
to this question.
I turn first to the situation on the ground, which
is extremely worrisome. Once again, in recent days
the Gaza Strip has found itself on the brink of a new
conflict, as it has experienced three times in the past
decade. The firing of a rocket into the central region of
Israel, which killed several people, including children,
less than two weeks after shots were fired in Tel Aviv, is
something that has not been seen since the 2014 conflict.
We condemned that launch in the strongest possible
terms and we reiterate our unwavering commitment to
Israel’s security. These launches represent a dangerous
escalation, which could quickly spiral out of control.
The return to a ceasefire, thanks to the efforts of Egypt,
which should once again be welcomed, must not blind
us to the frequency of those incidents of escalation over
the past several months. Everyone knows that, in the
absence of a fundamental change in the situation in the
Gaza Strip, a new conflict is inevitable.
The situation in Gaza is now characterized by a
multidimensional crisis. On the humanitarian level,
the situation in the Gaza Strip is disastrous and fuels
despair among the population. The efforts of the
Special Coordinator and all United Nations agencies,
including the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, have enabled
an emergency humanitarian response that must be
resolutely sustained, but a long-term response is
still needed.
The despair generates a wave of protest, which
Hamas and other armed groups are trying to exploit
and which has as its source the plight of the people
of Gaza. Those protests led to a disproportionate

19-0850817/24

S/PV.8489

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and indiscriminate use of force, which has led to the
deaths of nearly 200 protesters and the injuring of
6,000 people, including a large number of people who
should have enjoyed protected status — including
children, medical personnel and journalists — and
which we have condemned. Israel must respect the
right of Palestinians to protest peacefully. We call on
everyone to exercise maximum restraint in the run-up
to the commemoration of 30 March, which could lead
to large-scale rallies.
At the political level, the inter-Palestinian
division aggravates the situation of the people of
Gaza and weakens the national aspirations of the
Palestinians. There is an urgent need to relaunch the
inter-Palestinian reconciliation process. Everyone must
commit themselves to the Egyptian efforts, and we
call on Mr. Mohamed Shtayyeh, whose appointment as
Prime Minister I welcome, to make Palestinian unity,
the return of legitimate Palestinian authorities to Gaza
and the democratic strengthening of the Palestinian
Authority the priorities of his future Government.
Furthermore, France also reaffirms that the Gaza Strip
must be an integral part of the State of Palestine.
There can be no solution to the humanitarian
crisis in the Gaza Strip in the long term without lifting
the Israeli blockade, in accordance with Palestinian
aspirations to live in dignity and in line with Israel’s
security concerns. In the immediate term, the measures
taken by Israel following the most recent rocket
attacks — from the closure of crossing points to the
limiting of fishing zones — must be lifted.
Secondly, developments in the settlement policy
in the West Bank, which are described in detail in the
Secretary-General’s report, are of particular concern
and are leading to the automatic erosion of the two-State
solution on the ground. During the three-month period
covered by the report, 2,500 housing units advanced
in the approval process and 650 units were opened
to tender. At the same time, the policy of legalizing
so-called wildcat settlements, which are illegal even
under Israeli law, has continued, as has the practice of
demolishing Palestinian structures and expropriating
and forcibly relocating their inhabitants. The latter trend
is particularly alarming in East Jerusalem, in particular
in the Old City and its surrounding neighbourhoods,
such as Sheykh Jarrah.
With more than 600,000 settlers, including 200,000
in Jerusalem, we are close to the point of no return. The
18/24

26/03/2019

fragmented territorial unit that is taking shape before
our eyes has already meant that two peoples must
coexist in an unequal manner on the same territory. If
the process continues unchecked, the Palestinians will
be forced to abandon their national aspirations, which
are first and foremost the establishment of a State;
and, for Israelis, the renunciation of the democratic
nature of the State of Israel. Settlement, which is illegal
under international law, is also dangerous because of
the tensions it raises on the ground. That is reflected
in the increase in acts of violence over the reporting
period, as noted in the report, in particular in Hebron.
A total of 71 settler attacks against Palestinians and 46
Palestinian attacks against settlers were carried out.
We know that the destinies of the Israelis and
the Palestinians are intertwined: neither of the two
peoples will achieve their aspirations over the long
term at the expense of the other. France, which is a
friend of both Israelis and Palestinians, has only one
objective: the implementation, through negotiation,
of the two-State solution, on the basis of parameters
agreed by the international community. In that respect,
the findings set out in the Secretary-General’s report
are particularly worrisome: the trajectory is negative
and the irreversible trend jeopardizes the two-State
solution, which are far from being offset by the few
positive developments that occurred during the past
quarter. France especially regrets the decision of the
Israeli authorities, noted in the report, to freeze a part
of the tax revenues they are required to pay to the
Palestinian Authority under the Paris Protocol, at a time
when the Palestinian Authority’s financial situation is
already very precarious. We call on all parties to fully
respect their obligations under the Oslo Accords, in
particular those under the Paris Protocol. In today’s
context, everyone must refrain from any measure that
could make it even more difficult to resume dialogue.
At a time when a peace plan has been announced for
the next few weeks by our American partners, we would
like to kindly recall that any attempt to deviate from
the parameters agreed by the international community
would be doomed to failure. Those parameters are not
optional or a menu from which one can pick and choose
at will; rather they are a package that forms the bedrock
of any peace plan and any future negotiations.
Twenty-five years after Oslo, there might be a
temptation to break away from the agreed framework
based on international law and Security Council
resolutions and pursue unilateral decisions. However,
19-08508

26/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I think we are all aware of the dangers posed by the
temptation to pursue a unilateral path. A unilateral
approach would widen the divisions that must be
decreased and exacerbate the resentment that must be
overcome, and therefore cannot lead to peace in the
region. Beyond the Middle East, such an approach
would undermine the international rules-based order.
That is the message that France reiterated, together
with several Arab and European partners, at the
Dublin meeting in February. The same logic applies
to the establishment of embassies in Jerusalem, which
challenges the status quo of the city, which is guaranteed
by several Security Council resolutions, namely, 476
(1980) and 478 (1980). And let us make no mistake,
that also goes for the issue of the Golan Heights — a
territory that has been occupied by Israel since 1967
and is defined as such by the Council since the adoption
of resolution 242 (1967). The acquisition of territory by
force is illegal under the Charter of the United Nations.
France does not recognize the Israeli annexation of the
Golan in 1981. It is considered null and void by several
Security Council resolutions, including resolution
497 (1981). The recognition of Israel’s sovereignty
over the Golan is contrary to international law, in
particular the obligation States have to not recognize
an illegal situation.
It is the responsibility of the Council to ensure
that those fundamental principles, which condition
international peace and security, are respected. That
is why silence by the Council on this subject is ever
more deafening and incomprehensible. For France it is
entirely unacceptable, which is why we will continue to
spare no effort in that regard.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Permanent Observer of the
Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I thank the French and
German presidencies of the Security Council for their
response to the calls for the Council to urgently address
the dangerous situation unfolding in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. I would
also like to thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing, and the
Secretary-General for his written report (S/2019/251),
which has been circulated, on the implementation of
resolution 2234 (2016).

S/PV. 8489

Before I proceed to read out my written statement,
let me say that I would be extremely happy to not
deliver a statement and instead engage in a discussion,
as my friend the Ambassador of Germany stated. But
I am only a representative of Palestine — although I
support the implementation of all the resolutions of the
Security Council and international law, beginning with
resolution 2334 (2016) — if a way can be found. He is a
member of the Security Council and the representative
of mighty Germany. I listened very carefully to the
presentation delivered by my good friend the President,
the representative of France, and I completely agree
with him. However, if the Security Council comes to
me to tell me that it does not have the political will to
implement its resolutions, does it think that if I come
here and selectively respond to certain questions asked
by some of those present that this is the solution the
predicament that we face?
I tell the Council, those here in the Chamber
and all those watching us from every corner of the
globe, that I am committed. I would be happy if the
resolutions were implemented, and I would not deliver
a statement. Can the Security Council get a similar
commitment from the other side of the table, which is
the one refusing to implement those resolutions? There
is another member in the Chamber that is powerful
and protecting the occupying Power from honouring
and respecting the Council’s resolutions. If that is the
predicament we face, including the lack of agreement
within the Council to send the Council to see with its
own eyes the tragic reality of the Palestinian people
under occupation — it cannot even reach that basic
agreement to go visit — then the solution would be for
me to respond to some questions.
I beg the Council to find a way to implement its
resolutions, beginning with resolution 2334 (2016),
and I promise that I will not deliver a single statement,
if the Council finds the political will and methods to
bring to account those who are violating the provisions
of resolution 2334 (2016). The Council will not see me
making statements or objecting to its ruling in that
regard, that is, on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016).
I was not planning to respond, but then I was
asked to; however, I have a statement that I need to
continue reading because I have to address the issue
at hand until the Council collectively finds a method
of implementing its resolutions as they relate to us.
There is no other option for now but to listen to more

19-0850819/24

S/PV.8489

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

statements. Members of the Council might think that
my statement is accusing the other side — they can
think that way — but I have to defend my people, who
live a life of misery under occupation, whether in the
Gaza Strip, the occupied West Bank or occupied East
Jerusalem. It is my duty to defend my people, who live
that miserable life.
History does not begin with the firing of a rocket or
doing something wrong. The history is well-known to
all those present, and it is the tragedy of the Palestinian
people, who live under occupation. That tragedy has
to end, on the basis of ending the occupation and
upholding the independence of the State of Palestine.
As articulated by my good friend the Ambassador of
France, the parameters must be respected, which is why
I always look to all those present, for they are defenders
of those parameters — the global consensus on how to
solve the problem.
Many of those here often say that we all know
what the solution is, and it is very simple. That solution
consists of ending the occupation and upholding the
independence of the State of Palestine with a view
to reaching a two-State solution, living side by side,
and a just solution to the refugee question, which we
all know is a simple solution and acceptable to us and
the Council. But there are forces, which the Council
knows well, that are refusing that solution and acting
every day to prevent it, even though it is a solution
that emanates from the global consensus. I also took
serious note of the position that the Ambassador of
France, the President of the Council, reiterated, which
is shared throughout the Council, that any solution or
formula that is put on the table that does not take into
account the global consensus of what is known as the
parameters has no chance of resolving the conflict.
May I now proceed to read out the rest of
my statement?
Week after week, in official communications, we
have alerted the Security Council to the escalation
of Israeli violations against the Palestinian people,
who remain captive under Israel’s medieval military
occupation and blockade. We have urged the Council to
heed the early warnings and act to halt the deterioration
of an already tense and volatile situation, which all have
deemed not only unsustainable but explosive. Time
after time, we have called on the Council to uphold its
duties under the Charter of the United Nations in order
to avert the outbreak of another deadly cycle of violence
20/24

26/03/2019

and to protect innocent civilian lives. We have appealed
to the Council to implement its own resolutions with
a view to ensuring accountability and salvaging the
prospects for peace.
Yet all that has been to no avail. The Council has
been silenced by the obstruction of a permanent member,
which has, in turn, emboldened Israel, the occupying
Power, to persist with total impunity in its systematic
acts of violent aggression, incitement, provocation and
collective punishment of the Palestinian people and
rabid colonization and de facto annexation of our land.
And so today we again find ourselves at the edge
of the precipice, fearing for the lives of our people as
Israeli officials ratchet up their threats of war against
the besieged Gaza Strip. Once again, the Israeli
occupying forces have taken to the skies to drop bombs
and missiles on our defenceless civilian population,
terrorizing and traumatizing them in a blatant act of
aggression and collective punishment in grave breach
of international law. While perhaps the cyclical wars
on Gaza have come to be seen by some as the norm,
there is nothing normal about imprisoning, isolating
and terrorizing 2 million people — more than half
of them children and young people — for more than
a decade. There is nothing normal about a people
being repeatedly trapped and slaughtered, including
children who pose absolutely no threat to life, just
like the families sheltering in their homes fearing the
next nightmare of Israeli attacks. There is nothing
normal about the targeting and injuring of more than
29,000 civilians — peaceful demonstrators — with live
ammunition and other deadly weaponry by one of the
most powerful armies in the world.
As we approach the one-year anniversary of the
Great March of Return, with deep worry about such
continued savagery by the Israeli occupying forces,
the Security Council cannot ignore the findings of the
independent, international commission of inquiry of the
Human Rights Council, which, with the exception of
one incident on 14 May 2018 and another on 12 October
2018, found reasonable grounds to believe that in all
other cases the use of live ammunition by the Israeli
forces against demonstrators was unlawful and that
demonstrators were shot in violation of their right to
life or of the principle of distinction under international
humanitarian law. Nothing under international
law — whether international humanitarian law or
international human rights law — can ever justify the
dehumanization, desperation and devastation imposed
19-08508

26/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

upon our people — even the need for security, which is
neither mutually exclusive nor zero-sum. Implications
that the security of one must be achieved at the expense
of the humanity and welfare of the other are as offensive
as they are illegitimate. The law is more than clear. It is
not the occupied people that must ensure the safety of
the occupier, but the other way around. No rhetoric or
propaganda can change that reality.
What we are witnessing at this moment did not
begin yesterday; it is part of the long-running campaign
of violence and terror waged against our people by
Israel, the occupying Power, and its military forces
and extremist settlers. What we are witnessing is
pretext after pretext exploited by warmongering Israeli
officials — once again in the context of an election
campaign — to harm, kill, injure and maim defenceless
Palestinians in order to prove their might and bravado
and gain a few votes. Just listen to the words of
Israeli Government and military leaders themselves
as they boast of their intentions to annihilate, punish
and devastate Gaza, threaten to bomb the Palestinian
people back to the stone age and continue in vying
with one another to spill more Palestinian blood. Yet
that is met with silence. But one can just imagine
the condemnation, shaming and calls for action were
such threats and inflammatory rhetoric uttered by
anyone else.
We must once again put on record — contrary to
the blatant distortion and deception by Israel — the
fact that the Palestinian leadership has repeatedly and
unequivocally condemned acts of violence against
civilians, including acts of terror. We reject any
libellous claims otherwise. We have condemned rocket
fire against civilian areas. That cannot be denied. We
have stood firmly against terror and have committed
to respect international law in that regard without
exception, including the Council’s demand in resolution
2334 (2016) for the cessation of all acts of violence
against civilians, including all acts of terror, as well
as provocation, incitement and inflammatory rhetoric.
That commitment and our long-standing commitment
to non-violence and the pursuit of peaceful, political
and legal means for the realization of our people’s rights
and a just peace have been demonstrated over and over
again — also, regrettably, to no avail. Moreover, that
makes all the more repugnant Israel’s attempts to paint
the leadership and entire people with the broad brush of
terrorism and its vicious claims concerning the social
assistance to the families of Palestinian prisoners and

S/PV. 8489

martyrs who have suffered much under the unjust and
absolutely illegal occupation.
Palestinian families — defenceless children, women
and men — are bracing themselves for the prospect of yet
another barbaric military aggression by Israel against
Gaza, where the population has yet to recover from the
lasting impact of the destruction and human loss caused
by past Israeli wars, and coping capacities have been
depleted by the collective punishment of the illegal
Israeli blockade and the humanitarian catastrophe
that it has deliberately inflicted on them. The Security
Council must make its voice heard and act to deter
further violence and the escalation of this dangerous
situation. The Council is duty-bound to maintain
international peace and security and must not turn a
blind eye to Israel’s violations and acts of aggression. It
must demand the occupying Power to respect its legal
obligations without exception, including to ensure the
safety and welfare of the civilian population under its
occupation pursuant to the fourth Geneva Convention
and ensure accountability in the case of continued
breaches. This is matter of urgency to avert another
onslaught and save innocent civilian lives.
We urge that the warnings be heeded and call for
serious action to prevent further brutality from raining
down on our people. We recognize and pay tribute to
Egypt and its efforts to secure a ceasefire. We also
recognize the efforts of the Secretary-General and
Special Coordinator Mladenov in seeking de-escalation
and the protection of civilian lives. We recognize, as
well, the vital humanitarian assistance that continues
to be provided by United Nations agencies on the
ground — even during these turbulent times, with the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in the lead constituting
a vital lifeline for the most vulnerable among our
people — our refugees. At the same time, we must
call on the Security Council, which today received
the ninth report (S/2019/251) of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) — in
writing, which we welcome — to remain vigilant in also
demanding an end to all other illegal Israeli policies
and practices in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. Israel cannot be absolved,
under any pretext, of its obligations to completely and
immediately halt its settlement activities, which are
destroying the contiguity of the State of Palestine and
the viability of the two-State solution within the 1967
borders, in grave breach of international law and in

19-0850821/24

S/PV.8489

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

flagrant contempt of the Council. Furthermore, those
who are complicit in those crimes must not be spared
censure or accountability, including with regard to
attempts at the annexation of Jerusalem and the Syrian
Golan, in blatant violation of the prohibition on the
acquisition of territory by force, the relevant Security
Council resolutions and the rules-based order.
The Security Council must also demand that Israel,
the occupying Power, cease immediately all acts of
provocation and incitement, including by its extremist
settlers, and all military incursions, including attacks
on worshippers and the sanctity and historic status
quo of holy sites in occupied East Jerusalem, including
Al-Haram Al-Sharif. Such reckless and unlawful
actions could lead to the outbreak of a religious conflict
with a far-reaching and disastrous impact.
Today we once again appeal to the Council to uphold
its responsibility to put an end to this illegal occupation
and historical injustice against the Palestinian people.
We urge the Council to act before it is too late, based
on the principles and parameters long enshrined in
the relevant United Nations resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2016). We urge it to protect the
innocent lives endangered by this man-made disaster
and, beyond that, to seek solutions and to stop managing
crisis after crisis, tragedy after tragedy, generation
after generation, instead of resolving the conflict. The
lives of our people and their future depend on this; the
prospects for a just solution depend on this; and peace
and security in the Middle East depend on this.
I conclude by offering my apologies to my good
friend the Ambassador of Germany.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): I wish to say to my colleague
from Germany that I agree with him that it is about time
that we leave statements aside and speak directly. It is
really easy to speak about both sides showing restraint;
but rockets are flying into our cities. The last rocket that
landed in Israel landed in in my community in Israel,
where I live, 100 feet from my house and from where
I am raising my children. So it is comfortable to come
and speak about ideas and implementation, but once
rockets start flying into our cities, we will defend our
people. That is the first thing we will do, and then we
will talk. We will continue to have a dialogue. But the
first thing we are committed to doing is to defend our
people and to defend our children, who last night had
22/24

26/03/2019

to sleep in shelters because of the rockets coming from
Gaza. We are determined to do whatever is necessary to
protect our people, even if it means burying the leaders
of Hamas in the tunnels of Gaza.
I want to challenge my colleague from Germany.
Next month, Germany will preside over the Security
Council, so perhaps we should have a closed meeting,
without cameras. He could call on both sides. We can
leave our statements at our Missions and come here and
talk. We are here to talk. We will continue to defend our
people, but at the same time, we are here to talk.
On Monday, 25 March, at 5 a.m., Hamas fired a
long-range rocket from Gaza into Israel. The rocket
travelled more than 120 kilometres past Tel Aviv
and landed directly on a private home in the farming
community of Mishmeret. The home was completely
destroyed. Neighbouring houses and cars sustained
damage, and seven civilians, including a grandmother,
a baby — her grandchild — and two other children
were injured. This was an act of terror for which the
Hamas terrorist organization is responsible. Hamas
terrorists manufactured this long-range rocket, filling
it with steel bullets and metal fragments in order to
maximize the damage. They fired it from the centre
of a Palestinian civilian area in Rafa and sent it into a
civilian area populated by families in Israel. On either
side, and from start to finish, Hamas deliberately placed
innocent people in the line of fire, making it guilty of a
double war crime.
Throughout the day, Hamas continued to fire
more than 130 rockets into Israel. In response to these
sustained terrorist attacks, Israel took swift action,
targeting Hamas military infrastructure in Gaza.
Israel will continue to act forcefully so long as these
attacks continue.
For 12 years, since 2007, Hamas has fired more
than 12,000 rockets and mortars into Israel; that is
1,000 rockets and mortars per year, launched from
civilian areas into civilian areas. Hamas’s stated goal
in firing rockets and mortars into Israel is to destroy
my country, but its other goal is to distract the attention
of the world, and our attention, from its oppressive rule
of Gaza. Over the past week, Hamas arrested, beat up
and shot at Palestinian protesters demonstrating against
the terrorist regime. People did not see it on CNN or the
BBC, people did not hear about it; but they were killing
people on the streets of Gaza.
19-08508

26/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We heard nothing from the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East. We heard nothing from the so-called Human
Rights Council, which did not even mention Hamas
in its recent report of the independent international
commission of inquiry on the protests in the occupied
Palestinian territory, under agenda item 7. Instead, it
blamed Israel for all of the ills in Gaza. These bodies
simply reaffirmed what has always been true: for the
United Nations, all people deserve human rights, except
for the people of Israel. And it is the Palestinian people
in Gaza who are paying a heavy price for the crimes
of their leadership. Ask the Palestinian representative
what he really thinks about the Hamas regime in Gaza,
about the way it handles the Palestinian people in Gaza.
We have entered a new reality. Hamas has gained
the ability to launch long-range rockets deep into Israel,
past Tel Aviv and into Mishmeret. For me, the terror
attack on Mishmeret, where the most recent rocket
landed, was too close to home, because Mishmeret
is my place of residence. It is where my family lives
and where I am raising my children. I know the family
whose home was hit; my house is only a few hundred
feet away. Imagine if a rocket was fired at your home.
Think about it targeting your kids. Now imagine that
the terrorists who launched the attack said it was an
accident, as Hamas did; you would never accept that.
You would not think twice about taking action. Just
think about a rocket in Paris, in Lima, in Berlin, in
any capital. If a rocket landed tomorrow morning and
someone said, no, it was an accident, you would put
your people first, and you would likely have the support
of this body behind you.
So let me be very clear. Monday’s events were no
accident. Hamas committed a heinous crime against
Israel, a deliberate and direct act of terror against our
people, just like every one of the 12,000 attacks before
it. We will not hesitate to take action.

S/PV. 8489

the moral high ground by telling Israel to exercise
maximum restraint. They will try to rationalize the
attack with the argument of “both sides”. I do not see
both sides. I see a terror organization and I see a country
that is defending its people. Make no mistake. We will
not accept a reality in which our children become the
targets of Hamas. We are determined to protect our
people. If the terror attacks continue, the leaders of
Hamas will feel the might of the Israeli Defence Forces.
They will be buried in the tunnels of Gaza.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of Germany has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Very briefly, I would
like to thank both the Palestinian and the Israeli
representatives for partially responding to my request
to put aside their speaking notes, but I regret the fact
that neither of them responded to the questions that I
put. Can the representative of Palestine not say how the
Palestinian Government plans to stop the incitement,
provocations and inflammatory rhetoric? What is it
doing to stop rockets falling on the Israelis. I did not
hear once from our Israeli colleague how Israel wants to
implement to resolution 2334 (2016) with regard to the
settlements or what Israel plans to do so that the crisis
that we read about Al-Haram Al-Sharif is stopped and
it negotiates with the Jordanians. Both representatives
said basically the same. The Israeli representative said,
as I understand, that as long as the children in his city
or village where he grew up cannot sleep in peace and
be safe from Palestinian Hamas rockets, he cannot
respond to the issue of implementing resolution 2334
(2016). The Palestinian representative said the same
thing: as long as Palestinian children cannot be sure
that the next morning when they wake up there will not
be bulldozers in front of their house to tear it down, he
must read out his statement.

Israel’s expectations of the international community
are twofold. The Security Council should issue a clear
condemnation of Hamas and its prompt designation
as a terrorist organization. The United Nations must
condemn Hamas and its terrorism against Israel
unequivocally, and the Security Council must designate
Hamas as a terrorist organization.

We therefore did not make progress on substance,
but I wanted to take up the proposal of the Israeli
representative. In view of the German part of the joint
German-French presidencies, I am very happy to pick
up with my colleagues his idea of having an informal
meeting of Security Council members with the Israeli
and Palestinian representatives behind closed doors so
that we can perhaps prolong the debate.

Twelve thousand rockets and mortars should be
enough evidence to warrant such a designation. Some
countries will, as we heard over the past hour, claim

The President (spoke in French): The Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine has
requested the floor.

19-0850823/24

S/PV.8489

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I apologize for taking
the floor again but with regard to incitement, which we
believe comes from the other side, if members think
that it comes from our side, we accept the following
proposals, namely, first, to form a commission from
members of the Security Council to observe our
behaviour and that of the other side. Whatever the
Council decides in advance, I say that we will accept.
Observe our conduct. Do not trust what we say or
what they say. The Council is a third party. Let the
Security Council establish a commission and review
our educational books. Or if it does not want to, offer
us UNESCO to do the same thing so that we can get to
the bottom of the so-called provocation and incitement.
I do not claim that we are a group of angels. We are
not. We are human beings. But in order to resolve
this puzzle, let us have a credible third party to come
and evaluate our conduct and our curriculum and the
conduct and the curriculum of the other side. So that is
to deal with the first question that the representative of
Germany raised.
Secondly, with regard to the rockets, we welcome
a commission, to be established by the Council, since
the Security Council is responsible for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Let it be stationed
on the Gaza side or on the Israeli side, in Al-Khalil or
in East Jerusalem, and observe our conduct and their
conduct. It should try to be an element for deterrence
so that no one conducts their behaviour in violation
of international law. It cannot be that the Council just
keeps talking to us. It can see the problem. It should
assume its responsibility and act. Who is going to stop
the Council from observing the situation? Members say
that they want to have a special commission or a special
body that the Council forms to see who is violating
international law, including all the kinds of behaviour
that members mentioned, such as rockets.
Those are ideas. I hope that my colleagues in the
Security Council will consider them seriously so that
we do not continue with the eternal cycle of the Council
asking us to do something and thinking that we are not
doing it and it asking the other side to do something
and it is not doing it. Step up to the plate. The Council
is an objective party. Whatever decision it takes should
be the most objective decision because the Council
is responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Security Council members are
also supposed to be defenders of international law. I

24/24

26/03/2019

say here on behalf of the Palestinian people and their
leadership, we accept any such proposal. If the Council
is strong enough and powerful enough, it should see
if the other side would accept such proposals. By the
way, I accept having a discussion without statements,
but I do not want it to be behind closed doors. I want
the whole world to see the conduct of us all. It must be
televised in all corners of the globe. If the idea is not
to read statements, I accept it. If the idea is to have a
very frank discussion in the Security Council, I accept
it but let it be aired to all corners of the globe. Let the
whole world see who is trying to work with the Council
to open doors for peace and who is obstructionist and
trying to block doors for peace.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of Israel has asked for the floor to make
a further statement.
Mr. Danon (Israel): Unfortunately, the Council
can see what we are dealing with. It can have another
commission, another resolution and another empty
debate. In the end, in order to have a sustainable
negotiation, both sides need to speak directly, and
we deal with Egypt. Today, we celebrate the peace
agreement that we signed with Egypt 40 years ago. But
we found a real partner. When Sadat came to Jerusalem,
he said that he recognized Israel and that he was sitting
with us and negotiating with us. We can have another
committee. We are not against a commission to check
the incitement. We know the facts. They showed the
Council the books. The Security Council can check
the budget of the Palestinian Authority (PA). Seven per
cent goes to pay the families of terrorists. It should not
deny it. Mr. Mladenov is here. He can come and give a
report about the textbooks in Israel and in the PA, about
payments — it is paying the salaries of terrorists. We
are not against a commission but eventually, in order
to move forward, it is necessary to have a real direct
negotiation. That is the only way to move forward.
The President (spoke in French): I would
like to see a positive element in these limited but
non-scripted exchanges.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers no request for the floor. I now invite Council
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

19-08508
