UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1999/34
30 November 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 4073rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 30 November 1999 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "Role of the
Security Council in the prevention of armed conflicts", the President of the
Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered, within its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, its
role in the prevention of armed conflicts. The Council emphasizes the need
fully to respect and implement the principles and provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations and norms of international law, in particular in this
context those related to prevention of armed conflicts and settlement of
disputes by peaceful means. It affirms its commitment to the principles of
the political independence, sovereign equality and territorial integrity of
all States. The Council also affirms the need for respect for human rights
and the rule of law. It will give special attention to the humanitarian
consequences of armed conflicts. The Council recognizes the importance of
building a culture of prevention of armed conflicts and the need for a
contribution from all principal organs of the United Nations in that
regard.
"The Security Council stresses the importance of a coordinated
international response to economic, social, cultural or humanitarian
problems, which are often the root causes of armed conflicts. Recognizing
the need for the development of effective long-term strategies, it
emphasizes the need for all United Nations organs and agencies to pursue
preventive strategies and to take action within their respective areas of
competence to assist Member States to eradicate poverty, strengthen
development cooperation and assistance and promote respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms.
"The Security Council recognizes that early warning, preventive
diplomacy, preventive deployment, preventive disarmament and post-conflict
peace-building are interdependent and complementary components of a
comprehensive conflict prevention strategy. The Council emphasizes its
continuing commitment to addressing the prevention of armed conflicts in
all regions of the world.

99-36774 (E)

301199

/...

S/PRST/1999/34
English
Page 2

"The Security Council is aware of the importance of its early
consideration of situations which might deteriorate into armed conflicts.
In this context it underlines the importance of the settlement of disputes
by peaceful means, in accordance with Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations. The Council recalls that parties to any dispute, the
continuance of which is likely to endanger the maintenance of international
peace and security, have an obligation to seek peaceful means of
settlement.
"The Security Council reaffirms its responsibility under the Charter
of the United Nations to take action on its own initiatives in order to
maintain international peace and security. The results of the Council’s
mission to Jakarta and Dili from 6 to 12 September 1999 demonstrate that
such missions undertaken with the consent of the host country and with
clear goals can be useful if dispatched in a timely and appropriate manner.
The Council expresses intention to support, with appropriate follow-up
action, efforts to prevent conflict by the Secretary-General through such
areas as fact-finding missions, good offices and other activities requiring
action by his envoys and Special Representatives.
"The Security Council emphasizes the important role of the SecretaryGeneral in the prevention of armed conflicts. The Council expresses its
readiness to consider appropriate preventive action in response to the
matters brought to its attention by States or the Secretary-General and
which it deems likely to threaten international peace and security. It
invites the Secretary-General to present to the members of the Council
periodic reports on such disputes, including, as appropriate, early
warnings and proposals for preventive measures. In this regard the Council
encourages the Secretary-General to improve further his capacity to
identify potential threats to international peace and security and invites
him to indicate any requirements to fulfil these capacities, including the
development of Secretariat’s expertise and resources.
"The Security Council recalls that the United Nations Preventive
Deployment Force, as the first United Nations preventive deployment
mission, has prevented the spillover of conflict and tensions from the
region to the host country. The Council will continue to consider the
establishment of such preventive missions in appropriate circumstances.
"The Security Council will also consider other preventive measures
such as the establishment of demilitarized zones and preventive
disarmament. While fully conscious of the responsibilities of other United
Nations organs, it emphasizes the crucial importance of disarmament and the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the means of their
delivery for the maintenance of international peace and security. In
particular, progress in preventing and combating the excessive and
destabilizing accumulation of and illicit trafficking in small arms and
light weapons is of vital importance to the prevention of armed conflicts.
The Council will also take appropriate measures in situations of postconflict peace-building aimed at preventing the recurrence of armed
conflicts, including through adequate programmes for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants. The Council
/...

S/PRST/1999/34
English
Page 3

acknowledges the increasingly important role of the civilian components of
multifunctional peacekeeping operations and will look towards their playing
a greater role in wider preventive efforts.
"The Security Council recalls the provisions of Article 39 of the
Charter of the United Nations concerning measures to prevent armed
conflicts. Such measures may include targeted sanctions, in particular
arms embargoes and other enforcement measures. In imposing such measures
the Council will pay special attention to their likely effectiveness in
achieving clearly defined objectives, while avoiding negative humanitarian
consequences as much as possible.
"The Security Council recognizes the link between the prevention of
armed conflicts, the facilitation of the peaceful settlement of disputes
and the promotion of security for the civilian population, in particular
the protection of human life. Furthermore, the Council underlines that the
existing international criminal tribunals represent useful instruments to
combat impunity and can, by helping to deter crimes against humanity,
contribute to the prevention of armed conflicts. In this context the
Council acknowledges the historic significance of the adoption of the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court.
"The Security Council recognizes the important role that regional
organizations and arrangements are playing in the prevention of armed
conflicts, including through the development of confidence- and securitybuilding measures. The Council also emphasizes the importance of
supporting and improving regional capacities for early warning. It
emphasizes the importance of cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations in preventive activities in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. The Council welcomes
meetings between the United Nations, including the Security Council, and
regional organizations, and encourages participants to continue to focus
those meetings on issues related to prevention of armed conflicts.
"The Security Council will continue to review its activities and
strategies for the prevention of armed conflicts. It will consider the
possibility of holding further orientation debates and strengthening its
cooperation with the Economic and Social Council. The Council will also
consider the possibility of a meeting at the level of Foreign Ministers on
the issue of prevention of armed conflicts during the Millennium Assembly.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
