UNITEDiVATI0N.S

THIRTY-THIRD

YEAR
th
MEETING:

NEW

2 NOVEMBER

1978

YORK

CONTENTS
Page
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2095)

Adoption

of the agenda

. . . .. . ,. . . . . . .. . ., .. .. . , . .. .. .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . .. . . . . . .. . . .. .

The situation in Namibia:
(a) Report
of the Secretary-General
submitted
pursuant to paragraph 7 of
Security Council resolution 435 (1978) (S/12903);
(b) Letter dated 24 October
1978 from the Permanent Representative Of
Burundi
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/l 2906) _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . .

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2095th
Held in New York

MEETING

on Thursday,

F?esident; Mr. L&on N’DONG (Gabon).

2 November

1978, at 4 p.m.

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Cuba,
Mozambique and Yugoslavia, in which they ask to be
invited to participate in the discussion. In accordance with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in conformity with the
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

&sent:
The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2095)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Roa Kouri laba),
Mr. Lobo (Mozambique) and Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Namibia:
(a)
Report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to paragraph 7 of Security Council resolution
435 (1978) (S/12903);
(bj Letter dated 24 October 1978 from the Permanent
Representative of Burundi to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2906)

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2092nd meeting,
I invite the President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia and the delegation of the Council to be seated at
the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Miss Konie (Yresident
of the United Nations Council for Namibia) and the other
members of the delegation took places at the Council table.

lie meeting was called to order at 4.35 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

4. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2092nd meeting,
I invite Mr. Gurirab to take a seat at the Council table.

The ugenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia:
(a) Report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to
paragraph 7 of Security Council resolution 435 (1978)
(S/12903);
(6) Letter dated 24 October 1978 from the Permanent
Representative of Burundi to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12906)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gurirab (Permanent Observer of the South West Africa People’s
Organizalion) toolc a place at the Council table.
5. Mr. JAIPAL (India): Mr. President, I would extend to
you the warm felicitations of my delegation on your
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of November and express the hope that under your
presidency the Council will take effective action on African
questions that have been outstanding for too long a time.

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decisions taken at the 2092nd and
2094th meetings, I invite the representatives of Bangladesh,
Benin, Burundi, Egypt, Ghana, Guyana, Saudi Arabia,
Somalia and Zambia to take the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber.

6. As you know, the Council is currently meeting at the
request of the African Group to consider the continued
South African defiance of the decisions of the Council and
the General Assembly in relation to Namibia. This open
defiance of the United Nations by South Africa is not a
new phenomenon, It has existed ever since 1966 when the
Assembly terminated South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia
and reaffirmed the legal responsibility of the United
Nations for that Territory. However, South Africa refuses
to withdraw its presence from Namibia and continues to
behave as if its Mandate were still valid. And it also

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Huq (Bangladesh),
Mr. Houngavou
(Benin),
Mr. Simbananiye (Burundi),
Mr. Abdel
Meguid
(Egypt),
Mr. Boaten
(Ghana),
Mr. Sinclair (Guyana),
Mr. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia),
Mr. Hussen (Somalia) and Miss Konie (Zambia) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
1

continues to subject the people of Namibia to its racist
discriminatory laws and policies.

The answer to that cannot be in the affirmative unless
South Africa cancels its unilateral elections and offers to
co-operate in the implementation of resolutions 385 (1976)
and 43.5 (1978).

7. South Africa’s latest act of defiance is particularly
revolting, because it is an act of betrayal. It had given the
Council adequate reason to believe that it would fulfil the
terms of resolution 385 (1976), which calls for the holding
of free elections in Namibia under United Nations supervision and control. At any rate, South Africa had clearly
encouraged the five Western members of the Council to
think that there was a fair chance of holding United
Nations supervised elections, and to that end intensive
diplomatic efforts have been exerted by them. In fact, their
efforts led to the Council’s adoption of resolution
435 (1978), which approved the Secretary-General’s plan
for the United Nations supervision of the elections.

11. If the Secretary-General’s representative does not go to
Namibia now, nothing will be lost. At least we can be sure
that he will not be blamed for the failure of South Africa,
The Secretary-General is not a sort of general scapegoat; his
role and the integrity of his office should be protected at all
times in the interests of this Organization. Furthermore,
legal responsibility for Namibia is vested in the United
Nations. In other words, the General Assembly and the
Security Council together share responsibility for the future
of Namibia, and I would add that there are limits beyond
which the Council cannot proceed without first making
sure that it is in tune with the Assembly.

8. Since then, further diplomatic efforts have been made
at the level of Foreign Ministers by the five Western
countries. However, the upshot of all this, curiously
enough, is South Africa’s firm decision to go ahead with its
own elections without United Nations supervision or
control. In deciding to do so, South Africa is disregarding
the judgement of the five Western countries-and, indeed,
that of the United Nations-that its unilateral elections will
be considered null and void. The purpose of its elections is
plainly set out in the proclamation of 20 September of the
South African Administrator-General in Namibia. His proclamation provides for the election of a SO-member
assembly to draw up a constitution leading to independence. There is really nothing more to say than that these
elections would lead to the unilateral declaration 01
independence by a minority in Namibia, as was done in
Southern Rhodesia.

12. In my delegation’s view, the present situation calls for
a draft resolution which, in its operative paragraphs, would
call upon South Africa to cancel its December elections and
co-operate in the implementation of resolutions 385 (1976)
and 435 (1978). It should also warn South Africa that
unless it indicates to the Council its willingness to CO.
operate within two weeks, the Council would be obliged to
initiate appropriate action under Chapter VII of the
Charter.
13. To that end, we might commence forthwith
the
drawing up of contingency plans for the implementation
and monitoring of such mandatory sanctions as will be
sufficient to compel South Africa to comply with the
Council’s decision. I would say that my delegation appreciates very much the diplomatic initiatives taken by the five
Western members of the Council. They have indeed done a
very great deal, and if they have failed it is not due to want
of effort or will. It is due simply to the open defiance by
the Pretoria regime of the authority of the United Nations
and its refusal td quit the international Territory
of
Namibia. There is nothing more left for the Western Five to
do than to join forces with the other members of the
Council in applying the full range of options available under
Chapter VII of the Charter. Any other course of action
might call into question the good faith as well as the
motives of the Council.

9. It is revealing to read the statement made by the new
South African Prime Minister to the Foreign Ministers of
the five Western countries on 16 October this year
[S/12900, annex 11. Mr. Botha’s statement is truly extraordinary, even for a politically prehistoric monster who
claims to be civilized. At no point did Mr. Botha refer to
the United Nations, except once to say that South Africa
was in a state of dispute with the United Nations over
Namibia. Mr.Botha’s apparent concern is to secure international recognition for an independent Namibia under the
leadership of persons elected at the December elections.
The fact that those elections are null and void and will be
boycotted by SWAP0 and several other political parties is
evidently of no consequence or concern to Mr. Botha and
his Government.

14. The choice before the Council is really limited to
imposing sanctions, either before the December elections or
after the unilateral declaration of independence in Namibia.
In either case, our target surely should be South Africa. MY
delegation will be prepared to submit a draft resolution
along the lines that I have mentioned, together with
like-minded members, and might I add that it is clear to us
that it will be desirable not to wait until there is a unilateral
declaration of independence by a minority in Namibia
before initiating mandatory sanctions against South Africa.
The experience of Southern Rhodesia should have made
this point clear enough. Perhaps we all draw different
lessons from that dismal experience.

10. In these circumstances, there can be no question at
present of having consultations with South Africa or its
Administrator-General in Namibia about the modalities of
elections to be held under United Nations supervision and
control. In our view, there is no point in sending the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative to Namibia, as
long as South Africa is determined to proceed with its own
elections, the purpose of which is false independence. The
issue is not whether the Secretary-General’s representative
should or should not go to Namibia now; the real issue is
whether rhere can be free elections under United Nations
supervision and control in the new illegal situation in
Namibia that will be created by the December elections.

15. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): Tk
next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make l&
statement.
2

16. Mr. KOMATINA (Yugoslavia): I wish to thank the
Security Council for having enabled me to set forth the
views of the Yugoslav delegation on the present phase of
one of the most acute and urgent issues of decolonization,
namely, the question of the liberation of Namibia. To you
personally, Mr. President, I wish much success in carrying
out your responsible duties.

which is bound to exacerbate still further the situation in
that part of the world. There is no doubt that the South
African r&me opposes to the United Nations plan the
so-called internal solution, which is directed in the first
place against the liberation forces of Namibia personified in
SWAPO. There is also no doubt that South Africa has
constantly used the negotiations for the purpose of
preparing the so-called internal settlement. It is obvious
that the basic aim of these manoeuvres is to thwart the
genuine independence of Namibia. In this way the South
African Ggime not only has rejected the basic principles of
the plan of the Security Council but has begun arrogantly
to pose new conditions whose acceptance would amount to
the legalization of the occupation and perpetuation of the
colonial status of Namibia through the establishment of a
quisling regime of the Turnhalle group.

17. All of US here, as well as the whole international
community, are well acquainted with the problem of
Namibia, which is characterized by the illegal occupation of
the Territory, by racist repression against the Namibian
people and by South Africa’s constant aggression against
free and independent African countries, primarily the
front-line States. This poses a constant threat to inter.
national peace and security. We are also aware of the
responsibility of the United Nations with regard to Namibia
and with the role that the world Organization has assumed
under resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978). The nonaligned countries have also assessed the situation in Namibia
and adopted a clear stand with regard to this problem at the
recent ministerial conference at Belgrade.

21. We know very well from history-both ancient and
more recent-that no genuine solution could ever be
achieved anywhere by relying on alliances with forces
imbued with a puppet mentality. All such attempts in the
world have failed in the past and will fail in the future as
well, in the same way as it has proved impossible to arrest
the process of decolonization and prevent further deveIopment of the national liberation struggle.

18. We are now confronted, in and regarding Namibia,
with a situation which, although reflecting the old and
unchanged policy of South Africa, nevertheless contains
some new elements posing a direct challenge to all of us and
making it imperative to adopt clear options. The consensus
achieved by the international community embodied in
resolution 435 (1978) to ensure, on the basis of the plan of
the five Western countries, a peaceful transfer of power in a
democratic and legal manner to the genuine representatives
of the people of Namibia-with
the United Nations playing
the central role in this process-constitutes
undoubtedly a
positive development,

22. The purpose of such conduct by South Africa is clear.
The racist regime is endeavouring to preserve its dominant
role in southern Africa and to deprive the Namibian people
of its inalienable national rights. The United Nations must
strongly oppose this. The acceptance of any variant of
“internal” settlement imposed by South Africa even by
implication would be tantamount to endorsing the system
of illegal occupation of Namibia. These attempts by South
Africa should be checked by the United Nations, as this is
the only way to preserve peace and security in that region.
There can be no permanent solution without satisfying the
legitimate aspirations of the Namibian people, and this can
be achieved only through dialogue with SWAP0 as its
legitimate representative.

19. This important achievement of the national liberation
struggle of the Namibian people, under the leadership of
SWAPO, its only legal representative, as well as steady
international solidarity have provided a solid basis for the
attainment of independence by Namibia. In the course of
conceiving and adopting this plan, SWAP0 asserted itself, in
spite of the immense sacrifices made by the Namibian
people, as a constructive
factor which, in its noble
endeavour to prevent any further bloodshed and to defuse
tension in the region of southern Africa, has made it
possible to open the door to the peaceful solution of one of
the most serious problems in southern Africa. Actually,
both SWAP0 and the front-line States have made substantive concessions in order to create conditions for a
peaceful solution.

23. South Africa is once again giving proof of its intransigence and persistent defiance of the decisions of the United
Nations. The present situation regarding the problem of
Namibia constitutes in many respects a test for all of us,
and I wouId even say a “moment of truth”, particularly for
the countries that initiated the plan which was adopted by
the Security Council as a way conducive to a peaceful
solution.
24. The United Nations has, in the view of the Yugoslav
delegation, no choice but to maintain a firm stand, which
will prevent South Africa’s attempt to circumvent and
sabotage our endeavours. If we showed weakness, we would
then be confronted later by catastrophic consequences, as
we would have encouraged South Africa to entrench its
neo-colonial and racist control of Namibia and increase the
danger to international peace and security in Africa. We
must also do so because all the genuine national liberation
forces have already rejected South Africa’s manoeuvres.
The United Nations must bear this fact in mind. Otherwise,
we would become inadvertent accomplices to further
aggravation of the situation. And we can avoid this only by
taking direct action against the instigator of such a

20. And where are we today, after all this? When it was
rightly expected that prospects for an internationally
negotiated settlement of the problem of Namibia would be
opened, which would have affected positiveIy the solving of
other problems in southern Afirca as well, South Africa by
resorting to acts of repression against SWAP0 and the
People of Namibia and by taking unilateral measures,
deprived the United Nations plan of any substantive value,
Preventing its implementation. The decision of South
Africa to conduct elections under its patronage and
aPParatus of repression is obviously in flagrant violation of
resolution 435 (1978) and constitutes an unacceptable step
5

situation. We cannot remain passive and indifferent in the
face of South Africa’s action.

31. We are not without an alternative. We considerthat it
is still possibleto find a peaceful solution, first, if we all
take action on the basisof resolutions 385 (1976) and
435 (1978), secondly, if the liberation movement of
Namibia-SWAPO-participates as the main and only partner in the searchfor a solution, and, thirdly, if all the
factors involved continue, firmly and with a deep senseof
responsibility,their action aimed at finding a peaceful and
just solution.

25. To be even more precise, we must reject South
Africa’s manoeuvres aimed at preventing the implementation of the United Nations plan for a peaceful solution and
at perpetuating the illegal occupation of Namibia. This
means that we must, in the view of my delegation, reaffirm
the responsibility of the United Nations over Namibia and
its central role in the search for a solution to this problem.
26. We must strongly condemn South Africa for its
continued illegal occupation of Namibia and the holding of
illegal elections, by proclaiming all unilateral measures to be
null and void, and emphasize that the well known plan of
the Security Council provides the only basis for a peaceful
solution,
27. We must lend full moral, political and material support
to the national liberation struggle of the Namibian people
under the leadership of SWAPO. The lending of such
assistance is actually in harmony with the substantive aims
of the United Nations. We must further extend support and
assistance to the front-line States,asa matter of urgency,
with a view to helping them to resist aggressionand
overcome the economicdifficulties createdby their special
geopoliticalsituation.

32. Yugoslaviais prepared to support every action based
on United Nations resolutionsand on the recommendations
of meetings of non-aligned countries conducive to a
peaceful solution. In the sameway, it will continue to
support the national liberation struggle of the Namibian
people, under the leadershipof SWAPO, becauseit is not
only the struggleof the Namibianpeoplefor independence
that is involved, but alsothe strugglefor peaceand stability
in that dangeroushotbed of crisisin Africa. Failure to settle
this crisisin Africa would result, as stated by the Yugoslav
Federal Secretary for Foreign Affairs in the genera!
debate,’ in new gravedisturbancesin international relations
and would open new areasfor the rivalry and conflicts of
foreign interestsand confrontation. We cannot tolerate any
longer the insolent challengesand manoeuvres of racist
rCgimes,which imperil the peaceand security of all of US.
33. The PRESIDENT (interpretation jkom French): The
next speakeris the representativeof Mozambique, whom I
invite to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

28. We have to establish full co-operation with the
Organization of African Unity, primarily with the front-line
States,in the searchfor waysconduciveto the liberation of
Namibia.

34. Mr. LOB0 (Mozambique): Sir, on behalf of the
front-line States-Angola, Botswana, Mozambique, the
United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia-I wish to
congratulateyou on your assumptionof the presidency of
the Security Council. You have taken over this important
responsibility at a time of critical events concerning
Namibia. I know only too well how dear the question of
Namibiais to Gabon and to you personally, as, indeed, to
the rest of the African continent. It is the hope and
expectation of the front-line States that, under your wise
guidance, the Council will be able to respond unambiguously and decisively to the latest in a seriesof South
African challengesto the authority of the United Nations.

29. We must, first and foremost, find the most suitable
ways and meansto preventSouth Africa from impcsingthe
so-called“internal” solution and to compel it to comply
with the decisionsof the United Nations.There is no doubt
that we are faced with a situation that comeswithin the
purview of sanctionsunderChapterVII of the Charter.This
meansthat it will be necessary
to take againstSouth Africa
all the necessarymeasures
at the disposalof the Security
Council and to exert all formsof pressurethat will prove to
be effective. The Charterand the decisionsof the General
Assembly and the Council provide us with a political and
legal basis for undertaking such measures,while the
repeatedly expressedwill of the international community
providesthe broadestbasisfar concreteand effective action
againstthe permanentaggression
of South Africa.

35 This meetingof the Council is a logical sequel to that
held a few weeks ago at which the Council took a
momentousdecision, reflected in resolution 435 (1978),
concerning the holding of free and fair elections under
30. Such a developmentcausesus grave concern. Our
concern stemsfrom our awareness
and conviction that the
United Nations supervision and control to herald the
question of Namibia does not constitute a regional or
termination of South Africa’s illegal occupation and the
simply a local problem, because-byits substanceand asa
accessionby Namibia to genuine independence. This
componentof the southernAfrican complex-it represents development, which was formerly believed felicitous and
part of a strategy aimed at preservingcolonialismand hopeful but had now taken a turn towards frustration, was
discriminationin that part of the world, This is alsoproved the result of almost 18 monthsof painstakingand complex
by the aggressive
actscommittedby the racistsalmostdaily
negotiationsto which the front-line States,together with all
againstthe neighbouringcountries; this is alsoshown by
of Africa, madea considerablecontribution.
their intention to prevent the genuine independenceof
Namibia and Southern Rhodesia.The conduct of South
36 In its resolution43.5(1978), the Council approved the
Africa in Namibia and the assistance
given to the racist report of the Secretary-General[S/12827/ for the fulfilregimein SouthernRhodesiaare a substantivepart of a plan
aimedat perpetuatingdominationin that economicallyrich
1 official
Rwmds
of‘ the General Assetnbly,
Thirty-third
Sessim,
and strategicallyimportant part of Africa.
Plenary Meetings,
7th meeting.
4

ment of the United Nations objective of free and fair
elections in Namibia, and requested him to report to it by
23 October 1978 on progress made to this end. On behalf
of the front-line States, I should like to express to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, our warmest congratulations and acknowledgement
for the indefatigable
efforts he has been n-raking with a view to the implementation of the principles of self-determination
and real
independence with regard to Namibia.
37. This is an occasion for a candid assessment of the
situation. We must realistically answer the question whether
or not the Secretary-General has been able to implement
resolution 435 (1978). His report [S/12903/ which the
front-line States have studied carefully, leaves no doubt
that the Secretary-General has been unable to fulfil his
mandate because of South African intransigence. It was this
intransigence of South Africa which prompted the Foreign
Ministers of the five Western members of the Council to
proceed to Pretoria in an attempt to impart sense and
reason to the South African regime.
38. Assuming that the intentions of the five Western
countries were indeed good, their efforts none the less have
resulted in a futile exercise. The joint statement issued at
Pretoria on 19 October by the Western Foreign Ministers
and the South African regime /S/12900, annex II] is a sad
document. There can be no question that the Foreign
Ministers failed to salvage the situation. South Africa has
rejected resolution 435 (1978) and once again, as it has
done for the last 12 years, has treated with contempt the
authority of the United Nations. The Pretoria racists and
Fascists are bent on going ahead with the so-called internal
election in Namibia, through which they intend to install
their puppets to power and accord sham independence to
the Territory,
39. The front-line States supported and encouraged the
Western initiative on Namibia because WC believed in the
bona fides of those countries We thought they were, at
long last, ready and willing to use their influence and
leverage over South Africa and bring it into line with the
values and democratic principles which they have always
made the world belisve they espoused and professed in
their respective countries.
40. For us, it is discomforting to be certain once more
that the five Western countries are still very much the
traditional allies of South Africa and countries in whose
name the Pretoria regime has, as indeed has the regime of
Ian Smith in Southern Rhodesia, perpetuated its subjugation of the black majority in Namibia and South Africa.
These are the same countries which have, over the years,
collaborated with South Africa in the political, economic
and military spheres, and have given it moral encouragement to persevere in its policies.
41. Within this context, we had understood the visit of the
Foreign Ministers of the five Western countries to Pretoria
as intended solely to extract South African acceptance of
and compliance with resolution 435 (1978). As the African
Group has eloquently stated, the visit could not properly be
for the purpose of reopening negotiations or seeking
compromises with South Africa. The stage of negotiations
is over, and the current phase is that of implementation of
resolution 435 (1978).

42. In spite of the fact that it has no right to be in
Namibia, South Africa procrastinated and prevaricated in
the negotiations. In spite of the fact that it is under
obligation to withdraw completely from Namibia unconditionally, South Africa got away with a lot of concessions
during the negotiations. For instance, the question of
Walvis Bay was literally shelved, and unilateral actions such
as the appointment of the so-called Administrator-General
were tolerated.
43. Furthermore, in an attempt to create a future fait
accompli, the South African regime went ahcad with
unilateral registration of voters, and there were even some
people who were saying that, by and large, further
infraction should be tolerated.
44. During the same period of negotiations, South Africa
intensified its repression and oppression of the Namibian
people and committed acts of aggression against Angola and
Zambia, intended, infer ah, to undemrine and frustrate the
negotiations.
45. SWAPO, on the other hand, in spite of its overwhelming support in the international community, took political
risks and co-operated admirably and fully in the negotiations.
46. South Africa is now attempting to get away with the
so-called internal elections in Namibia. This is no doubt the
culmination of its carefully conceived and executed plan
for Namibia. Thus, while SWAP0 has been negotiating in
good faith, South Africa has used the negotiations as a
cover for carrying out its diabolic scheme for Namibia. The
Pretoria statement is disquieting in that it seeks to conceal
and divert attention from the real problem that has
occurred in the efforts to give effect to resolution
435 (1978).
47. The question that must be resolved first and foremost
is that of the so-called internal elections. This is an illegal
exercise which must be condemned and rejected in no
uncertain terms. It is an act of defiance of the authority of
the United Nations that must be stopped. In no circumstances or guise must South Africa be allowed to get away
with the internal elections, which indeed make a mockery
of resolution 435 (1978) and the entire United Nations
system. It takes no more than common sense to realize that
any of those persons who will be “elected” in the so-called
internal elections will not opt for other elections under the
supervison and control of the United Nations with the risk,
of losing power to others.
48. It is significant in this regard that South Africa has not
even made a commitment that the free and fair elections
envisaged under the United Nations plan would take place,
beyond saying it would “use its best efforts to persuade”
the so-called elected leaders “to consider ways and means
of achieving international recognition through the good
offices of the Special Representative and the Adntinistrator-General” [ibid., para. 41. Since it has always pretended and claimed to champion the right of the Namibian
people to choose and have authorized spokesmen, South
Africa must not deceive the international community into

believing that it would go against the “wishes”
hand-picked so-called leaders.

of the

52. The United Nations must not be fooled by the
so-called willingness of South Africa not to shut the door to
a solution of the question of Namibia on the basis of
resolution 435 (1978). The concrete and practical actions
of South Africa matter more than a categorical “No”,
which can never be forthcoming from the rigime. The
Pretoria r&me will continue to give the impression that it
is prepared to keep the door open in order to buy time for
its devious plans in Namibia.

49. The contradiction between pretending to uphold the
aspirations of the Namibian people, as expressed by their
elected leaders, and vowing not to be bound by their
wishes, as stated to the Western Foreign Ministers and
enshrined in a recent so-called proclamation, is glaring to
say the least. Contrary to the belief that South Africa
would go along with the United Nations-supervised elections in Namibia, paragraph 4 of the Pretoria statement
seems to suggest that the good offices of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General would be used to
seek international recognition for the so-called leaders
emerging from the internal election ploy. Any visit by the
Special Representative to Namibia in the present circumstances would serve no useful purpose and would be
ill-advised.

53. We in Angola, Botswana, Mozambique, the United
Republic of Tanzania and Zambia arc amazed that in the
Pretoria statement the five Western Foreign Ministers
virtually conceded veto power to South Africa by unduly
stressing consultations in paragraph 2 regarding the composition of the United Nations Transition Assistance Group
(UNTAG). This is all the more surprising since the Western
countries have all along maintained that the question of the
composition of the Group should appropriately be left to
the Secretary-General. We do not see any necessity whatsoever for stressing consultations with South Africa in this
public document. Why should the West always seek to
appease South Africa?

50. The problem that exists is political. There is an
absence of the politicai breakthrough so necessary for the
present exercise to go forward. This cannot be achieved at
the level of the Secretary-General or his representative, who
must merely implement the decisions made at the political
level. The front-line States do not see how the Special
Representative can be expected to succeed where the
Foreign Ministers of the five powerful countries with
leverage, allies of South Africa indeed, have failed. The
Western countries concerned surely do not need
Mr. Ahtisaari to test the sincerity of South Africa. They
should have established this themselves in their three days
of meetings at Pretoria. At any rate, if the issue is simply to
establish South Africa’s so-called sincerity, it does not
really require a special visit of the United Nations represcntative to Namibia to do so. We have a duty to preserve
the integrity of the office of the Secretary-General by
avoiding actions that would only bring that office into
disrepute. In the present exercise, it is vitally important
that the Western members of the Security Council should
not shift the burden to the Secretary-General and make him
responsible for their failure.

54. South Africa has once again defied the United
Nations. Concrete and effective measures must be taken by
the Security Council to compel it to comply with the
demands of the international community. The situation in
Namibia and related developments have clearly demonstrated that South Africa’s continued illegal occupation of
Namibia constitutes a serious threat to international peace
and security.
55. The front-line States trust that the Council will live up
to its responsibilities in this grave situation. At issue is the
implementation of resolution 435 (1978). South Africa has
defied that resolution. SWAP0 has accepted it. The
Council’s responsibility, therefore, is to take all effective
measures to ensure compliance with its own resolution. The
Council cannot afford to prevaricate on such a clear
question, for it must not only act in order to arrest the
deteriorating situation which is a clear threat to intern&
tional peace and security; it must also act, and decisively SO,
lest its credibility become a laughing-stock.

51. The so-called introductory
statement made by
P. W. Botha at the meeting with the Foreign Ministers of
the five Western members of the Security Council at
Pretoria on 16 October [ibid., annex I] says it all. South
Africa is determined to present the international community with a fait accompli in Namibia, by reviving the
Turnhalle arrangements. It intends to put the United
Nations in a position where it will have to deal with the
so-called internal leaders in Namibia to the detriment of
SWAPO, which is anathema to the Pretoria Fascists. South
Africa is not prepared to tolerate SWAPO’s accession to
power in Namibia, whether through democratic elections or
by any other means. Thus, through the promotion of the
Tumhalle Alliance in the so-called internal elections, South
Africa is hoping to undermine international support for and
solidarity with SWAP0 and make impossible the accession
of Namibia to genuine independence. Yet, at the beginning
of the Western initiative 18 months ago, we were told by
the five Western countrjes that South Africa had agreed to
abandon the discredited and illegal Turnhalle plan. Now we
know this is not the case.

56. In conclusion, on behalf.of the front-line States, I wish
QI renew our unequivocal support for and solidarity with
SWAPO, the sole and authentic representative of the
Namibian people. We salute them for their bravery in
combat and for their statesmanship and reasonableness in
the negotiations. It is no longer contestable that even
SWAPO’s worst defectors cannot accuse them of failing to
do everything possible to facilitate a negotiated solution.
We hope that the Western five in particular will bear that in
mind.
57. The front-line States, along with the other African
States, are determined to give all the necessary support to
the people of Namibia, Zimbabwe and South Africa until
they are completely free from colonial domination, neocolonial imposition and racial discrimination. We wilf Only
consider ourselves free after these peoples have acquired
their human dignity. These are our valued principles. For
them we are ready to endure any sacrifices required to
6

make effective our solidarity with the people of Namibia
and their sole representative, SWAPO. The struggle continues.
$3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
59. Mr.

ROA KOURI
(Cuba) linterpretation
from
Mr. President, I should like first of a11to
congratulate you on behalf of my delegation on your
presidencyof this important United Nations organ.
Spanish):

60 My delegation has asked to speak at this meetingto
reiterate once again the solidarity of the people and
Government of Cuba with the heroic struggle of the
Namibianpeople for independenceand self-determination,
under the enlightened leadership of its sole legitimate
representative,SWAPO.
61, A brief account of the effort made by SWAP0 to
achievethe freedom and independenceof Namibiareveals
the consistent, but also flexible, attitude of those who
beyond doubt head the liberation struggle against the
oppression
of the racist South African regimewhich illegally
occupiestheir territory. ComradeSamNujoma hasnot, in
fact, been remiss in seeking negotiated solutions which
could have saved valuable lives of a people subjectedto a
most brutal and pitilessexploitation, assassination,
torture,
imprisonmentand exile. Only Nazi barbarismis comparable
to the barbarismunleashedby the South African raciststo
maintainthe reprehensibleregimein southernAfrica.
62. As has been affirmed more than once by President
Fidel Castro:
“Cuba is not opposedto any peaceful solution for the
peoplesof Africa, particularly of ZimbabweandNamibia,
or their independence,as long as it is acceptedby the
legitimate representativesof those peoples,the Patriotic
Front and SWAPO, and by the African States which
support them. At the sametime we must say that the
greatestresponsibility for the failure to achievea peaceful
solution so far lies with the Anglo-American rulers,who,
while they speak of peace, pretend to achieve it by
maintaining intact the repressiveand reactionary structures created by Smith and Vorster to impose their
odiousrBgimesof white minority rule andaf~artheid.”
One need hardly be a great oracle to realizc that that is
Preciselywhy nothing has been done towards the attainmentof independencefor Namibia andZimbabwe.
63. It is, furthermore, evident that the gameplayedby the
South African racists and their Western partners and
keepers has as its objective not the acceleration of
independencefor Namibia but the gainingof time in order
to forge a solution in keepingwith their sordid economic,
Commercialand political interests. It is an opensecretthat
the transnationat corporations of those countries, mainly
North American and British companies,have violated all
the decisionsof the Security Council and of the General
Assembly in regard to the embargo against the racist
r&mes. It is alsowell known that it isnot only a matter of

guaranteeingtheir vast profits, extorted from the peoples
W~KIare under the boot of apartheid, but also to ensure
continuedexploitation of Africa by imperialismin yearsto
come.
64. Shouldanyonestill maintainillusionsabout the close
links which unite the South African racists with their
Partnersin the “civilized, ChristianandWestern”world, as
the aposh Of the capitalistnew order like to call it, the
barbarianBotha hasbrutally dispelledthemin the so-called
statementwhich he madeby way of welcome-andwhy not
recall it-to his friends of the five Western Powers at
Pretoria. After all, Herr Botha will think, and rightly so
from his narrow, rapaciousand allegedly“civilized” point
of view, that the truth is the truth eventhoughit may not
comeout smellinglike roses.
65. For the imperialists,the questionof southernAfrica is
one and indivisible:to maintainthe capitalistsystem,with
all its consequences.
For them it isessential
that the power
structuresin South Africa shouldremainimmutableand
that their racist tentaclesshouldimprisonZimbabweand
Namibia through vassaland obsequiousGovernments,if
needbe with an African far;ade,asSmithhasattemptedto
do in Zimbabwe and as Herr Botha will try to do in
December with the soscalled“internal elections” in
Namibia.Hencetheir Westernpartnershesitate,becauseof
the dilemmathey face asa resultof countlessresolutions
adoptedby the Security Councilandthe GeneralAssembly,
to put an end to the illegaloccupationof Namibiaandthe
racist rCgimeof Ian Smith. The implementationof those
resolutionsis quite clearly not part of the “Westernplan”.
66. In taking up the questionof ZimbabweandNamibiaand also the important questionof South Africa itselfone cannot lose sight of the unity of the problem.Today
we are consideringthe undeniablefailure of the negotiations undertaken,without consultation,by the five Western
Powersin connexionwith Namibia.But can one separate
what hasbeenhappeningin Namibiafrom the development
of the situation in Zimbabweor in SouthAfrica? TOdo SO
would be a grave error, althoughperhapsthat is what
Mr. Botha’s friends are trying to do. On the contrary, the
strugglein southernAfrica is but one,just asthe imperialists’ policy in the regionis but one, and,eventhough the
scenariosare different, the sturgglefor independenceof
Zimbabweand Namibiawill strengthenthat of the South
African people against the racist white minority which
upholds the systemof exploitation establishedby colanialismandimperialism
in that part of the continent.
67 Unequivocal proof of that is found in the recent
manoeuvresof the WesternGovernments.On the onehand
they encouragethe establishmentof a puppet rigime in
Zimbabwe, allowingits spokesmen
to travel to the United
States in clear violation of Security Council resolution
253 (1968) and 423 (1978), to promote their infamous
creature and win the support of the so-calledconservative
Congressmen
and of public opinion, so that the sanctions
imposedby the internationalcommunity againstthe illegal
r&gime
of Ian Smithmay belifted. On the other hand, they
would have SWAPO, the African Stateswhich SUppOrtits
just causeand the United Nations itself break breadwith
the monsterrecently createdat Pretoriawhich &XX away

with everything that has been agreed to and violates the
spirit and the letter of Security Council resolutions
385 (1976), 431 (1978), 432 (1978) and 435 (1978).
68. While all this is going on at the diplomatic level-we
have to find some description for this tortuous process of
deceit and delay-the
Ian Smith racists continue their
aggression against Mozambique and Zambia, and at the very
time of his North American tour, while South Africa
directly participates with counter-revolutionar
bands in
the attack on Kasinga in the People’s Republic of Angola.
These are no fortuitous deeds. This is part of a well-coordinated policy of striking at the liberation movement and
the countries which give them their unwavering support,
while at the same time attempting to undermine the
progressive neighbouring regimes which have emerged in the
former Portuguese colonies.
69. At its 2087th meeting, the Security Council adopted
resolution 435 (1978), in which it reiterated that its
objective was the withdrawal
of South Africa’s illegal
administration from Namibia and the transfer of power to
the people of Namibia with the assistance of the United
Nations. It declared that all unilateral measures taken by
the illegal administration in Namibia in relation to the
electoral process, including unilateral registration of voters,
or transfer of power, in contravention of resolutions
38.5(1976), 431 (1978) and 435 (1978), were null and
void.
70. No one, no Member of the Organization, far less those
States which have special obligations as members of the
Security Council, has the right or the authority to ignore
resolutions adopted by the Council. If the five Western
Powers were really desirous of finding a peaceful solution
to the question of Namibia, all they would have to do
would be withdraw
their support for the Pretoria racists
and compel them to comply with the relevant United
Nations resolutions.
71. The international community must energetically reject
any attempt by sleight of hand to rob Namibia of its
independence and to install a puppet rdgime there. It must
reaffirm the right of SWAP0 as the sole legitimate

representative of the Namibian people and oppose the
electoral manoeuvres of South Africa designed to rob
SWAP0 of that status. The international community must
also reiterate its support for the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Namibia. But above all, at this
time, the international community must demand that the
Security Council should live up to its obligation and use
every means provided for in the Charter, including the
sanctions provided for in Chapter VII, to force the racist
South African regime to comply with its decisions.
72. As we see it, the Council must also be careful not to
approve the journey of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to Namibia, which in the present circumstances woulcl be tantamount to implicating the high office
of the Secretary-General in a manoeuvre intended to
endorse South Africa’s designs.
73. It is true that the prestige and moral authority of the
Organization are at stake. But there is much more to it than
that. What is involved is the destiny of a people that has
fought hard for its freedom and independence, a people
that cannot be abandoned to the arbitrariness of an
international delinquent like Mr. Botha. It is more than
high time to proceed from words to deeds. Resolutionr
abound, all reflecting the firm will of Member States tc
support Namibian independence. Whether independence i!
obtained by peaceful means or otherwise now depends or
the decisions the Council will adopt. In one way or anothel
the people of Namibia will be free and will expel the Soutl
African occupiers from their country.
74. The freedom fighters of SWAPO, in their heroic battle
for a free, independent and sovereign Namibia, will alway
have the Cuban revolutjon at their side. At the Unite1
Nations we shall give all necessary support for a peacefu
solution that respects the true interests of the Namibia!
people. We shall continue to give our fraternal assistance tl
all those who in Africa have raised the banners c
independence and social progress and who resolute]
oppose imperialism, apurtheid and any other form C
domination or oppression.
7%~ meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.
