A /76/PV.96

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

96th plenary meeting

Thursday, 21 July 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

In the absence of the President, Ms. Chan Valverde
(Costa Rica), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 124 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
Special report of the Security Council
(A/76/905)
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
continue the debate pursuant to resolution 76/262, of
26 April 2022, on the situation in which a veto was cast
by a permanent member at the 9087th meeting of the
Security Council on 8 July 2022, under the agenda item
“The situation in the Middle East”.
Ms. Stoeva (Bulgaria): Bulgaria aligns itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union (see A/76/PV.95).
It is unfortunate that the mechanism set by
resolution 76/262 has been triggered for the second
time in less than three months since its adoption. The
reason for today’s debate is the veto cast by the Russian
Federation on 8 July (see S/PV.9087) on draft resolution
S/2022/538, submitted by Ireland and Norway, on
ensuring the delivery of humanitarian assistance to the
Syrian people. Its objective was clear — humanitarian
assistance should reach the Syrian people. It enjoyed
the support of 13 members of the Security Council
and yet was vetoed. The arguments for the veto of
the Russian Federation are far from convincing. The

use of the veto was even more regrettable because on
this particular occasion it went against the principles
of international humanitarian law and humanitarian
assistance — humanity, neutrality and independence.
We acknowledge that a solution was subsequently
found. The mechanism is now renewed for six months,
and the Bab Al-Hawa border crossing remains open.
However, the decision on further renewal will have to
be taken in the middle of winter when people will be
most in need of assistance.
We urge the members of the Security Council to
ensure a smooth renewal in six months. United Nations
agencies and the other international organizations
delivering life-saving humanitarian aid to Syria should
not be forced to rely on contingency planning and
should be able to continue to provide food, medicine
and hygiene supplies, drinking water, shelter and fuel
to those in great need. Humanitarian assistance cannot
and should not be used as a mere tool for the achievement
of selfish political goals. The Syrian people, especially
Syrian women and children, deserve to be assured
that their pleas are heard and that their unhindered
and sustained access to adequate humanitarian aid is
strictly guaranteed by international humanitarian law
and the international community.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Syrian crisis has dragged on for 11 years and has been
a deep calamity for the Syrian people. China pays great
attention to this issue. We have always supported the
United Nations and the international community in
extending humanitarian relief to Syrians in line with
the principles of humanity, neutrality and impartiality.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-43451 (E)

*2243451*

A/76/PV.96

For our part, we have also actively delivered assistance
of all kinds to Syria through multiple channels and
have played a constructive role in improving the
humanitarian situation on the ground and overcoming
the difficulties afflicting the country’s economy and
people’s livelihoods.
China’s position on the Syrian humanitarian issue
has been consistent and clear. The efforts to address it
must fully respect Syria’s sovereignty and the ownership
of the Syrian Government. Cross-line delivery should
become the main avenue for humanitarian aid to Syria,
while the cross-border mechanism is only a temporary
arrangement. It was made based on the extraordinary
situation in Syria and should transition at a greater pace
towards cross-line delivery, with a clear timeline for
bringing cross-border aid to an end.
At the same time, more and targeted investment
should be made in early-recovery projects to enhance
Syria’s homegrown development drive. China wishes
to emphasize once more that unilateral sanctions have
had an enormous negative impact on socioeconomic
recovery and development in Syria by impeding the
operations of international humanitarian agencies
there. The sanctions have become the most significant
obstacle to resolving the Syrian humanitarian issue
and should therefore be immediately and fully lifted,
and the Security Council should make clear provisions
for that.
Security Council resolution 2642 (2022) allows
for a more flexible arrangement for renewing the
authorization for cross-border humanitarian aid
to Syria, which will facilitate the Council’s timely
assessments and adjustments of its authorization. In
the light of the current circumstances, the resolution
further requires the delivery of early-recovery projects
and greater transparency in relief efforts. The Council’s
informal interactive dialogues, held every two months,
are also conducive to concrete follow-up on the progress
made in implementing the resolution, and a majority
of Council members voted in its favour. We expect
all parties to strictly abide by the basic principles
governing international humanitarian assistance,
stringently adhere to the resolution’s provisions, ensure
the neutrality and transparency of relief efforts and
make them more targeted and effective.
During the consultations on the draft resolution,
China repeatedly called on all the parties to stick to
dialogue and consultations and work up to the last
2/21

21/07/2022

minute in an effort to find a practical and viable
solution. Regrettably, two days before the expiry of
the authorization, when there was still margin for
compromise, the Council forcibly resorted to a vote,
which led to the use of the veto. Forcing the vote in
such a manner was not necessary. This case shows
that in the face of differences and contradictions,
Council members can find an effective solution to the
issue at hand only by following through with dialogue
and consultation. Forcibly pushing for a vote only
escalates such contradictions and divergence and does
a disservice to the Council’s effective discharge of
its responsibilities.
A fundamental settlement of the Syrian
humanitarian issue requires actively promoting a
Syrian-led and -owned political process. The relevant
countries should immediately end their illegal
occupation of Syria and cease all acts that undermine
Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. It is our
expectation that Syria will soon return to the family
of the League of Arab States, which will be conducive
to fostering regional synergy in promoting peace and a
speedy resolution of the Syrian issue.
Mr. Prvý (Slovakia): Slovakia aligns itself with the
statement delivered on behalf of the European Union
(see A/76/PV.95). The following remarks will be made
in my national capacity.
We appreciate the convening of this second debate
held pursuant to General Assembly resolution 76/262,
providing the broader United Nations membership with
an opportunity to speak about the important topic of
humanitarian access in Syria. Slovakia commends the
renewal of the mandate of the cross-border mechanism,
which ensures that irreplaceable humanitarian
assistance can continue crossing at Bab Al-Hawa for
now. The extension of the mechanism’s mandate was a
humanitarian imperative for preserving the functioning
of a critical humanitarian lifeline for 4.1 million Syrian
men, women and children. That includes the 2.8 million
internally displaced people in north-western Syria who
depend on the vital humanitarian assistance delivered
through the mechanism for their survival. It is estimated
that today 12 million Syrians are food insecure and
fully reliant on external food assistance.
We were, however, saddened by the Russian
Federation’s veto of draft resolution S/2022/538,
proposed by the co-penholders for a 12-month renewal
of the cross-border mechanism. That proposal, calling
22-43451

21/07/2022

for a full year’s renewal, which was advocated by
numerous humanitarian experts, the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Secretary-General himself, garnered wide support from
Security Council members, with 13 votes in favour. The
Russian Federation, ignoring those calls, once again
politicized the discussion, took the Security Council
hostage and cynically blocked a path to predictable and
long-term cross-border humanitarian access in Syria.
Slovakia continues to advocate for all parties
to depoliticize and allow the unimpeded, continued
delivery of humanitarian aid to all in need. Crossborder assistance will continue to be vital to meet the
immense humanitarian needs in Syria, and we strongly
urge the members of the Security Council to uphold
their commitment to renew the resolution for a further
six months by January 2023, in order to ensure that
humanitarian assistance continues through the middle
of winter, when people need it most. As has been well
documented by the humanitarian community, there
is no adequate alternative to cross-border assistance
for meeting significant humanitarian needs that only
continue to increase, especially in the light of the
food crisis caused by Russia’s illegal, unjustified and
totally senseless invasion of Ukraine. Life-saving and
-sustaining humanitarian actions must not be disrupted,
targeted or politicized. Safe, unhindered and sustained
access to all in need in Syria must be guaranteed.
Slovakia calls on all the parties to the conflict
to join forces to reaffirm and consolidate their
strong support for a political solution, in accordance
with Security Council resolution 2254 (2015), and
commends the tireless efforts of Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen to advance such a solution. In the meantime,
all parties must respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law, including those related
to humanitarian access. Sustainable peace and stability
can be achieved only through a genuine, inclusive,
comprehensive and Syrian-led political solution.
Mr. Massari (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement delivered on behalf of the European Union
(see A/76/PV.95), and I would like to add some further
remarks in my national capacity.
Today’s plenary meeting is the second
implementation of the procedure set by resolution
76/262 on strengthening the United Nations system and
aimed at debating the use of the veto in the Security
Council. However, it is the first time that we are

A/76/PV.96

discussing a veto on a humanitarian draft resolution.
What we should be discussing today are not the political
reasons behind Russia’s decision to veto draft resolution
S/2022/538, on the cross-border mechanism in Syria,
but the humanitarian consequences of such a decision.
Looking carefully at those consequences, the
Secretary-General
and
Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths strongly requested a renewal of 12 months
rather than the six months imposed by Russia, for the
following main reasons. First, 12 months would ensure
full coverage of the winter, when people’s humanitarian
needs are at their peak. Secondly, 12 months would
enable humanitarian agencies to plan better. And
finally, 12 months would enhance the logistics and
the implementation process of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) on the ground. Unfortunately,
Russia’s decision to veto the draft submitted after the
extraordinary diplomatic effort of the co-penholders,
Ireland and Norway, will create a sense of uncertainty
about the future for the Syrian population and an
incredibly complex endeavour for the humanitarian
system. Those consequences are indeed very tangible
both for the Syrian people and for the humanitarian
agencies and NGOs on the ground. What is worse is
that a short-term renewal is less effective in fostering
the early-recovery projects that Russia itself requested,
owing to their inherently medium-term nature.
The Security Council should not fail to address the
urgent humanitarian needs of a suffering population,
especially if all the remaining members are not against
the co-penholders’ text. We therefore urge the Council
to renew the cross-border mechanism for Bab Al-Hawa
next January, and we hope that a reliable United
Nations-facilitated political process that is Syrian-led
and -owned can parallel that renewal. We commend the
exceptional work of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and its implementing partners in
Syria, and we will continue our support in the future.
Mr. Mohammad (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
convening this meeting in line with General Assembly
resolution 76/262, also known as the veto initiative. The
resolution was adopted by consensus and provides that
the General Assembly shall convene a formal meeting
within 10 working days of the casting of a veto by one
or more permanent members of the Security Council.
This meeting is the second in which we are
implementing that important resolution. The State of

22-434513/21

A/76/PV.96

21/07/2022

Kuwait was among the core group that proposed the
resolution to the Assembly, and we did so out of our
belief that it would enhance and enable the Assembly’s
role and increase the transparency and accountability
in the relationship between the General Assembly and
the Security Council. The use of the veto by one of the
five permanent members has in many cases undermined
the Council’s decision-making process. It has also
hindered the Security Council from shouldering its
responsibilities, and created frustration among States
and the international community as a consequence of
the Council’s failure to take measures necessary for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

for the Syrian humanitarian dossier, alongside Sweden
in 2018 and Germany and Belgium in 2019. One of
our responsibilities was renewing the work of the
cross-border mechanism in Syria. We succeeded in
that mission in 2018, thanks to resolution 2449 (2018),
which renewed the work of the mechanism through four
crossings for 12 months. As a previous penholder, we
are fully aware of the sensitivities of this dossier in the
Council and the lengthy and difficult negotiations that
were needed to renew the mechanism. We therefore
want to express our appreciation to Ireland and
Norway, as the current penholders, and to thank them
for their efforts.

We believe that the right of veto is an exceptional and
rare privilege that has been granted to only five States
in the world since the creation of the United Nations
and that entails responsibility above all. In that context,
I would like to mention several innovative initiatives
that Kuwait has joined, such as the code of conduct of
the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group,
under which Member States commit to refraining from
using the veto to block draft resolutions addressing
crimes against humanity, genocide and war crimes. We
have also participated in the French-Mexican initiative,
which asks permanent members to voluntarily refrain
from using the veto right in cases of mass killings.

As the penholder during our membership of the
Council, we took on the responsibility from a purely
humanitarian standpoint. As we noted at the time
and have seen ever since, the humanitarian needs on
the ground in Syria are huge, and millions of Syrians
are benefiting from this assistance mechanism. Those
humanitarian needs have escalated over the past few
years and this year reached levels unprecedented since
the crisis in Syria began, according to United Nations
reports and statistics. More than 14 million people
in Syria are in need of humanitarian assistance, and
considering those increasing humanitarian needs, it is
regrettable that we are seeing the work of this important
mechanism being hindered. We were hoping that the
Security Council would be able to reach an agreement
to renew the work of the mechanism for another 12
months, as requested by the Secretary-General and
those working in the humanitarian arena.

We paid close attention to the Security Council
meeting (see S/PV.9087) on 8 July on renewing the
cross-border mechanism for humanitarian aid to Syria,
and we have taken note of the special report (A/76/905)
presented by the President of the Security Council to
the General Assembly pertaining to the use of the veto
during that meeting. In that context, we would like to
mention the following points.
In the light of the humanitarian disaster in Syria,
which has been going on for more than 10 years,
Kuwait has adopted a purely humanitarian approach to
dealing with the crisis, based on our belief in the need
to assist our brother people of Syria and alleviate their
humanitarian suffering. My country hosted several
international donor conferences jointly with the United
Nations in 2013, 2014 and 2015. We also participated
effectively in the donor conferences that followed. My
country has become one of the major donor countries in
the context of the humanitarian response in Syria and
in neighbouring countries hosting Syrian refugees.
During our membership in the Security Council for
the period from 2018 to 2019, Kuwait was the penholder
4/21

Kuwait is deeply concerned about the humanitarian
crisis in Syria, our brother Arab country with an
important heritage. We have always insisted that
there can be no military solution to the crisis there.
The solution must be a political one, agreed on
by all the Syrian people and responding to their
legitimate aspirations while safeguarding Syria’s
unity, sovereignty and independence, in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015). We also reiterate that no
sustainable and comprehensive peace can be achieved
in Syria without justice and accountability and without
fighting impunity.
In conclusion, although the veto was used on 8 July,
we welcomed the adoption on 12 July (see S/PV.9089) of
resolution 2642 (2022), which renewed the work of this
vital mechanism. It will guarantee access to life-saving
humanitarian assistance and relief for millions in need
in Syria, although only through a single crossing and
22-43451

21/07/2022

only for six months, with the possibility of renewal
for another six months through a second resolution.
We reiterate the importance of guaranteeing access
to humanitarian assistance to all in need in Syria in
a safe and sustainable manner, without obstacles or
discrimination and using all available means including
through cross-line delivery. We hope that the Security
Council will overcome its divisions on the Syrian
dossier in all its dimensions — humanitarian, political
and chemical — and that it will demonstrate unity and
shoulder its responsibility in line with the Charter of
the United Nations.
Ms. Rizk (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to express Egypt’s appreciation for the
convening of this meeting, considering the special
importance of our sister country of Syria to security
and stability in the Middle East.
More than a decade into the Syrian crisis, the country
is still witnessing clashes and economic deterioration,
as well as an increase in the humanitarian needs of our
brother people of Syria. That has been exacerbated by
ongoing international tensions and a rise in food prices
worldwide. Despite the painful situation in Syria, and
considering that the country is one of the Arab region’s
cradles of civilization, the current developments should
not discourage the international community from
trying to reach a sustainable, Syrian-owned political
settlement that is agreed on by all Syrian stakeholders.
We need to create an enabling environment to
achieve the desired progress on the political track
by adopting important measures that would help to
improve the situation on the ground. They are, first, the
implementation of a nationwide ceasefire. Any military
escalation that threatens Syria’s unity, sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity must be avoided.
All efforts to prevent terrorism must be supported.
Secondly, given Syrians’ increasing humanitarian
needs, we must provide the assistance they need to help
them face the food crisis and the consequences of the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
Thirdly, support must be given to early-recovery
projects in all sectors, leading to the initiation of the
reconstruction process and the return of Syrian refugees
and internally displaced persons.
Fourthly, the necessary support must be provided to
refugees’ host countries in order to alleviate the burdens
they are shouldering, which have been exacerbated

A/76/PV.96

by the current international economic situation. In
that context, Egypt welcomed the Security Council’s
adoption of resolution 2642 (2022), on the assistance
mechanism in Syria, and we look forward to its full
implementation by the parties concerned.
Peace, stability and security cannot be restored in
Syria without achieving progress on the political track
and on the work of the Constitutional Committee, in
line with Security Council resolution 2254 (2015). That
means that Syrian national interests should be given
priority over any other considerations and that the
political settlement to which we all look forward should
maintain Syria’s unity, sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity.
Mr. Alateek (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): The
world today is experiencing difficulties linked to the
consequences of the coronavirus disease pandemic,
which is weakening State public health and economic
systems, in addition to threats of food insecurity and
the exacerbation of humanitarian needs in conflict
areas and areas exposed to natural disasters. For that
reason, it is important that the international community
should reconsider its priorities and emphasize the
humanitarian situation and humanitarian needs first
and foremost.
In that regard, Saudi Arabia welcomed the
Security Council’s adoption of resolution 2642 (2022),
on renewing the cross-border assistance mechanism
in Syria. We also welcome the concerted efforts
by the penholders, the delegations of Norway and
Ireland, to reach a final text. The resolution is of vital
importance. While the renewal is only for six months
and assistance is going through only one crossing point,
it will nevertheless allow humanitarian assistance and
urgently needed supplies to reach the Syrian people.
The cross-border mechanism will ensure that they
reach them, which is especially vital given the increase
in humanitarian needs and the number of displaced
persons, according to the various reports of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. We also
reiterate that the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia stands ready
to continue to provide Syrians with humanitarian and
relief assistance within and outside Syria through the
programmes and projects implemented by the King
Salman Humanitarian Aid and Relief Centre, which
total more than $330 million in total.
My country’s delegation associates itself with
many delegations of Member States in calling upon the

22-434515/21

A/76/PV.96

international community, in particular the members
of the Security Council, to put political differences
aside and shoulder its responsibilities vis-à-vis the
Syrian people so that we can continue our constructive
cooperation to reach consensus on all issues that could
alleviate the humanitarian suffering of civilians,
especially the most vulnerable groups in Syria.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): We should
not be here today. There was no justification, no
conceivable reason, for Russia’s decision on 8 July (see
S/PV.9087) to veto a Security Council draft resolution
(S/2022/538) designed to facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to more than 4 million people
suffering from 11 years of war. These meetings are
intended to promote accountability — accountability
for the abuse of the very special veto power. There is no
question that, in vetoing a draft resolution authorizing
humanitarian aid to the most vulnerable Syrians, one
Council member abused its veto.
Right now, the humanitarian needs in Syria are
greater than they have ever been. When the Security
Council took up this issue, the Secretary-General asked
for more aid. United Nations agencies asked for more.
Non-governmental organizations (NGOs) asked for
more. Tragically, heartbreakingly, the Syrian people
asked for more. But one country chose not to put
humanitarian needs first. Rather than scaling aid up,
that country scaled aid down.
Since the start of the conflict in Syria in 2011,
Russia has vetoed 17 Security Council draft resolutions
on Syria. Throughout that time, Russia has sought
only to shield the Al-Assad regime — to shield it
from accountability for its brutal human rights abuses
and its chemical weapons use. Russia has propped
up the regime’s tattered standing in the international
community and forced humanitarian organizations
to capitulate to the regime’s whims. Let us remember
that the reason the Security Council has a mandate for
cross-border humanitarian aid is because the Al-Assad
regime has a well-documented history — a history of
corruption, stealing aid and denying it to communities
in need.
Beyond its 17 vetoes, Russia has undermined the
work of the Security Council on Syria in other ways.
Just in the past few days, we have seen Russia push
the Al-Assad regime to suspend its participation in
the ninth round of the Constitutional Committee — a
Syrian-led, United Nations-facilitated process. Russia
6/21

21/07/2022

continues to prioritize narrow Russian interests over
finding a political path out of a devastating conflict that
has now entered its eleventh year. It is far past time that
the regime and Russia engage constructively in helping
to advance the political solution that is called for in
Security Council resolution 2254 (2015).
Russia’s veto earlier this month has consequences.
The first of the two six-month extensions authorized in
Security Council resolution 2642 (2022), as many have
said before me, brings us to January, when humanitarian
needs will be greatest. That timeline risks leaving
Syrians without blankets and heating fuel and depriving
them of a steady supply of basic food items during the
coldest of months if the draft resolution confirming the
second sixth-month extension is not adopted. The scale
of the United Nations cross-border delivery mechanism
is immense and requires detailed, long-term planning.
Without certainty about the duration of the authorization,
the ability of humanitarian organizations to organize
supply chains, retain staff and plan operations will be
severely impacted.
As others have said, the international community
must come together now and firewall any further
politicization of what is a purely humanitarian issue.
The United States will work with any and every country
that prioritizes delivering aid to the most vulnerable.
In that spirit, let us all redouble our support for the
United Nations and those NGOs working to deliver the
desperately needed assistance to Syria. Let us remember
the Syrians who have suffered for over a decade and
are counting on leaders in New York to put Syrian
needs ahead of politics. Let us remember that there is
a different way to pursue the draft resolution — one in
which no vetoes are used and the entire Council comes
together in a spirit of solidarity. We have done that
before, and we must return to that path in the future.
We have the power to make that difference. The Syrian
people are counting on us to deliver.
Ms. Kinyungu (Kenya): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this meeting.
On 8 July (see S/PV.9087), the Security Council
took action on the renewal of the Syria humanitarian
cross-border mechanism by taking a vote on two
competing draft resolutions, which were not adopted,
one (S/2022/538) owing to a negative vote by a permanent
member and the other (S/2022/541) having failed to
obtain the required number of votes. The impasse was
the result of a difficult negotiation and essentially
22-43451

21/07/2022

arises from disagreements concerning the length of the
mechanism’s renewal. The draft resolution proposed
by the co-penholders, Norway and Ireland, called for
a 12-month renewal period, while the draft resolution
proposed by the Russian Federation called for a sixmonth period. Extensive negotiations were undertaken
to arrive at a single consensus draft resolution, but
they did not succeed. The Council’s inability to unite
endangered a critical channel of aid.
Kenya, as the coordinator of the 10 elected members
of the Security Council (E-10) for July, facilitated a
conversation that confirmed the support of elected
members for the co-penholders’ draft resolution.
An important point of unity for the E-10 was that a
12-month renewal offered humanitarian organizations
more certainty in their operations, particularly during
the coming winter. The E-10 agreed on a common
position reflected in an explanation of vote before the
voting, which supported the co-penholders’ draft. The
E-10 was also ready to support a compromise, reflecting
its primary focus on the need to prioritize the provision
of humanitarian aid to the Syrian people.
We believe that the E-10 played a constructive
role in seeking to bridge divides and identify useful
compromises between Council members. Perhaps a
lasting lesson that the General Assembly can take from
this experience is that elected members that are ready to
work across divides are important to the success of the
Security Council. The experience has also left us with
the conviction that E-10 unity is an important pillar
of an effective Security Council. In time, the role of
this elected block should be strengthened procedurally
and considered when it comes to fundamental Security
Council reform.

A/76/PV.96

adopt a draft resolution and the subsequent compromise
will make for a more realistic and more united Council
when the six-month cross-border mechanism expires
and there is a need to negotiate a continuation. In time,
we hope that Security Council resolutions will not be
necessary to ensure humanitarian access in Syria. For
that to happen, Syria and regional countries should
undertake trust-building, dialogue and negotiations
for a security solution that puts the needs of the Syrian
people first.
In conclusion, as Kenya draws close to the end of
its term on the Security Council, we want to make clear
that our primary motivation has been to support every
measure that relieves the humanitarian suffering of the
Syrian people.
Mr. Croker (United Kingdom): The use of the veto
is a heavy responsibility, and it is therefore one that
should not be used lightly. It has been 50 years (see
S/PV.1666) since the United Kingdom last unilaterally
vetoed a Security Council draft resolution. When we
negotiate draft resolutions, our objective is to reach
agreement and, where necessary, to win arguments in
votes rather than to use our veto to block Council action.
Unfortunately, the same is not true of Russia, which
has now used its veto 17 times since 2011 to block the
Council’s efforts to protect the Syrian people. That is in
addition to the numerous other times they have used it,
including to protect themselves following their illegal
invasion of Ukraine. Those 17 vetoes are a significant
cause of the international community’s failure to
protect the Syrian people from the Al-Assad regime — a
failure that has undermined and weakened the Council
and should weigh heavily on our collective conscience.

It is also important that the permanent members
engage the E-10 as a bridge to unity and necessary
compromises in the implementation of the mandate.
The immense efforts by the elected co-penholders to
find a compromise may also inform future changes
to the penholder system, especially at this time when
some of the five permanent members are engaged in
far-reaching geopolitical confrontations.

The unilateral Russian use of its veto to block
a humanitarian draft resolution (S/2022/538) on a
mechanism upon which 2.4 million people rely is
particularly egregious. Humanitarian need in Syria is
the greatest it has ever been. We heard repeatedly from
the United Nations and non-governmental organizations
that renewal of the cross-border mechanism for 12
months was necessary to provide the operational
certainty to meet humanitarian needs.

Despite the differences among its members, the
Security Council was able to adopt resolution 2642
(2022) on 12 July (see S/PV.9089). We listened carefully
to the reasons for the veto, and we believe that more
could have been done by all delegations to close the
divide. We are encouraged that the initial failure to

The explanation we heard from Russia today (see
A/76/PV.95) is pure fiction, including their farcical
suggestion that the United Kingdom, alongside the
United States of America and France, blocked their
proposed text. Let us be clear on the facts — their
proposed text was supported by only one other member

22-434517/21

A/76/PV.96

of the Council. Two votes in favour are far from the
nine votes required for a draft resolution to be adopted.
No amount of disinformation can change the fact that
only one member of the Council chose to politicize this
issue. The United Kingdom approached this negotiation
as we have every year since 2014 — on the basis of
humanitarian need alone.
We commend the co-penholders, Norway and
Ireland, for their efforts to secure the adoption of a draft
resolution that would maintain that vital humanitarian
lifeline in the face of Russian intransigence, which
received 13 votes in favour. And we should be clear:
under resolution 2642 (2022) the intent of the Council is
to maintain the mechanism for 12 months. The United
Kingdom will continue to support United Nations
efforts to deliver its humanitarian response plan, and
we call on other Member States to do the same.
Finally, as we have said many times before, a
genuine political process is the only sustainable means
of ending suffering in Syria.
Mr. Gala López (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Member States of the Group of Friends
in Defence of the Charter of the United Nations (see
A/76/PV.95). I wish to make the following statement in
my national capacity.
This is the second time that we are meeting pursuant
to resolution 76/262, entitled “Standing mandate for a
General Assembly debate when a veto is cast in the
Security Council”. The concerns and interpretations
that our delegation expressed when that resolution was
adopted (see A/76/PV.69) remain true today. The fact
that the mechanism is triggered automatically, without
any margin for Member States to decide whether
or not it is necessary to hold a meeting, proves the
insufficiencies of a text that was not discussed in depth
or with sufficient time.
In our opinion, this General Assembly meeting
is unnecessary. The issue under consideration has
already been surpassed by events with the adoption
of resolution 2642 (2022) in the Security Council on
12 July (see S/PV.9089). Pursuant to that resolution, the
authorization to extend the cross-border humanitarian
mechanism in Syria was approved.
Cuba rejects the politicization of humanitarian
aid and its use as an instrument of political blackmail.
8/21

21/07/2022

Any decision adopted in the Security Council about
the humanitarian situation in Syria should take into
account the interests and concerns of that country.
We reaffirm the guiding principles of humanitarian
assistance pursuant to resolution 46/182. It is essential
to obtain the consent of the country concerned. We must
fully respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Syria. We demand that there be no more external
influence in that brotherly Arab country. The main
responsibility for guaranteeing that humanitarian aid
reaches all Syrians falls on the Government. Therefore,
we must duly take into account all concerns relative
to assistance.
The United States claims to be very concerned about
the humanitarian situation in Syria, yet it maintains
criminal unilateral coercive measures against Syria.
Those measures, along with the impact of more than
10 years of a war that has been waged against this
country, as well as the socioeconomic and humanitarian
impacts of the multiple global crises exacerbated by
the coronavirus disease pandemic, have undermined
sustainable development in Syria and inflicted
enormous suffering upon the Syrian people. Those
unilateral measures should be eliminated promptly.
What is necessary is to encourage cooperation with
the Syrian Government in order to benefit its people,
without the selectivity or political bias that we see
today against that country.
Mr. Lam Padilla (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to thank the President of the
General Assembly for convening this meeting in
line with the provision of resolution 76/262 to hold a
General Assembly debate when a veto is cast in the
Security Council.
Guatemala joins others in once again expressing its
rejection of the use of the veto by permanent members
of the Security Council. We are deeply concerned that
draft resolution S/2022/538 was vetoed by a permanent
member despite the work carried out by the delegations
of Norway and Ireland who, as non-permanent members
of the Security Council, led the preparation of a draft
resolution aimed at providing humanitarian assistance
to those most in need in the Syrian Arab Republic for a
period of 12 months.
According to reports by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the humanitarian
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic is alarming.
Beyond the complex humanitarian situation caused by a
22-43451

21/07/2022

conflict that is more than a decade old, the destruction
of infrastructure, the critical economic situation, the
socioeconomic consequences and the coronavirus
disease pandemic have compounded the basic needs
of the country as a whole, with more than 14.6 million
people in need of humanitarian assistance.
Once again, Guatemala calls for the Security
Council to act responsibly regarding the maintenance of
international peace and security, based on the Charter of
the United Nations and in accordance with its purposes
and principles. Humanitarian assistance is one of the
fundamental purposes of the Organization, as stated
in the Charter, promoting international cooperation in
solving international problems of an economic, social,
cultural or humanitarian nature.
In conclusion, we recognize the subsequent efforts
to adopt resolution 2642 (2022), on humanitarian
assistance in Syria. However, we are of the view that, in
circumstances as complex as those that the country is
going through, it is necessary to act in a timely manner
to assist the civilian population in need.
Mr. Benaabou (France) (spoke in French): France
regrets that the draft resolution (S/2022/538) submitted
by Ireland and Norway on 8 July (see S/PV.9087) and
supported by almost all the members of the Security
Council was not adopted, following the veto used by
the Russian Federation alone.
The Security Council has since adopted resolution
2642 (2022), renewing the cross-border humanitarian
mechanism. I wish to commend the outstanding work
of Ireland and Norway. However, that represents a
precarious renewal, lasting only six months, which
will expire in mid-winter and without a firm guarantee
of renewal. The Security Council has therefore failed
to live up to its responsibilities, ignoring the appeal
of the Secretary-General and the entire humanitarian
community to renew the mechanism for 12 months.
Progress in cross-line access must of course continue.
However, even if the cross-line convoys were deployed
regularly, they could not replace the 800 aid trucks that
cross the Turkish border each month.
In six months, at the time of the renewal of the
cross-border mechanism, France will be extremely
vigilant in order to ensure that the Council gives the
humanitarian community the possibility of responding
to the immense needs of the population. We will continue
to fully assume our humanitarian responsibilities, in

A/76/PV.96

the spirit of the Secretary-General’s “Parameters and
principles of United Nations assistance in Syria”.
I recall that at the sixth Brussels Conference, held
last May, the European Union and its member States
committed to disburse more than 4.8 billion euros of
the nearly €6.4 billion that had been promised. In terms
of funding, Russia gives nothing or almost nothing.
France remains committed to putting an end to the war.
Our position and that of our European partners remains
unchanged: we will not finance reconstruction and we
will not lift sanctions until a credible and inclusive
political process is firmly under way, in accordance
with Security Council resolution 2254 (2015).
Ms. Matar (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): The United Arab Emirates appreciates the
convening of today’s meeting on the mechanism
established by resolution 76/262 to enhance the
transparency of the work of the Security Council, which
acts on behalf of all Members of the United Nations.
The United Arab Emirates welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2642 (2022), which represents a compromise
solution. My country participated constructively in the
negotiations, during which the Council’s 10 elected
members took a united position in a clear demonstration
of their commitment to the implementation of the
Council’s mandate. That meticulously drafted resolution
reflects the Council’s commitment to respond to the
dire humanitarian needs in Syria and ensures that relief
assistance reaches all those in need across the country
and by all possible means.
Although we had hoped that the cross-border aid
mechanism in Syria would be extended for 12 months,
we believe that resolution 2642 (2022) contains critical
additional provisions that provide a basis for addressing
the humanitarian situation in Syria in the long term
and on a larger scale. For example, it calls for the
intensification of early-recovery projects, including to
provide electricity to the Syrian people. Electricity is a
fundamental humanitarian need. Without it, essential
services, in particular hospitals and schools, cannot
function and millions of Syrians will not have access
to water.
In that context, my country urges Member States
to focus on the humanitarian imperative of this dossier
and avoid politicization, while placing the needs of
all Syrians above any other considerations when the
cross-border mechanism is discussed for renewal in
January 2023.

22-434519/21

A/76/PV.96

In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates calls for
continued importance to be given to the Syrian dossier
in all its long-term aspects in order to achieve stability,
prosperity and peace for the brotherly Syrian people
and end their humanitarian crisis.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): Germany fully aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the representative
of the European Union, in its capacity as observer (see
A/76/PV.95). I would like to add the following remarks
in my national capacity.
At the outset, let me stress that we deeply regret the
latest veto cast by Russia against the draft resolution
(S/202/538) proposed by Norway and Ireland for a
12-month renewal of the cross-border mechanism in
Bab Al-Hawa. By using its veto power yet again, Russia
not only put at risk the lives of millions of Syrians who
rely on humanitarian aid for their sheer daily survival
but also held that purely humanitarian draft resolution
hostage to achieve its political goal of bolstering the
Syrian regime.
We strongly condemn such political tactics. The
lives of human beings should under no circumstances
become a pawn of political power games. That is
inhumane and morally unacceptable. Humanitarian
access in the situation at hand is governed by
international humanitarian law. The parties to the
conflict must allow and facilitate rapid and unimpeded
passage of humanitarian relief for civilians in need, and
such consent must not be refused on arbitrary grounds.
The uncertainty created by the repeated threat and
use of the veto in recent years is clearly at the expense
of the Syrian people, as well as the effectiveness of the
humanitarian work provided by the United Nations and
its partners. It is also a distraction from the Security
Council’s core task in the Syria file: to work towards a
sustainable political solution, within the framework of
Security Council resolution 2254 (2015), that addresses
the root causes of the conflict and ensures accountability.
We expect the Security Council to renew once
more the cross-border mandate in January 2023, simply
because it will be a humanitarian imperative to ensure
life-saving and life-sustaining humanitarian deliveries
for more than 4 million Syrians in northern Syria,
particularly throughout the harsh winter.
The General Assembly needs to closely follow the
humanitarian situation in Syria. Any failure to guarantee
the continuity of humanitarian aid deliveries will need
10/21

21/07/2022

to see consequences. The General Assembly should
therefore stand ready to assist given a scenario in which
the Council shows itself again obstructed. It did so when
it successfully established the International, Impartial
and Independent Mechanism. That foreshadows the
way for further action by the Assembly, if need be.
Humanitarian needs in Syria are most likely to
increase in the upcoming months, in particular in the
coming winter. Demands will be further intensified
in the light of the global food crisis and skyrocketing
prices for basic commodities and energy due to
Russia’s unlawful and unprovoked war of aggression
against Ukraine. We cannot risk another obstruction
that would deprive people in dire need of international
humanitarian assistance.
We therefore urgently call on the Russian
Federation to refrain from using its veto power again.
It is also important to reiterate and remind ourselves
that there can only be a political solution to the conflict
in Syria. We underscore that no normalization, lifting
of sanctions or assistance for reconstruction will be
possible until the Syrian regime in Damascus engages
in a true and meaningful political transition in line
with Security Council resolution 2254 (2022) and the
Geneva communiqué of 2012 (S/2012/522, annex).
Ms. Kókai (Hungary): Hungary aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of the
European Union (see A/76/PV.95), in its capacity as
observer, and would like to add the following remarks
in our national capacity.
In April, the General Assembly adopted a resolution
on the so-called veto initiative (resolution 76/262), which
enables United Nations States Members to discuss
an issue in the framework of a formal meeting of the
General Assembly if a veto was previously cast on that
situation in the Security Council. Hungary underlines
the importance of the initiative, which we believe
largely contributes to strengthening transparency
within the United Nations decision-making system.
Humanitarian needs in Syria are greater than ever.
Hungary believes that the renewal of the mandate on
the cross-border humanitarian mechanism was of the
utmost importance to alleviate the humanitarian needs
of the Syrian population. While Hungary welcomes
the latest six-month extension of the mandate, we also
urge Council members to uphold their commitment
and renew the mechanism for a further six months by
January 2023.
22-43451

21/07/2022

Mitigating the serious humanitarian crisis caused
by the conflict, which has been going on for more
than 11 years, should be one of our most important
priorities — not only for Syria but also for the entire
region. Therefore, Hungary is also implementing a
number of development and humanitarian projects with
a long-term impact in Syria and the countries of the
region. We believe that the international community
should spare no effort to help people in need in Syria,
and cross-border humanitarian access plays a significant
role in that regard. We emphasize that humanitarian
action should not be politicized and that humanitarian
assistance must be provided in line with the principles
of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence.
Let me underline again the importance of the
extension of the Syrian cross-border mechanism and
our sincere hope that the mandate can be renewed again
by January.
Mr. Jiménez (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the delegation of Venezuela for speaking on
behalf of the Group of Friends in Defence of the Charter
of the United Nations (see A/76/PV.95). Nicaragua
aligns itself with that statement.
Unfortunately, today’s meeting exposes the
politicization, double standards and selectivity with
which resolution 76/262, on a standing mandate for a
General Assembly debate when a veto is cast in the
Security Council, was also handled. The mechanism of
that resolution is being exploited and abused by some
Western countries that promote trends and measures
that result in negative votes by the other permanent
members of the Security Council on draft resolutions
presented by Western countries.
Those draft resolutions clearly uphold and promote
Western interests and the Western global agenda, while
simultaneously undermining any effort at responsible,
good-faith negotiations on the draft resolutions before
the Security Council, putting the maintenance of
international peace and security in real danger.
Nicaragua is of the view that the issue of concern
today has already been resolved, since Security Council
resolution 2642 (2022) on extending the authorization
of the Syria cross-border humanitarian assistance
mechanism was adopted by 12 votes in favour, with 3
abstentions, on 12 July (see S/PV.9089).
The adoption of resolution 2642 (2022) confirms
that, when negotiations are responsible and not

A/76/PV.96

politicized, the Council acts accordingly and fulfils
its responsibilities. Therefore, if the negotiations had
continued on 8 July, today’s meeting would not have
been called, as other delegations have stated.
In that regard, we must thank the Russian
Federation for its explanation of vote in the Security
Council, its solidarity with the humanitarian situation
in Syria and its refusal to allow the politicization of
that humanitarian aid, as well as for its defence of the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
self-determination of the people and the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic.
We underline the need to use these spaces to
promote greater cooperation and collaboration with the
people and the Government of Syria. We must eliminate
double standards and the imposition of illegal, criminal
and inhumane unilateral coercive measures, which
constitute aggression and have catastrophic effects on
the lives of the Syrian people and their livelihoods,
thereby hampering the work of the United Nations and
its humanitarian agencies in Syria. The international
community believes that, if the desire and intent is truly
to provide humanitarian assistance to, and alleviate
the suffering of, the Syrian people, then the first step
should be the immediate cessation of sanctions and
unilateral measures, which during a pandemic are also
a crime against humanity.
Nicaragua reiterates its position of principle with
respect to the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of all peoples. Nicaragua, as a nation of
peace-loving people who respect international law,
does not recognize or accept initiatives that violate
the sovereignty of Syria, which has suffered attacks
on, and violations of, its territorial integrity and
political independence.
We reiterate that any resolution and decision
related to the situation in Syria, whether taken in the
General Assembly or in the Security Council, must take
into account the legitimate concerns of that country,
as the main stakeholder in the resolution of this issue,
its rebuilding and its right to live in peace. We reject
any attempt to politicize humanitarian assistance
and reaffirm our support for the guiding principles
of humanitarian assistance, international law and
international humanitarian law.
To truly address the humanitarian situation in
Syria, we must take a wise and constructive approach
that demands an end to attempts at isolation, hostility

22-4345111/21

A/76/PV.96

and unilateral coercive measures and policies. We must
find a way to create an environment that is conducive
to a political solution that is Syrian-owned and Syrianled; is free of external interference; restores the
security and stability of that country, while allowing
what has been destroyed by terrorism, interventionism
and foreign aggression to be rebuilt; and allows for the
voluntary and dignified return of displaced persons and
refugees to their homes.
In conclusion, the international community hopes
that transparency and accountability will prevail in
meetings on this topic. In that regard, it would also be
appropriate for permanent members that cast a negative
vote on the draft resolution submitted by Russia on
8 July (S/2022/541) to present their explanations. That
would preserve the credibility of the General Assembly,
since the resolution adopted on 12 July did not differ
substantively from the draft resolution presented by
Russia on 8 July.
Mr. Ferreira Silva Aranda (Portugal): Portugal
aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of the European Union (see A/76/PV.95),
in its capacity as observer, and would like to add the
following remarks in its national capacity.
For the second time, we are making use of a
mechanism meant to strengthen the United Nations
system and ensure accountability between the Security
Council and the General Assembly. As co-sponsors
of the veto initiative, we believe that this debate is
very relevant, although one we would rather not have.
The uncertainty arising from the repeated threat and
use of the veto in the Council is at the cost of the
Syrian people and the effectiveness of United Nations
humanitarian assistance.
We regret the veto used by the Russian Federation
on the draft resolution (S/2022/538) proposed by the
co-penholders for a 12-month renewal of the crossborder mechanism. If approved, that would have
ensured further predictability for humanitarian actors
on the ground in order to better plan and provide
critical assistance to the Syrian people. The renewal of
the mechanism was an important outcome for millions
of Syrians who depend on United Nations humanitarian
assistance. Nonetheless, we urge all Council members
to uphold their commitment to renew resolution 2642
(2022) for a further six months by January 2023 in
order to ensure that cross-border assistance continues
12/21

21/07/2022

through the winter, especially in the context of the food
crisis triggered by the war in Ukraine.
Portugal will continue to support a peaceful
political transition in Syria and to pay special attention
to the provision of education in the humanitarian
context. Education is critical for children and young
people in conflict settings. It is the very foundation
of tolerance and peace and the cornerstone of
sustainable development.
Finally, on the use of the veto, we would like to
encourage all Member States to join the Political
Declaration on the Suspension of Veto Powers in Cases
of Mass Atrocities and the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency Group code of conduct regarding
Security Council action against genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes.
Mr. Shaev (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
Republic of Belarus aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of
the Group of Friends in Defence of the Charter of the
United Nations (see A/76/PV.95).
In our opinion, this meeting is the result of deeprooted disagreements among the permanent members
of the Security Council. We are forced to note that
the subject of international humanitarian assistance
is increasingly being used by individual countries
as a pretext for interfering in the internal affairs of
sovereign States — States that are going through a
difficult period of humanitarian disasters — and also
as an opportunity to shed doubt on the very basis on
which the Security Council operates.
We believe that practice is unacceptable. Instead
of dealing with the deep-rooted causes of those
disagreements, the inability of the Security Council to
reach consensus and the reasons for which permanent
members of the Council are reluctant to reach a
compromise, we are being asked today to give our
opinion on the agenda of the Security Council.
Having taken the decision to dissociate from the
adoption of resolution 76/262, a standing mandate for
convening a General Assembly debate when a veto is
cast in the Security Council, we clearly understood
that duplicating in the General Assembly the work of
a primary organ responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security would only erode the
mandate the Security Council and weaken its role.
22-43451

21/07/2022

We are not opposed to additional discussion of
questions on the agendas of primary organs of the
United Nations in the General Assembly. Far from it.
But let us be realistic and ask ourselves whether this is
constructive. This will inevitably detract from the time
and resources of the United Nations system.
When it comes to the veto right, we are forced once
again to note that this institution should not be seen
as a privilege for individual countries. That right is an
exclusive element of the responsibility of permanent
member countries when it comes to considering
questions of the maintenance of international peace and
security. The mechanism of the veto right is enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations and is an important
tool for coming up with balanced decisions that will
shape the peace and security of our planet.
Returning to the substance of this meeting, we
note that, if the draft resolutions on the cross-border
mechanism for the provision of humanitarian assistance
to Syria are compared — draft resolution 2022/541
proposed by Russia and draft resolution 2022/538
proposed by Ireland and Norway — among other
things, they take the same stance on the extension of
the mechanism for six months. That gives rise to the
question of whether this meeting is appropriate, given
that the mechanism was ultimately renewed.
Belarus continues to share in the concerns of
the international community with respect to the
humanitarian situation in Syria. We believe that
comprehensive, constructive solutions should be found
to the long-standing problems in this area on the basis
of consensus to de-escalate the situation in the region.
Mr. Cho (Republic of Korea): The Republic of
Korea welcomes this opportunity for the General
Assembly to debate a situation on which a veto was cast
in the Security Council on 8 July (see S/PV.9087).
Syria is indeed in a grave humanitarian crisis. We
are deeply troubled by the report that the number of
people in need is the highest since the start of the war,
which began 11 years ago. Soaring food and fuel prices
are only exacerbating the already serious humanitarian
situation on the ground. It is of particular concern that
needs in the north-west of Syria continue to grow.
More than 90 per cent of people in the north-west need
aid, and 80 per cent of those in need are women and
children. The massive humanitarian operation by the
United Nations and its partners allowed us to stave off
the worst. But more is required.

A/76/PV.96

Against that dismal background, we regret that the
Security Council failed to adopt a 12-month extension
of the mandate for cross-border aid despite the support
of a vast majority of members. Without the veto cast
by the Russian Federation, the original draft resolution
(S/2022/538), proposed by Norway and Ireland, would
have provided humanitarian organizations on the
ground with more certainty and predictability, which
are essential for an adequate humanitarian response.
While we welcome and support the significant
progress in cross-line assistance and early-recovery
efforts across Syria, it is an undeniable reality that
there is no alternative to cross-border deliveries in
terms of scale and scope. The cross-border mechanism
still remains the critical lifeline for millions in need in
the north-west of Syria. It is therefore a relief that the
Bab Al-Hawa border crossing remains open following
the adoption of resolution 2642 (2022).
However, we share the concerns expressed about the
precarious status of the mandate. We hope the Security
Council can unite on intrinsically humanitarian issues
and that the Council’s decision on this matter in six
months’ time will be guided solely by humanitarian
needs, putting the needs of the Syrian people at the
heart of the Council’s deliberations.
The Republic of Korea, for its part, is deeply
committed to joining the international effort to alleviate
the suffering of the Syrian people. At the sixth Brussels
Conference, held last May, we pledged to contribute
$13.8 million in humanitarian assistance to Syria and
neighbouring countries that host Syrian refugees this
year. As the Secretary-General recently underlined,
the only way to end the humanitarian tragedy in Syria
is through a truly nationwide ceasefire and a political
solution that enables the Syrian people to determine
their own future. We strongly encourage the Syrian
parties and countries involved to move forward towards
an inclusive political solution, in line with Security
Council resolution 2254 (2015), in order to end this
long-standing humanitarian catastrophe.
Before concluding, I would like to remind the
Assembly that this is the fourth consecutive occasion
since last year that the use of the veto by one or two
States has blocked the Security Council’s action on
such critically important issues as climate change,
aggression, non-proliferation and humanitarian
assistance. The veto lies at the heart of the problem
that undermines the Council’s ability to carry out its

22-4345113/21

A/76/PV.96

core mandate. A growing number of Member States
are now vocally supporting a limitation of the veto.
My delegation would like to reiterate its support for all
initiatives aimed at limiting the use of the veto.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Sovereign Order of Malta.
Mr. Beresford-Hill (Sovereign Order of Malta):
The Sovereign Order of Malta gives its thanks to
Ireland and Norway for their relentless pursuit of this
agenda, confronting the devastating consequences that
the recent veto cast will have on the millions of people
whose welfare and very lives depend on the maintenance
of a humanitarian corridor between Türkiye and Syria.
A total of 4.1 million people in north-western Syria will
be affected — 90 per cent of whom are in severe need
of humanitarian assistance. By putting politics above
human lives, basic human rights have been undermined.
In March, I visited a hospital supported by the
Sovereign Order of Malta and a refugee camp in Bab
Al-Salamah, in Turkish-controlled Syria. There I saw
for myself the suffering and privation of the area, how
the supply of aid from all aid agencies was making a
difference to the inhabitants and how that aid was one
of the last remaining agents of hope.
What would a closure of the border mean for
the dynamics of humanitarian assistance in northwestern Syria? We know that the entire United Nations
coordination mechanism would be threatened by a
non-renewal of the cross-border facility. There would
be a transitional period due to a necessary shift of roles
and responsibilities from cross-border, United Nationscontrolled to cross-line commercial operations. It is
unclear how such a change would impact the volume of
aid distribution, especially in the light of concerns about
aid diversion in regime-controlled areas and the ability
of Damascus to implement humanitarian decisions.
We must face the fact that six months will not give
sufficient time to build a long-term and sustainable
alternative strategy to meet the needs of civilians
affected. Training and capacity-building for health
authorities and local professionals will continue to be
very difficult, if not impossible, in many areas.
It remains our deep concern that the lack of respect
for international humanitarian law and international
human rights law is becoming more and more prevalent
across the international community. The Charter of
the United Nations, in its Preamble, set the objective
14/21

21/07/2022

of establishing the conditions under which justice and
respect for the obligations arising from treaties and
other sources of international law can be maintained.
We urge the Members of the United Nations,
especially the Security Council, to put politics aside
and focus on those who are, most decidedly, left behind.
Among other things, not to do so makes a mockery of
our commitment to the Sustainable Development Goals
and the work that the Economic and Social Council
recently completed here in this very Hall.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in this debate. The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 124.
Agenda item 2 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of item
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly concluded its consideration
of agenda item 25 at its 54th plenary meeting, on
17 December 2021. In order for the General Assembly
to take action on the draft decision, it will be necessary
to reopen consideration of agenda item 25. May I take
it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to reopen
consideration of agenda item 25?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Members will also recall
that, at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 17 September 2021,
the General Assembly decided to allocate agenda item
25 to the Second Committee. To enable the Assembly
to take action expeditiously on the draft decision, may
I take it that the Assembly wishes to consider agenda
item 25 directly in plenary meeting and proceed
immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided (decision 76/506 B).
Agenda item 25 (continued)
Operational activities for development
Draft decision A/76/L.73
The Acting President: The Assembly will
now take action on draft decision A/76/L.73,
entitled “United Nations Pledging Conference for
Development Activities”.
22-43451

21/07/2022

A/76/PV.96

May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft decision A/76/L.73?
Draft decision A/76/L.73 was adopted (decision
76/573).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 25.
Agenda item 20 and 78 (continued)
Sustainable development
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Draft resolution A/76/L.72
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/76/L.72, entitled
“Our ocean, our future, our responsibility”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/76/L.72?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 76/296).

A/76/L.72

was

adopted

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
who wishes to speak in explanation of position on the
resolution just adopted.
Mr. Guerra Sansonetti (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela once again thanks Portugal and Kenya for
organizing the Ocean Conference, as well as for the
amenities provided to our delegations.
We would also like to take this opportunity
to thank the delegations of Denmark and Grenada
for co-facilitating the declaration that was adopted
within the framework of the Conference, which was
held in Portugal, in support of the implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14.
In that context, we recall that the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, as a responsible member of
the international community, decided to support that
recently adopted declaration, as my country is aware of
the importance of maintaining consensus on a matter as
vital as the comprehensive achievement of sustainable
development in its three pillars, and of making progress
on an issue as crucial as the conservation and sustainable
use of the oceans, seas and marine resources.

However, during the course of negotiations and
at the time of adoption of the declaration in Portugal,
my delegation had — and continues to have — serious
reservations regarding the references in the declaration
to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea (UNCLOS), given that our country is not a party
to the Convention. The norms of that Convention
are not applicable to my country as conventional
law, or as international custom, except those that the
Venezuelan State has expressly recognized, or may
recognize in future, through their incorporation into
national legislation.
In that regard and in relation to resolution 76/296,
we reiterate our reservations and emphasize that our
joining the consensus that allowed its adoption without
a vote should not in any way be interpreted as a change
of position with respect to UNCLOS, since the reasons
that motivate the decision of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela not to sign that instrument still stand.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this stage
of its consideration of agenda item 20 and sub-item (a)
of agenda item 78.
Agenda item 68
New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and international
support
(a) New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and international
support
Draft resolution A/76/L.59/Rev.1
(b) Causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa
Draft resolution A/76/L.60
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan to introduce draft resolution
A/76/L.59/Rev.1.
Ms. Majeed (Pakistan): On behalf of the Group
of 77 (G-77) and China, Pakistan has the honour to
introduce draft resolution A/76/L.59/Rev.1, entitled
“New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support”.

22-4345115/21

A/76/PV.96

21/07/2022

The countries of Africa have strengthened their
commitments and actions in the area of socioeconomic
development and have continued to undertake the
actions and efforts necessary to achieve sustainable
and resilient recovery from the coronavirus disease
pandemic. In that regard, it is very important to
highlight their crucial role in transforming the
development agenda through the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
represents the commitment of the leaders of all countries
to multilateralism, the central role of the United
Nations and the promotion of sustainable development.
In that context, draft resolution A/76/L.59/Rev.1 is a
shared pledge by Africa and all its partners, based on
a common vision and their firm and shared belief that
they have a pressing duty to eradicate poverty in Africa
and put the continent on a path to sustainable growth
and development.
The G-77 and China has always supported the
ambition of the Group of African States to encourage
international cooperation with Africa in a spirit
of mutual benefit and international solidarity. We
would like to extend our thanks and appreciation to
the African Group, represented by the coordinators,
Ms. Meryem Hamdouni of Morocco and Mr. Jeswuni
Abudu-Birresborn of Ghana, for their excellent
work representing the G-77 and China during the
process. In addition, we want to thank the facilitator,
Mr. Mohamed-Esseghir Latrous of Algeria, for his
outstanding leadership and stewardship of the process.
We would also like to thank all delegations for their
continuous engagement and active commitment.
With the very minor technical updates made this
year, we look forward to the substantive discussions to
be held during the seventy-seventh session with the aim
of stepping up our efforts to cooperate in implementing
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in
synergy with the Agenda 2063 of the African Union,
for the shared development and prosperity of all
African countries.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/76/L.59/Rev.1,
entitled “New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and international support”.
I give the
the Secretariat.
16/21

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In addition to the
members of the Group of 77 and China, the following
countries have also become co-sponsors of draft
resolution A/76/L.59/Rev.1: the Russian Federation
and Türkiye.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/76/L.59/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/76/L.59/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 76/297).
The Acting President: Before giving to speakers
who wish to speak in explanation of position on the
resolution just adopted, may I remind delegations that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Atanaszov (Hungary): With regard to
resolution 76/297, entitled “New Partnership for
Africa’s Development: progress in implementation and
international support”, Hungary wishes to add some
remarks in its national capacity.
Hungary remains committed to promoting
development in Africa; nevertheless, we would like to
take this opportunity to put on the record Hungary’s
position concerning the eighteenth preambular
paragraph of the resolution, which contains references
to the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and
Regular Migration.
I would like to recall that Hungary did not adopt
the Global Compact and does not participate in its
implementation, as we firmly believe that migration
has no positive impact on inclusive growth and
development. In our view, instead of promoting
departures from countries of origin and facilitating
migration, we should focus on providing assistance to
third countries locally by creating stable and secure
conditions, thereby ensuring that people can stay in
their homeland in peace and prosperity.
The Hungarian Government therefore prioritizes
development projects in Africa that can contribute
to establishing lasting solutions for those in need
and improving the living conditions of people in
vulnerable situations.
For those reasons, Hungary disassociates
itself from the eighteenth preambular paragraph of
resolution 76/297.
22-43451

21/07/2022

Ms. Kafková (Czechia): Czechia is pleased to
join the consensus on resolution 76/297, entitled “New
Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in
implementation and international support”.
We fully recognize the importance of the
implementation of the New Partnership for Africa´s
Development. Through its development cooperation,
Czechia assists partner countries in Africa to promote
democracy, human rights and good governance, as well as
to build resilience and achieve sustainable development.
Czechia did not join the Global Compact for Safe,
Orderly and Regular Migration, did not participate in
the Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, held
in Marrakesh, and voted against resolution 73/195,
by which the General Assembly endorsed the Global
Compact, for the reasons we clearly explained in the
explanation of vote delivered on 19 December 2018 (see
A/73/PV.60).
Recalling those facts, Czechia cannot accept the
word “reaffirming” in the eighteenth preambular
paragraph of resolution 76/297, and it is therefore
obliged to disassociate itself from that paragraph.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 68?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan to introduce draft resolution
A/76/L.60.
Ms. Majeed (Pakistan): On behalf of the Group
of 77 (G-77) and China, Pakistan has the honour
to introduce draft resolution A/76/L.60, entitled
“Implementation of the recommendations contained
in the report of the Secretary-General on the causes
of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa”.
The draft resolution highlights the crucial role of
African countries in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts, as well as in building peace for sustainable
development. The causes of conflict in Africa are
many. Complex internal and external factors continue
to cause, fuel and perpetuate disputes in many parts of
the world, including Africa.

A/76/PV.96

Despite the progress made in recent years, the
global health crisis has directly affected Africa’s ability
to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, in
particular to address the many challenges and threats to
its peace and stability. Peace and security in Africa have
an important bearing on the stability and development
of the world generally. Consequently, partnerships are
essential, particularly for pooling efforts and means of
action in the areas of crisis prevention and resolution,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The international
community should collectively uphold the leadership
and ownership of African countries in suppressing
conflicts by acting on the root causes of such conflicts.
African countries can address the causes of human
insecurity if afforded the policy space and international
solidarity. The work of the United Nations in the areas
of conflict prevention and resolution and peacebuilding
requires constant rethinking and should be based on the
principles of national ownership and respect for African
resolutions. The key will be ensuring the speedy and
comprehensive implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. African countries have taken
numerous and significant steps to address peace and
security challenges at the national and regional levels.
Despite the progress that has been made in the area
of security, the international community and partners
should continue to support activities and initiatives
aimed at strengthening the efforts of African countries
to address the continent’s peace and security. In order
to prevent and resolve conflict at its earliest stages,
we stress the importance of ensuring that the United
Nations system supports the efforts of African countries
to achieve sustainable and durable peace.
The G-77 and China has always supported the
ambition of the Group of African States to step up
international cooperation for Africa in a spirit of mutual
benefit and international solidarity. We would like to
express our thanks and appreciation to the Group of
African States, represented by the co-coordinators,
Mr. Joseph Davies of South Africa and Mr. Tony Oweke
of Kenya, as well as to the facilitator, Ms. Nadja Micael
of Eritrea, for their brilliant work and great leadership.
We would also like to thank all delegations for their
active engagement and commitment, which enabled us
to proceed with technical updates. We look forward
to the substantive discussions to be held during the
seventy-seventh session.

22-4345117/21

A/76/PV.96

21/07/2022

The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/76/L.60,
entitled “Implementation of the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.60?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 76/298).

A/76/L.60

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
those representatives who wish to speak in explanation
of position on the resolution just adopted, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Atanaszov (Hungary): Hungary wishes to
add some remarks in its national capacity regarding
resolution 76/298, entitled “Implementation of the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa”.
Hungary attaches great importance to sustainable
development in Africa and recognizes the challenges
caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, climate
change and so on. However, we would like to put on
the record Hungary’s position on paragraph 11 of the
resolution, which contains references to the Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration.
Hungary did not support the adoption of the Global
Compact and does not participate in its implementation.
Since 2015, Hungary has consequently emphasized
that, instead of promoting or facilitating migration,
the focus should be on providing assistance to third
countries locally by creating local conditions that are
more conducive to stable growth and development.
Therefore, we put emphasis on building health care,
agriculture, sanitation, water management and
educational infrastructure in African countries.
For those reasons, Hungary disassociates itself
from paragraph 11 of this resolution.
Ms. Kafková (Czechia): Czechia is pleased to
join the consensus on resolution 76/298, entitled
“Implementation of the recommendations contained
in the report of the Secretary-General on the causes
of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
18/21

sustainable development in Africa”. For the reasons
explained in its statement in explanation of position
on resolution 76/297, Czechia disassociates itself from
paragraph 11 of resolution 76/298.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 68 and of agenda item 68 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 75 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
Draft decision A/76/L.71
The Acting President: I now give the floor
to the representative of Belarus to introduce draft
decision A/76/L.71.
Mr. Evseenko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
The Republic of Belarus has the honour to introduce
draft decision A/76/L.71, entitled “Strengthening of
the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief
assistance of the United Nations, including special
economic assistance”.
Under the draft decision, the General Assembly
would defer to its seventy-eighth session its
consideration of the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of resolution 74/114, of 16 December
2019, on the persistent legacy of the Chernobyl
disaster, under the sub-item entitled “Strengthening of
international cooperation and coordination of efforts to
study, mitigate and minimize the consequences of the
Chernobyl disaster”.
In submitting this draft decision, we are guided
by the importance of international cooperation on
Chernobyl under the auspices of the United Nations and
the fact that it is unacceptable to politicize international
cooperation aimed at overcoming the long-term impacts
of the accidents at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant.
To a greater or lesser degree, the impacts of the largest
man-made disaster of the twentieth century, which
happened more than 35 years ago, have affected more
than two dozen countries, which means that we can say
it is global in nature.
22-43451

21/07/2022

A/76/PV.96

The heaviest burden was borne by Belarus. About
35 per cent of the radioactive fallout from Chernobyl
on the European continent is on the territory of our
country. The impacts of Chernobyl for Belarus have
been described as a national ecological disaster, and
dealing with that is a State priority.

The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft decision A/76/L.71.

The subject of the legacy of Chernobyl remains
relevant for the affected areas. We are grateful for
the contribution of the international community to
their recovery and development. A particular role
in that area has been played by the United Nations
Development Programme, which acts as coordinator of
all the agencies and organizations of the United Nations
system involved in that work.

Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): We just heard a statement
in which the gentleman said that it is very important
to preserve the trilateral agreement. Perhaps he meant
Ukraine, Belarus and the Russian Federation — and yet
the gentleman has never made an effort to get in touch
with the Ukrainian delegation to discuss the matter.
Nevertheless, let me proceed with my explanation.

Belarus, Ukraine and Russia, as the countries that
were worst affected by the disaster at the Chernobyl
nuclear power plant, were the initiators of the sub-item
under consideration today. We are convinced that such
an important subject must not be looked at in the context
of confrontation and a lack of consensus. The subject of
Chernobyl is perhaps one of very few subjects today
that can — and must — unite us, rather than becoming
another opportunity for mutual recrimination.
Having set aside political considerations, let us ask
ourselves a simple question. Are we ready to submit
to the international community — and above all to the
peoples of the three worst-affected countries — joint
creative proposals on the basis of genuine dialogue?
That is a rhetorical question. We are convinced that
international cooperation on Chernobyl must be
continued exclusively in the spirit of coordination
and partnership, rather than becoming a platform for
manipulation and exacerbating confrontation. Belarus
will never back away from the subject of Chernobyl.
That catastrophe must remain on the General
Assembly’s agenda for many years to come.
Draft decision A/76/L. 71 is an attempt to protect
cooperation on Chernobyl from irrelevant rhetoric and
to preserve the fragile consensus that we managed to
achieve with great difficulty three years ago. Deferring
this important subject, which requires exceptional
trilateral consent on cooperation, would send an
important and sobering signal to the international
community about the need to preserve the principles
of multilateralism and consensus. We hope for the
solidarity of the Assembly and call on it to support the
draft decision.

Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, may I remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.

Thirty-six years ago, on 26 April 1986, the worst
nuclear accident ever occurred at the Chornobyl nuclear
power station. The disastrous consequences of that
explosion rippled across all of Ukraine, neighbouring
countries and far beyond. They still affect the health of
people throughout the region. Nobody dares live or farm
in the surrounding areas, although there were attempts
to dig trenches there by the Russian armed forces just a
few weeks ago during the temporary occupation.
At the time of the accident, the Soviet Government
tried to conceal the real scale of the tragedy. Crowds
of citizens were pushed into the streets of Kyiv for a
May Day parade in an apparent attempt to project the
message that nothing had happened at the Chornobyl
nuclear power plant. We should thank the international
community — many of the countries gathered
here — because, before long, Moscow was forced to
tell at least part of the truth. It took much more time to
reveal the entire extent of the tragedy, and I praise the
United Nations contribution to that end.
For more than three decades, the international
community has invested outstanding efforts in
mitigating and minimizing the consequences of the
disaster in both Ukraine and neighbouring countries.
Let us remember, however, that the Chornobyl nuclear
power plant is located on the territory of Ukraine, which
brings my country to the top of two lists — that of most
affected countries and that of responder countries. The
delegation of Ukraine is shocked by the attempt to
conceal information about the current situation in the
facility, which still poses a threat to nuclear safety on
a global level.
In short, draft decision A/76/L. 71 is an attempt
to prevent reporting by the Secretary-General to the

22-4345119/21

A/76/PV.96

General Assembly on a huge array of facts established
by experts, not politicians. It is also an attempt to
prevent the General Assembly from taking wellinformed action based on such reporting.
Let me note in that regard that in 2019 the General
Assembly adopted by consensus resolution 74/114,
entitled “Persistent legacy of the Chernobyl disaster”,
in which the Secretary-General was requested to
submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-seventh
session a report on the implementation of the resolution
under a special sub-item, entitled “Strengthening of
international cooperation and coordination of efforts to
study, mitigate and minimize the consequences of the
Chernobyl disaster”.
Given the most recent developments around the
Chornobyl nuclear power plant, it seems to be even
more urgent and necessary to secure the right of the
General Assembly to receive a timely and credible
update on the current situation and its implications
for the international efforts to mitigate and minimize
the consequences of the Chornobyl disaster. The right
of the General Assembly to consider the sub-item I
mentioned within the period agreed by consensus — the
same consensus to which the gentleman from Belarus
referred — and to take well-informed action should
also be guaranteed.
Therefore, we strongly reject the attempt to
suspend those rights of the General Assembly. No
credible explanation whatsoever as to why the General
Assembly should disregard its own consensus decision
was given. No consultations with Ukraine — or with
practically any other Member State — were held. The
real mastermind has not even had the courage to submit
the draft decision itself and has used its proxy instead.
The same proxy was used a year ago, on 18 June 2021,
when the Assembly considered resolution 75/287 on
Myanmar (see A/75/PV.83) and we saw only one red
dot on the screen — that of Belarus.
I can hardly imagine that responsible Governments,
which set the safety of their own citizens as a top priority
and realize that radiation has no borders, would support
a decision to limit their awareness and right to receive
the fullest possible information about a transborder
threat of this kind. It would mean an irresponsible
attitude towards the real danger to the entire region
and beyond coming from the ongoing situation around
Chornobyl nuclear power plant. It would also mean
an intentional step aimed at depriving peoples of all
20/21

21/07/2022

nations of knowledge of the truth and of timely updates
on the matter.
In the light of that, we have requested a recorded vote
on draft decision A/76/L.71 and urge Member States to
vote against it. That will secure our right — the right of
all of us — to receive credible and timely updates from
the Secretary-General, as well as to take well-informed
actions on such a critical issue as nuclear safety. Let us
protect ourselves. Let us respect the Secretary-General,
our citizens and their rights and vote against the draft
decision submitted by Belarus.
Mr. Kulhánek (Czechia): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
In its resolution 74/114, of 16 December 2019, the
General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to
submit to it at its seventy-seventh session a report on the
implementation of the resolution, under the sub-item
entitled “Strengthening of international cooperation
and coordination of efforts to study, mitigate and
minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster”.
That resolution was adopted by consensus and we
do not see a reason to diverge from it. Moreover, in
the light of recent concerning developments around
the Chernobyl nuclear power plant due to Russia’s
aggression against Ukraine, we believe it is critical to
receive a timely update from the Secretary-General
on the implications of those developments for the
international efforts to mitigate and minimize the
consequences of the Chernobyl disaster. The EU and its
member States therefore reject the proposal by Belarus
in draft decision A/76/L.71 to postpone to the seventyeighth session the report of the Secretary-General and
the consideration of the sub-item.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take action on draft decision
A/76/L.71, entitled “Strengthening of the coordination
of humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the
United Nations, including special economic assistance”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of draft decision A/76/L.71
and in addition to the delegation listed in the document,
22-43451

21/07/2022

the following country has also become a co-sponsor of
draft decision A/76/L.71: the Russian Federation.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Belarus, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Syrian Arab
Republic, United Republic of Tanzania
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Montenegro, Myanmar, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,

A/76/PV.96

Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino,
Senegal, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Trinidad and Tobago,
Türki̇ ye, Ukraine, United Kingdom, United States
of America, Uruguay
Abstaining:
Algeria, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belize,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Djibouti, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mongolia,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Oman,
Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, United Arab
Emirates, Viet Nam, Yemen
Draft decision A/76/L.71 was rejected by 77 votes
to 9, with 45 abstentions.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 75.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

22-4345121/21
