Recalling its resolution 4 l 8 ( l 977) of 4 November
1977, in which it determined, having regard to the
policies and acts of the South African Government, that
the acquisition by South Africa of arms and related
materiel constituted a threat to the maintenance of
international peace and security and established a
mandatory arm,- embargo against South Africa,

types of equipment and supplies and grants of licensing
arrangements for the manufacture or maintenance of
the aforementioned;
3. Calls upon all States to review, having regard to
the objectives of the present resolution, all existing
contractual arrangements with and licences granted to
South Africa relating to the manufacture and maintenance of arms, ammunition of all types and military
equipment and vehicles, with a view to terminating
them;
4. Further decides that all States shall refrain from
any co-operation with South Africa in the manufacture
and development of nuclear weapons;
5. Calls upon all States, including States non-members of the United Nations, to act strictly in accordance
with the provisions of the present resolution;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council on the progress of the implementation
of the present resolution, the first report to be submitted
not later than 1 May 1978;
7. Decides to keep this item on its agenda for further action, as appropriate, in the light of developments.

Mindful of the need to have appropriate machinery
in order to examine the progress of implementation of
the measures envisaged in resolution 418 ( I 977),
Noting that it requested the Secretary-General to
report to the Council on the progress of the implementation of n:solution 41 8 ( 1977),

1. Decides to establish, in accordance with rule 28
of its provisional rules of procedure, a Committee of
the Security Council, consisting of all the members of
the Council, to undertake the following tasks and to
report on its work to the Council with its observations
und recommendations:
(a)
To examine the report on the progre!".s of the
implementation of resolution 418 ( 1977) which will be
submitted by the Secretary-General;

Adopted unanimously at tile
2046th meetin[!.

(b) To study ways and means by which the mandatory arms embargo could be made more e!Tcctiw
against South Africa and to make recommendations to
the Council;

Decisions

( c) To seek from all States further information
regarding the action taken by them concerning the
effective implementation of the provisions laid down in
resolution 418 (1977) ;

At its 2052nd meeting, on 9 December 1977, the
Council decided to invite the representatives of Saudi
Arabia and the United Republic of Cameroon to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item
entitled "The question of South Africa: letter dated 5
December 1977 from the Permanent Representative of
the United Republic of Cameroon to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12470)". 17

2. Calls upon all States to co-operate fully with the
Committee in regard to the fulfilment of its tasks concerning the effective implementation of the provisions
of resolution 418 (1977) and to supply such information as may be sought by the Committee in pursuance
of the present resolution;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all
necessary assistance to the Committee and to make the
necessary arrangements in the Secretariat for that purpose, including the provision of appropriate staff for the
servicing of the Committee.

At the same meeting, the Council also decided, at
the request of the representatives of Benin, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya and Mauritius, 18 to extend an invitation to Mr. M. J. Makatini under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Adopted u11animous/y at the
2052nd 111eeti11g.

Resolution 421 (1977)
of 9 December 1977

Decision

The Security Council,

At its 2053rd meeting, on 9 December 1977, the
Council decided to extend an invitation, under rule 39
of the provisional rules of procedure, to the Chairman
of the Special Committee against Apartheid.

17 See Oficial Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second
Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1977.
1 s Ibid., document S/12480.

6
