S/PV.8713

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8713

th meeting
Wednesday, 5 February 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Belgium)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Jürgenson
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. King
Mr. Van Shalkwyk
Mr. Baati
Mr. Clay
Mr. Barkin
Mr. Dang

Agenda
Small arms
Report of the Secretary-General on small arms and light weapons (S/2019/1011)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-02899 (E)
*2002899*

S/PV.8713

Small arms

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President (spoke in French): I should like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Dang Dinh Quy,
Permanent Representative of Viet Nam, for his service
as President of the Security Council for the month of
January. I am sure I speak for all members of the Council
in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Dang
and his team for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Small arms
Report of the Secretary-General on small arms
and light weapons (S/2019/1011)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite the following briefers to
participate in this meeting: Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu,
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs; and
Mr. Damien Spleeters, Deputy Director of Operations,
Conflict Armament Research.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/1011, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on small arms and light weapons.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: At the outset, allow me to express
my gratitude to Belgium for convening this very
important meeting and for giving me the opportunity
to brief the Security Council. I applaud the Council’s
commitment to addressing the issue of small arms and
light weapons on a regular basis.
This is only the second time that I am briefing the
Council in person on this agenda item (see S/PV.8140),
but the biennial consideration of small arms began
12 years ago with the 2007 presidential statement
S/PRST/2007/24. In that statement, the Security
Council articulated the deeply negative consequences
of excessive and poorly controlled small arms and light
weapons (see S/PV.5709).
2/20

05/02/2020

The Council noted with grave concern that the
destabilizing accumulation and illicit manufacture,
trade and circulation of small arms and light weapons
increase the intensity and duration of armed conflicts,
undermine the sustainability of peace agreements
and frustrate prevention efforts. In sum, the Council
recognized that the illicit flow and excessive
accumulation of such weapons compromise the
effectiveness of the Security Council in discharging its
primary responsibility to maintain international peace
and security.
In view of the gravity of the challenges, the Security
Council requested the Secretary-General to begin
reporting on small arms on a biennial basis beginning
in 2008. Since that request, there have been six reports
of the Secretary-General on this topic.
It is important to acknowledge that there are
common themes that run through all the reports of the
Secretary-General on this critical issue, including the
most recent one issued in December 2019 (S/2019/1011).
Such commonalities are indicative of the depth and
scope of the problem of small arms and light weapons.
In this regard, I wish to address two themes of high
relevance to the work of the Security Council: the role of
illicit small arms, light weapons and their ammunition
in conflict and pervasive crime; and the deeply crosscutting and wide-ranging impact of illicit small arms
and light weapons flows. These two fundamental
themes have been consistently raised throughout the
biennial reports of the Secretary-General, as well as
in the context of the two thematic resolutions adopted
on small arms and light weapons, namely, resolutions
2117 (2013) and 2220 (2015). Let me highlight a few
points, drawing upon the content of the latest report of
the Secretary-General from last year (S/2019/1011).
First, the destabilizing accumulation, illicit transfer
and misuse of small arms and light weapons continue
to initiate, sustain and exacerbate armed conflict and
pervasive crime. In situations of conflict and postconflict, the majority of acts of violence are carried out
with small arms and light weapons. On a global scale,
small arms were used in nearly 50 per cent of all violent
deaths between 2010 and 2015. This translates into
more than 200,000 deaths each year. With an estimated
1 billion small arms in circulation worldwide, the use
of these weapons in lethal violence, whether in conflict
or non-conflict settings, is prevalent across regions and
subregions from the Americas to Africa to southern
20-02899

05/02/2020

Small arms

Europe. No State is immune from the challenges posed
by illicit arms flows:
Small arms and light weapons are the weapons
of choice in intra-State conflicts and for terrorism,
organized crime and gang warfare. Current and past
crises that have been addressed by the Council, from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to Haiti and
Mali, have all been aggravated by the widespread
availability and uncontrolled flow of small arms and
light weapons and their ammunition. In 2018 alone, the
Security Council raised the challenges posed by small
arms, light weapons and ammunition in the framework
of United Nations peacekeeping operations and special
political missions in Afghanistan, Abyei, the Central
African Republic, Haiti, Libya and Somalia. Currently,
the mandates of nine peacekeeping operations and
special political missions address conventional
weapons-related issues, including, inter alia, small
arms and light weapons control and weapons and
ammunition management.
In this context, I wish to highlight the mandate
of the newly-established United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti, that provides for advisory capacity
on gang violence, community violence reduction
and weapons and ammunition management. This is a
welcome development indicative of the importance
of proper weapons and ammunition management in
reducing violence.
Diversion remains a major source of weapons and
their ammunition for gangs, criminal organizations and
terrorist groups. Illicit small arms, light weapons and
their ammunition originate from varied sources, from
poorly-managed State-owned stockpiles, battlefield
capture or loss following State collapse. There are also
ample diversion opportunities along the supply-chain,
from manufacture through end-use.
We are witnessing the serious impact of such illicit
arms flows, including in relation to violent extremism,
throughout the Sahel and parts of the Central African
subregion. A continued influx of weapons, including by
sea, into Libya remains a serious concern. South Sudan
is similarly suffering from steady flows of weapons
and ammunition, a reality that is affecting the safety of
United Nations personnel and hindering the ability of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya to carry
out its mandate. In Haiti, where there are over 270,000
illicit firearms in the possession of civilians, violent
crime has reached unacceptable heights.

S/PV. 8713

I turn now to the second central theme. The negative
impact of illicit small arms and light weapons flows is
cross-cutting and multidimensional. Illicit small arms
and light weapons have a multitude of implications for
security, human rights, sustainable development, gender
equality and conflict prevention. It is in this spirit that
the Secretary-General has consistently encouraged
the Security Council to consider small arms and light
weapons, including their ammunition, in the context of
both country-specific and thematic agenda items.
As echoed by the Security Council in its 2007
presidential statement, the excessive accumulation
of, illicit trade in and misuse of small arms and light
weapons have wide-ranging consequences touching
upon all core pillars of the United Nations work: peace
and security, humanitarian actions, human rights, the
rule of law and development. Small arms continue to
facilitate a vast spectrum of acts that constitute human
rights violations, including the killing and maiming of
children, rape and other forms of sexual and genderbased violence. Armed violence perpetrated with small
arms and light weapons erodes legal and peaceful
dispute resolution mechanisms. And contemporary
armed conflict is also a primary driver of displacement
and food insecurity. In Yemen, as of the end of 2019,
an estimated 4 million people were internally displaced
amidst devastating conflict, facilitated by steady
arms flows.
The Secretary-General has recognized the
relationship between high levels of armed violence
and challenges to achieving sustainable development.
With the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the international community recognized
that sustainable development cannot be realized
without peace and security. In tandem, by virtue of the
adoption of target 16.4, which includes a significant
reduction of illicit arms flows, States acknowledged the
role of effective small-arms control in reducing armed
violence and thereby enabling communities to better
pursue sustainable development.
In his Agenda for Disarmament, the SecretaryGeneral prioritizes disarmament that saves lives,
including a call for deeper and more coherent efforts
on small arms and light weapons at the national level.
To that end, the Office for Disarmament Affairs is
partnering with the United Nations Development
Programme to support country-level, small-arms
control and armed violence reduction initiatives
through a holistic approach, including a gender lens. To

20-028993/20

S/PV.8713

Small arms

facilitate this work, the Secretary-General established
the Saving Lives Entity, the so-called SALIENT trust
facility, in his Peacebuilding Fund. The SALIENT
fund is intended to serve as an effective tool for the
realization of sustainable peace as a basis for longerterm development. Pilot projects will be initiated this
calendar year, in collaboration with respective United
Nations country teams.
I would be remiss not to also underscore the highly
gendered nature of small arms and light weapons. The
Security Council has paid increasing attention to the
gendered aspects of small arms and light weapons
control, including the full and effective participation
of women in all policy and practice, as well as the
differentiated impacts of illicit arms on women, men,
girls and boys.
The deeply societal characteristics of the small arms
and light weapons issue necessitate a comprehensive
mainstreaming of gender perspectives in legislative,
policy and programmatic frameworks. To date, gender
has not been sufficiently integrated into policies
regulating small arms and light weapons, nor has there
been sufficient research and data collection. Without the
benefit of evidence-based information on the gendered
implications of small arms and light weapons, smallarms control interventions will remain gender-blind,
thereby hampering policy development, reinforcing
gender inequalities and impeding the achievement of
the 2030 Agenda for sustainable Development.
To support enhanced effectiveness of small arms
control measures, the Office for Disarmament Affairs
is implementing a multi-year project, with the financial
support of the European Union, to promote small-arms
approaches that include systematic gender analysis, the
integration of gender perspectives and the promotion of
women’s empowerment. The development of a training
manual and the conduct of various national and regional
capacity-building activities are among the concrete
outputs to be delivered over the coming three years.
Before concluding, I wish to make a few additional
remarks on the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/1011). The Secretary-General provides an
overview of significant trends and developments over
the past two years. He laments the continued rise in
global military expenditure and the role that small arms
and light weapons continue to play in hindering peace,
security and sustainable development.
4/20

05/02/2020

At the same time, the Secretary-General recognizes
the considerable efforts undertaken at the global,
regional, subregional and national levels in support
of small arms and light weapons control. Such efforts
include work in the framework of the Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade
in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects
and its International Tracing Instrument, in particular
the outcome of the 2018 third Review Conference of
the Programme of Action, the Firearms Protocol to
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and the Arms Trade Treaty.
Equally important, efforts at the regional and
subregional levels have continued to reinforce and
enhance coordination in the area of small arms and
light weapons control. Regional efforts are especially
critical with regard to combating cross-border
trafficking. In particular, efforts in Africa, a region
severely affected by the small arms scourge, have
continued in the framework of the Silencing the Guns
by 2020 initiative. The Security Council, through the
adoption of resolution 2457 (2019), has outlined means
to ensure robust support for that important initiative.
The United Nations is undertaking concrete action
to support the African Union in achieving its goal of
a conflict-free continent, including by supporting the
upcoming September 2020 Africa Amnesty Month for
the surrender, collection and destruction of illegally
acquired weapons. The Office for Disarmament
Affairs and the Department of Peace Operations are
also continuing to support more effective weapons and
ammunition management, including in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration contexts.
Over the past two years, the United Nations
has supported national authorities in weapons and
ammunition management in the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Mali. The proper management of arms and
ammunition is fundamental to the safety and security
of communities, especially those impacted by conflict.
I would like to conclude my briefing by reiterating
the need for mainstreaming small arms and light
weapons considerations across the work of the Security
Council. A key denominator in all issues of the Security
Council, both geographic and thematic, is that the wide
and easy availability of small arms, light weapons and
associated ammunition are key determinants of crisis
dynamics. Given the wide-ranging impact of those
20-02899

05/02/2020

Small arms

weapons, section II of the Secretary-General’s report
contains an assessment of several of the Council’s
thematic areas of work that are particularly pertinent to
small arms and light weapons considerations.
The report assesses the relevance of small arms and
light weapons considerations to several key thematic
items on the Council’s agenda, namely the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, peace operations,
arms embargoes, women and peace and security,
children and armed conflict, counter-terrorism and
transnational organized crime. The assessment offers
concrete and conceptual linkages, including practical
recommendations on how to integrate small arms and
light weapons considerations in those areas of work.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate that the
compartmentalized treatment of the small arms and
light weapons issue is not sufficient to address the
seriousness and magnitude of the challenges arising
from those weapons. If threats to international peace
and security are to be adequately addressed, small arms
and light weapons must be considered regularly and
across issue areas.
It is a matter of urgency for the United Nations,
the Security Council and the broader international
community to focus on the root causes of illicit arms
flows with a view to preventing, mitigating and
resolving conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Spleeters.
Mr. Spleeters: I thank the Belgian representation
to the United Nations for giving me the opportunity
to address the Security Council today. I congratulate
Belgium for the work already accomplished during
its mandate.
In his very important and timely report to the Security
Council (S/2019/1011), the Secretary-General highlights
the importance of using evidence-based approaches
to control the illicit proliferation and circulation of,
and trafficking in, small arms and light weapons. The
Secretary-General’s report underlines a truth that is
widely recognized in the research community, namely,
that a comprehensive understanding of the problem is
a critical first step towards taking effective action and
achieving measurable outcomes.

S/PV. 8713

Since the early 1990s, the international community
has sought to control the conventional arms trade so
as to minimize weapons diversion — the loss, theft,
or intentional retransfer of legally acquired arms
to unauthorized users, such as insurgent, terrorist
and criminal groups, whose activities sustain armed
conflicts and violence across the globe. The lack
of detailed reporting has consistently hampered
those efforts, with most reports failing to record
unique weapon-identifying information, thereby
providing little indication of weapon provenance and,
consequently, offering few avenues for further and
effective investigation.
Ungrounded reporting has resulted in armscontrol policymaking that fails to understand the
dynamics it seeks to mitigate. That is a situation that
is analogous to attempting to control the spread of an
infectious disease without understanding its origins
and transmission vectors.
On the battlefield is precisely where my
organization, Conflict Armament Research (CAR),
gathers the evidence that matters. CAR’s approach
recognizes that the most effective way to determine the
origins of diverted weapons, ammunition and related
materiel is to observe and document them at first hand
on the battlefield or as close as possible to the point of
capture, seizure or recovery.
CAR places the physical weapon at the nucleus of
its investigations. Deploying alongside national defence
and security forces, CAR field investigation teams
recover unique, traceable information from weapons,
ammunition and related materiel, such as serial, lot and
batch numbers, which identify an item individually in
production, sales or transfer records.
With the cooperation of weapon exporters and their
Governments, CAR then traces each item’s transfer
history through sales and supply records from the place
of manufacture to the point of diversion. By aggregating
data on thousands of traced items recovered on the
battlefield, CAR provides a dynamic global picture of
weapon-supply chains and indicates where weaknesses
in those chains permit diversion to unauthorized users.
Those weaknesses usually include one or several
of the following six elements. First, Governments
fail to secure their weapons against theft and looting.
Secondly, national defence and security forces are
defeated, resulting in wholesale weapon losses. Thirdly,
export control documents are falsified. Fourthly,

20-028995/20

S/PV.8713

Small arms

States do not exercise proper due diligence when they
grant export licenses. Fifthly, imported weapons are
subject to unauthorized retransfers. Finally and sixthly,
State-led initiatives deliberately supply weapons to
rebel, insurgent and terrorist forces.
Weapon diversion has real consequences. In
2016, our field investigation teams working in Iraq
documented and traced a weapon that had been diverted
to the Islamic State group less than two months after
its manufacture in Europe. Although its investigations
begin with the examination of a physical weapon,
CAR pursues multiple strands of inquiry, following
the paper trail through arms transfer records to reveal
bank accounts, front companies, illicit brokers, conflict
financing and trafficking support networks.
In that work, CAR supports several crucial United
Nations mechanisms, such as the Arms Trade Treaty,
the Firearms Protocol, the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and the 2020
Group of Governmental Experts on problems arising
from the accumulation of conventional ammunition
stockpiles in surplus.
CAR provides information in support of several
United Nations sanctions monitoring groups and panels
of experts — such as those concerned with the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Al
Qaida, Libya, Somalia, South Sudan and Yemen. CAR
also provides direct support to United Nations operations
in the areas of diversion monitoring and the technical
aspects of weapon and ammunition management.
With resolutions 2370 (2017) and 2482 (2019), the
Security Council insists that efforts must be undertaken
by all Member States to address the sources of supply
of weapons to terrorists, including through better
information-sharing, coordination and investigations
into the illicit origin of weapons. However, national law
enforcement is often one of the first victims of armed
conflicts, which results in the obstruction of traditional
law enforcement investigations and weapon-tracing
mechanisms. Through its field documentation and
tracing operations, CAR offers a service to its national
partners that would otherwise not be available to them.
The Secretary-General indicates in his report that
Member States’ success rate in tracing weapons seized
between 2016 and 2017 was typically less than 13 per
cent. Between 2014 and 2019, CAR’s Tracing Unit issued
6/20

05/02/2020

more than 700 trace requests for weapons. If successful,
tracing can be defined as confirming a waypoint in
a weapon’s chain of custody. CAR’s success rate is
currently about 40 per cent. That demonstrates the
important complementary role that non-governmental
organizations can play in the process.
The Secretary-General’s report also underlines
that exports of conventional arms, including small
arms, light weapons and associated ammunition,
must be contingent upon a robust risk assessment that
incorporates the strictest considerations of international
law. Again, such a robust risk assessment must be
backed by concrete evidence provided by investigations
into weapon diversion. With that objective in mind,
CAR developed the iTrace project in 2013, with the
continuous funding and support of the European Union
(EU). That project is the foundation of CAR’s work and
methodology and the repository of all its data.
Through the iTrace project, our field investigators
have documented more than 6,000 individual weapons
and 590,000 units of ammunition. Recognizing the
cross-border nature of illicit arms trafficking, CAR
has worked in more than 30 conflict-affected States
from West Africa to the Middle East, thereby building
an extensive and holistic database that can support
effective sanctions and embargo monitoring or inform
required adjustments to sanctions regimes.
Using CAR’s iTrace project findings, the European
Union has made evidence-based policy decisions,
including risk assessment prior to the export of weapons.
CAR’s work in East Africa and the tracing of weapons
and ammunition documented there, for example, has
resulted in one European country publicly stating
that it refused to issue a licence to another country
in the region identified by CAR as having previously
diverted material.
To support embargo and sanctions enforcement,
CAR has provided law enforcement agencies in several
countries with detailed information about weapons
traders in their jurisdictions who have violated several
EU arms embargoes. CAR also works in partnership
with countries on the front line of embargo enforcement,
for example by directly supporting the Federal
Government of Somalia to identify supply routes of
weapons being trafficked into Somalia, in violation of
the United Nations embargo, and reaching Al-Shabaab.
The Secretary-General, in his concluding
observations, states that it is a matter of urgency for the
20-02899

05/02/2020

Small arms

United Nations, the Security Council and the broader
international community to focus on the root causes
of the diversion of small arms and light weapons. It is
my hope therefore that my briefing has demonstrated
the importance of an evidence-based approach and the
unique field expertise built by CAR in that respect.
That approach is an effective way to tackle the illicit
proliferation of weapons contributing to the massive
loss of civilian life and international instability.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Spleeters for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank
the Kingdom of Belgium for assuming the presidency
for the month of February and, again, we thank Viet
Nam for its excellent presidency in January.
We extend our thanks to the presidency for
convening this timely briefing on small arms and light
weapons. We also thank Under-Secretary-General
Nakamitsu and Mr. Damien Spleeters for their briefings.
I would like to begin by underscoring the great
importance that we attach to the issue of the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons and ammunition. The
widespread availability, excessive accumulation and
misuse of such weapons constitutes a serious threat to
international peace and security, foment armed violence
and undermine respect for human rights. Likewise,
it contributes to transnational organized crime and
terrorism, and poses an obstacle to the achievement of
sustainable development.
In that regard, we are steadfast in our commitment
to the international instruments that call for combating
that scourge, including the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, the
International Tracing Instrument and the Arms Trade
Treaty. We hope that they will become universal and be
fully implemented, and that there will be harmonization
among them.
Despite the strides that have been made, States
continue to face difficulties in achieving effective
arms control. That is why closer cooperation and
international and regional assistance must be stepped
up in the areas of financing, capacity-building, transfer
of technology and equipment, as well as in the exchange

S/PV. 8713

of experiences and best practices, taking into account
the needs of the host State. Similarly, it is imperative to
reinforce policies on the management and security of
weapon and ammunition stockpiles and the destruction
of surpluses, as well as on the tracing and marking
processes, border control and the development of a
robust legal framework.
The wide availability of arms directly impacts the
forms and intensity of gender-based violence, including
sexual violence, within and beyond conflicts, and puts
women and girls at a much greater risk of violence and
insecurity. Increased efforts to mainstream gender
perspectives into international arms control frameworks
are therefore imperative. We must continue to promote
gender equality and the meaningful participation of
women in decision-making and planning activities to
combat the illicit arms trade.
Equally important is respect for arms embargoes.
Their violation by States themselves, with the continued
supply of arms to the various parties to a given conflict,
including armed groups, leads to the perpetuation of
such embargoes and, in many cases, to the illicit
diversion of arms to terrorist groups. Libya is a perfect
example of that. Moreover and given the new means
of manufacture, design and technology of weapons,
we support engaging in discussions in that regard,
including on standards for marking and tracing, as well
as transfers via the dark web and the conversion and
reactivation of weapons, by adopting a comprehensive
approach and analysing the impact of such developments
on the fight against illicit trafficking.
On another note, we commend the approach to
arms control integrated into the mandates of various
peace missions and the support that the United Nations
provides to the national authorities of Mali, the
Central African Republic, Somalia and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the areas of arms and
ammunition management.
We emphasize that, owing to the key role played
by small arms and light weapons in armed conflicts
and the fact that they are the main cause of death in
conflicts and in acts of violence in general, we believe
that this issue must be discussed more often in the
Security Council. Furthermore, we believe that we can
make greater efforts to achieve concrete results, such
as updating resolution 2220 (2015). Since its adoption,
new methodologies for the manufacture, design and
transfer of arms have emerged, as have other needs

20-028997/20

S/PV.8713

Small arms

resulting from the specific circumstances facing States.
Resolution 2220 (2015) therefore should be updated
to face and meet the new realities and challenges of
today’s international environment.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, my
delegation would like to congratulate Belgium on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of February. We would also like to thank Viet
Nam for having successfully presided over the Council
during the month of January. I would also like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this very important
meeting. Let me also thank the briefers for their very
comprehensive briefings.
The illegal trade in small arms and light weapons
has worsened the situation in regions affected by armed
conflict, violence, organized crime and terrorism,
as highlighted in resolution 2220 (2015). Small arms
trafficking also hinders international efforts to resolve
conflicts and promote peace, and efforts to achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals in the aftermath
of conflicts. Indonesia attaches great importance
to ensuring that those efforts can be effectively
implemented through a holistic approach. Indonesia
would therefore like to emphasize the following points.
First, States bear the primary responsibility.
States are themselves responsible for regulating
their legitimate arms trade, as well as curbing
and eliminating the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons. Therefore, the implementation of a
politically binding multilateral framework is of crucial
importance. Various existing multilateral guidelines,
including the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat
and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and the International
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in
a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and
Light Weapons (ITI) have provided the framework for
States to address multifaceted challenge in countering
the illicit trade in small arms within their territories.
Furthermore, resolution 2117 (2013) underlines the
importance of international assistance in building
State capacity to implement the Programme of Action
and the ITI. Moving forward, we need to ensure the
adequacy, effectiveness and sustainability of such
international assistance.
Secondly, combatting the illegal trade in small
arms requires cooperation among States, including
regional organizations. Indonesia would like to
8/20

05/02/2020

emphasize the important role of regional organizations.
This is in line with resolution 2457 (2019), which calls
for further strengthening the partnership between the
United Nations and regional organizations. The African
Union Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative, similar
initiatives in the Caribbean and the regional road map
for the Western Balkans are noteworthy examples.
In our region, the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) continues to support the
implementation of the Programme of Action to address
arms smuggling and related issues, through, inter alia,
the ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on Transnational
Crime, the ASEAN Regional Forum and the ASEAN
Working Group on Arms Smuggling, established in
2018, as a platform for collaboration on capacitybuilding, training and information-sharing. Indonesia
therefore supports the strengthening and widening of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and interregional organizations to combat this
crime globally.
Thirdly, let me re-emphasize the need for a
comprehensive and inclusive approach to combating
this crime. Such a multifaceted challenge requires
a multi-stakeholder response. Governments should
substantially increase the participation and the
ownership of different stakeholders in implementing
policies to combat the illegal trade in small arms and
light weapons. Indonesia would also like to emphasize
that this effort should be undertaken as part of broader
peacebuilding and nation-building.
In conclusion, respect for sovereignty, the rule of
law, national ownership and international cooperation
are key to countering this challenge. States need to
work together to build a global culture of rights and
responsibilities, as well as respect for the rule of law,
in addressing the threat posed by illicit small arms and
light weapons.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for
introducing the report of the Secretary General on
small arms and light weapons (SALW) (S/2019/1011).
We are also grateful to Mr. Damien Spleeters for his
valuable briefing on the work of the non-governmental
organization Conflict Armament Research.
Russia has consistently advocated enhancing the
role played by the United Nations in coordinating
the international community’s efforts to resolve the
20-02899

05/02/2020

Small arms

problem of the illegal trade in SALW. The illegal traffic
in such weapons remains the main source of financing
for terrorist and extremist groups and a major factor
in the spread and exacerbation of local conflicts and
armed violence.
Despite progress in some areas, significant
improvement has yet to be made in countering the
illicit trade in SALW throughout the world. The pace
of the implementation of the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects remains
inadequate. There has also been a loss of traction in
the implementation of the International Instrument to
Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and
Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons.
We believe that the implementation of the
Programme of Action would be more effectively
facilitated by introducing a universal ban on the
transfer of all types of SALW to entities that are not
authorized by the Governments of recipient States;
ensuring that States impose strict regulations and
exercise direct control over brokering activities
related to arms exports within the territory under their
jurisdiction and limiting, to the extent possible, the
number of brokers themselves; imposing a ban on the
re-export of imported SALW without the consent of the
initial exporting State; and banning the manufacture of
SALW with expired licenses or without licenses from
the countries owning the production technology.
Finally, greater national control over all stages of
the life cycle of weapons, from their manufacture to
their use, would also help to significantly lower the
risk of the uncontrolled proliferation of SALW. Such
measures could be based on the relevant best practices
of States, including those of Russia, which has welldeveloped legislation in that area. We stand ready
to advise States interested in studying Russian best
practices in SALW control.
As part of its annual reporting, our country
always presents its report on the implementation of the
Programme of Action. It is a stand-alone, structured
document that provides a holistic view of the effective
implementation of the Programme of Action at the
national level.
However, we must point out that the report of
the Secretary-General also contains a number of
controversial points. In particular, we draw attention to
the idea it raises of expanding the remit of the United

S/PV. 8713

Nations Register of Conventional Arms to include
an eighth category of SALWs. It should be taken
into consideration that the existing seven categories
already include all major conventional weapons whose
delivery, in certain circumstances, can be destabilizing.
Furthermore, when taking decisions on an eighth
category, we should bear in mind the negative precedent
of the use of the Register for unintended purposes,
namely, to define the scope of arms embargoes, as
was the case with the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and Iran. In practice, that would significantly
curtail the ability of States under sanctions not only to
exercise the right of self-defence enshrined in Article
51 of the Charter of the United Nations, but also to
simply conduct law enforcement activities.
In addition, we find the references to the
international Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) questionable.
The Treaty, which is far from universal, still does not
fully allow for the implementation of its own provisions.
For example, the ATT does not explicitly prohibit the
unlicenced production of weapons or their transfer to
non-State actors or include provisions governing the
re-export of weapons. There are serious questions about
the application of the Treaty in practice. Some parties
to it continue to directly or indirectly supply arms to
areas of internal armed conflict.
In conclusion, I note that the Russian Federation
shares the concerns of the international community
with regard to the uncontrolled proliferation of SALWs
and advocates the further consolidation of international
efforts to counter them under the auspices of the
United Nations. We agree that those issues require a
comprehensive approach. We intend to continue to work
closely on these issues with all stakeholders during this
year’s biennial review conference on the Programme
of Action.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Viet Nam for its work as President of
the Council in January and congratulates Belgium on
assuming the presidency for this month. It also thanks
Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu and Mr. Spleeters
for their briefings.
The international security situation is complex
and grave at present, with regional conflicts and
hotspot issues popping up one after another. As stated
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/1011), the
illicit trade of small arms and light weapons (SALW)
aggravates regional and armed conflicts, abets violent

20-028999/20

S/PV.8713

Small arms

extremist forces and organized crime and obstructs
peace, security and sustainable development. The
Security Council and the Secretary-General himself
have made positive efforts and achieved effective
results on SALWs. The Council adopted resolutions
2117 (2013) and 2220 (2015) and has taken appropriate
account of SALWs when considering regional hotspots.
The Secretary-General has made SALWs a priority
concern in his disarmament agenda and set up a new
trust fund to support the relevant efforts of all countries.
In order to further prevent and counter the illicit
trade of SALWs, China would like to make the
following proposals.
First, there should be a focus on political settlement.
Settling disputes through political and diplomatic
means and maintaining international and regional
peace and stability are key to eliminating the illicit
trade of SALWs. We should intensify peacekeeping and
post-conflict rebuilding efforts to assist the countries
concerned in achieving economic prosperity and
sustainable development.
Secondly, State responsibility should be
strengthened. Governments bear the primary
responsibility for combating the illicit trade of SALWs
and should establish and improve laws and regulations
and strengthen their enforcement. In addition, they
should strictly implement Council resolutions on
arms embargoes, refrain from transferring weapons
to non-State actors and prevent the trafficking of
legitimate weapons through illicit channels.
Thirdly, United Nations leadership should be
enhanced. States should earnestly carry out their
international obligations deriving from, for instance,
the outcome of the third Review Conference of the
Parties to the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat
and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and the International
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in
a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and
Light Weapons. They should also support the SecretaryGeneral and United Nations agencies in playing their
positive role and push forward the multilateral process
of countering the illicit trade of SALWs so as to share
in the security and governance dividends.
Fourthly, international cooperation should be
increased. All countries should actively engage in
multilateral, bilateral and regional cooperation on
a voluntary and equal basis. In the light of the needs
10/20

05/02/2020

of developing countries, the international community
should increase, inter alia, its assistance for institutionand
capacity-building,
funding
contributions,
technology transfers and personnel training and should
effectively enhance developing countries’ capacity in
stockpile management, marking and tracing, collection
and destruction of illicit firearms.
The Chinese Government consistently opposes
the illicit trade of small arms and light weapons and is
prudent and responsible in exporting them. It actively
participates in international and regional cooperation
and endeavours to combat their illicit trade. State
Councillor and Minister for Foreign Affairs Wang
Yi announced at the General Assembly last year (see
A/74/PV.9) that China had started its domestic legal
procedures to accede to the Arms Trade Treaty, thereby
illustrating the determination and sincerity of China
to adhere to multilateralism and actively participate in
the global governance of the arms trade and in building
a community of shared future for humankind. China
would like to work together with the international
community to jointly combat the illicit trade of small
arms and light weapons, appropriately address the
humanitarian issues arising from their illicit transfer,
excessive accumulation and abusive use and make our
due contribution to the maintenance of international
and regional peace and stability.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank UnderSecretary-General Nakamitsu and Mr. Spleeters for
their informative and insightful contributions. Their
briefings reaffirm that the Council should maintain
its focus on this matter and that there is a need for
concerted action.
As
the
Secretary-General’s
latest
report
(S/2019/1011) regretfully confirms, the illicit trade,
diversion and unauthorized use of small arms and
light weapons continue to impede peace, security and
sustainable development. Small arms are relatively
cheap. They are easy to construct, maintain, operate
and conceal. For those reasons, small arms are often the
weapons of first resort in civil wars, terrorist attacks,
organized crime and gang warfare. The widespread
availability of such weapons continues to cause loss
of life, violate human rights, fuel conflict and hamper
humanitarian assistance and peacekeeping efforts.
Just last month, UNICEF published a report on the
situation in central Sahel. The report shows that the
recent surge in armed violence and attacks in the region
20-02899

05/02/2020

Small arms

S/PV. 8713

against communities, schools, health centres and other
public institutions have had devastating impacts on
civilians, especially children. Thousands of children
have been forced to flee their homes and cannot go to
school or receive basic social services. It is not possible
to sustain or build peace and increase development in
the Sahel, as well as in other parts of the world, if we do
not address the misuse of and illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons and their ammunition.

Finally, regional efforts and initiatives are essential
and should be encouraged. In 2018, the European Union
adopted its new strategy against illicit firearms, small
arms and light weapons and their ammunition. A number
of new capacity-building projects have launched since
then in support of small arms control in the Western
Balkans, the Middle East, Latin America and the
Caribbean, among other regions, in cooperation with
United Nations agencies and regional organizations.

It is clear that the threats posed by the illicit transfer,
excessive accumulation and misuse of small arms and
light weapons touch upon many country-specific and
thematic topics on the Council’s agenda. For that reason,
Estonia supports the further mainstreaming of the issue
in all relevant discussions in the Council’s work. There
are already some good practices in place. We note an
example in the report of the Secretary-General, with
reference to resolution 2454 (2019), in which he links the
assessment of weapons and ammunition management to
the review of arms embargo measures. We also support
the inclusion, in the mandates of United Nations peace
support missions, of assistance for monitoring arms
embargoes and supporting Government actions on
small arms management.

Estonia is committed to preventing and curbing
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. We
welcome today’s discussion and urge all countries to
join in strengthening the implementation of existing
commitments and obligations in the field.

Estonia welcomes the focus on gender in the
Secretary-General’s report. It is important to increase
awareness that armed violence affects women and men
differently. As the Secretary-General’s report notes,
sexual and gender-based violence is often abetted
by armed intimidation. We welcome the report’s
recommendation to consider including the small arms
issue in the women and peace and security agenda.
It is equally important to improve the role of women
as participants and decision makers in addressing the
proliferation and misuse of small arms in disarmament
and arms control programmes and policies.
Adherence to, and ratification of, key international
instruments in this area is of crucial importance. We
call on all States to implement the Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects and the International Tracing Instrument.
Estonia also continues to champion the universalization
and implementation of the Arms Trade Treaty. We
believe that, when the Treaty is effectively and widely
implemented, it has great potential to contribute to
more responsible and more transparent international
arms transfers.

Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): Let me start
by thanking Under Secretary-General Nakamitsu for
her briefing. We would like to emphasize that the issue
of small arms and light weapons remains an important
one for the African continent, as it exacerbates conflict
situations and enables threats to international peace
and security. We also thank Mr. Spleeters for his
comprehensive briefing.
South Africa supports the approach of the Security
Council in including consideration of the issue of small
arms and light weapons within the various United
Nations peacekeeping mandates, as well as with regard
to the imposition of arms embargoes.
South Africa also welcomes and emphasizes the
importance of supporting countries in implementing
the provisions of resolution 2220 (2015). To that end,
we commend the efforts of the Secretary-General
in prioritizing disarmament that saves lives and his
commitment to establish a trust facility in the form of
the Saving Lives Entity, which is being established in
conjunction with the Peacebuilding Support Office,
the United Nations Development Programme and the
Office for Disarmament Affairs.
South Africa believes that support for peacebuilding
efforts, especially those related to security sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, are
vital to curtailing the flow of illicit arms. Effectively
combating the illicit flow of arms is also critical to
efforts to create a better enabling environment for the
protection of civilians by United Nations peacekeepers.
South Africa supports the need to address the
linkages between curtailing the illicit flow of small
arms and light weapons and the women and peace

20-0289911/20

S/PV.8713

Small arms

and security agenda, particularly with regard to the
development of national action plans, security sector
reform and the broader peacebuilding and policy
spheres. In that regard, we support the SecretaryGeneral’s call for the Security Council to consider how
women can be actively engaged in efforts to prevent the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.
The African Union Peace and Security Council has
also been seized of the issue of the illicit proliferation,
circulation and trafficking in small arms and light
weapons on the African continent at both regional and
subregional levels, as Mrs. Nakamitsu ably informed
us. The Peace and Security Council has reaffirmed
that the elimination of the threat posed by the illicit
transfer, circulation and misuse of small arms and light
weapons is a critical component of realizing the goals
of the Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative
and Agenda 2063 of the African Union (AU).
The Peace and Security Council requires AU
member States to enact appropriate regulations and
administrative procedures to ensure effective control
over the production, export, import, transit or retransfer
of small arms and light weapons, as well as related
brokering activities, in order to prevent the illegal
manufacture of, and illicit trafficking in, small arms
and light weapons or their diversion to unauthorized
actors. Those steps are required to curb the illicit flow
of arms on the African continent.
South Africa’s National Conventional Arms Control
Act is the cornerstone of the country’s conventional
arms control legislation and contains specific guiding
principles and criteria to be considered when arms
transfer applications are assessed. Those provisions
include the principle of adherence to international law,
norms and practices and the international obligations
and commitments of the Republic of South Africa,
including Security Council arms embargoes.
South Africa will therefore continue to take the
necessary steps to combat the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons.
Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): Millions of people
around the world are impacted directly or indirectly by
the diversion of arms and illicit arms transfers. While
small arms and light weapons have a legitimate role
in ensuring defence and security, their diversion and
misuse cost hundreds of thousands of lives every year,
undermine security and sustainable development, and
fuel conflict, crime and terrorism.
12/20

05/02/2020

The United Nations has an important role to play in
supporting efforts to address illicit flows of small arms.
There is no one-size-fits-all solution and, to achieve
real progress in that area, it is crucial that we bring
on board all stakeholders, including the full and active
participation of women in the disarmament community.
As the High Representative stated this morning,
the United Nations is carrying out considerable work to
tackle the illicit spread of small arms and light weapons.
I would like to take this opportunity to commend the
work of Office for Disarmament Affairs and join the
High Representative in underlining the importance of
the role of peacekeeping missions and special political
missions in this area, in line with their mandates.
In its work, the United Nations must take into
account existing guidance. For example, the Modular
Small-arms-control Implementation Compendium and
the International Ammunition Technical Guidelines
provide international best practice in physical security
and stockpile management, and should be consulted
consistently in United Nations field work.
International cooperation in this area is vital. The
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects is a key forum for international action
and policy coordination. We look forward to productive
discussions at the seventh Biennial Meeting of States
on the Programme of Action, to be held later this year.
The United Kingdom is also proud to participate
this year in the Group of Governmental Experts on
problems arising from the accumulation of conventional
ammunition stockpiles in surplus. We hope that the
Group will achieve tangible results in addressing a
long-neglected problem in conventional arms control.
There is also important work to be done elsewhere.
We reiterate our full support for the Arms Trade Treaty,
a key multilateral tool for addressing the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons through its object
and purpose — to create a well-regulated legal trade
in conventional arms. The universalization of the
Treaty, coupled with the full implementation of its
robust provisions, remains a priority for the United
Kingdom. We continue to encourage all States that
have not yet done so to make ratification and accession
a national priority.
We welcome the language of the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report (S/2019/1011) on arms embargoes,
20-02899

05/02/2020

Small arms

which are a crucial tool for tackling the illicit spread of
small arms and light weapons to many of the conflicts
on the Council’s agenda. I would like to take this
opportunity to underline the importance of respect for,
and the implementation of, the arms embargoes that the
Council has agreed. We welcome the emphasis in the
Secretary-General’s report on the need for flexibility
and agree that arms embargoes should respond to
changing contexts. However, the United Kingdom is
concerned that arms embargoes are often lifted for
political reasons without sufficient consideration being
given to the efficient management of small arms and
light weapons and associated ammunition and the harm
caused by their mismanagement.
The challenge of illicit small arms and light weapons
is a global one that requires international cooperation
on action, but we must also recognize that different
regions face different challenges. The United Kingdom
has been a consistent supporter of regional approaches
in this area. The Western Balkans road map, which is
currently being implemented, is an excellent plan of
action for that region and has highlighted transferable
lessons to be taken forward.
The United Kingdom would also like to take this
opportunity to commend the African Union’s goal of
silencing the guns by 2020. It is vital that we seek to
translate that initiative into initiatives that will make a
direct difference to the lives of ordinary people across
Africa. Public buy-in and ownership of security sector
reforms and policy will be crucial to that objective.
In addition, success in silencing the guns will require
strong and effective partnerships to maximize results,
effective preventive diplomacy and mediation,
strengthening the role of women and young people in
conflict resolution and prevention and genuine and
lasting security sector reform, on which the United
Kingdom, in partnership with the African Union, has
a renewed focus.
The United Kingdom remains committed to
supporting African efforts in that regard through
cooperation on initiatives for disarmament, surplus
destruction, the regulation of arms transfers, weapons
marking, stockpile management and cooperation on law
enforcement across the continents. That is a key strand
of work for the British Army’s Peace Support Team
based in Nairobi. Through it, we provide technical
advice and training on this issue to the African Union
Commission, the African Union Mission in Somalia
and its troop-contributing countries.

S/PV. 8713

The United Kingdom continues to prioritize support
to work on small arms and has provided technical and
financial support bilaterally and through regional and
multilateral organizations. Through that support, we
help countries to strengthen arms control frameworks
through national legislation, to implement better
stockpile management procedures and to tackle the
grave challenges recognized in the Secretary-General’s
report, the drivers of terrorism, crime, poverty and
exclusion, which fuel the demand for illicit weapons.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I too
thank the briefers for their interventions, and I welcome
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/1011),
which contains very comprehensive recommendations.
The proliferation of and illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons pose a serious threat to international
peace and security. These weapons cause by far the
most casualties, averaging more than half a million
victims a year worldwide.
The concerns and challenges caused by such
weapons are widely shared by all regions of the world.
They cut across all issues, as the Secretary-General
points out by listing the opportunities for the Council
to address them. Their trafficking continues to foment
conflicts and exacerbate armed violence, while fuelling
organized crime and terrorism. Those weapons and
their ammunition are easily accessible and able to be
hidden and moved through cross-border trafficking.
France had the painful experience of that during the
attacks in 2015.
In that context, our common mobilization is
necessary now more than ever. The need for the
universalization and implementation at the national
level of jointly agreed measures to combat the
proliferation of and illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons is self-evident. I am thinking particularly
of international instruments such as the Arms Trade
Treaty, the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing
of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and
Components and Ammunition, supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, as well as, above all, the United
Nations Programme of Action on Small Arms and the
International Tracing Instrument.
Furthermore, the commitments made by States at
the third United Nations Conference to Review Progress
Made in the Implementation of the Programme of
Action, which France had the honour of chairing in June

20-0289913/20

S/PV.8713

Small arms

2018, should make it possible to specifically strengthen
the prevention of and fight against the illicit trafficking
in such weapons. We also have high expectations for the
discussions on preventing and combating the diversion
of small arms and light weapons, which should be the
main focus of the next biennial meeting, to be held
next June.
It is also more necessary than ever for Member
States to respect arms embargoes imposed by the
Council and work together to strengthen their
effectiveness, in particular in Libya, South Sudan and
the Central African Republic.
Our operational activities must also be strengthened
and based on two pillars: on the one hand, prevention
by improving national control capacities, marking
and securing weapons stockpiles and, on the other,
combating trafficking, particularly by strengthening
cooperation among States.
With regard to prevention, France conducts many
training and capacity-building activities for States,
including Benin, Mali and the Niger. My country also
contributes to combating the supply of weapons to
armed terrorist groups in the Sahelo-Saharan region.
That is also the purpose of the benchmarks that the
Security Council established at our initiative for the
arms embargo on the Central African Republic so as
to strengthen the capacities of the Central African
authorities in the areas of security sector reform and
arms and ammunition management and prevent the risk
of the proliferation of small arms and light weapons.
However, our efforts would be incomplete if they
were not implemented, coordinated and aligned at the
regional level. The Secretary-General’s report cites
many examples in support of that. I would like to come
back to the specific case of the Western Balkans, where
France, together with Germany, has been particularly
involved. The efforts made against the diversion of such
weapons have been significant and provide a frame of
reference on which we can draw.
We are also fully committed to supporting initiatives
in other regions, particularly West Africa and the Sahel
region. I would also like to commend the other regional
initiatives cited in the report, including the African
Union’s Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative. We must
continue to build on those experiences and promote the
mutual learning of lessons in order to better align our
action at the international and regional levels.
14/20

05/02/2020

In conclusion, the many links with other issues
at the forefront of the Council’s activities call for
strengthening the effectiveness of our work and
avoiding the silo approach. We must continue to strive to
take into account the existing synergies in all our areas
of work. France especially welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s call to develop a comprehensive approach,
particularly within the United Nations system with
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and in
cooperation with INTERPOL and the World Customs
Organization, around the interlinkage of combating
illicit trafficking, organized crime and terrorism.
Also in that context, I wish to note the usefulness
of the tools already developed by the Council, including
the aides-memoires and the dedicated Saving Lives
Entity fund. They are vital resources that we must
continue to use for the benefit of our action. For its part,
France, will remain fully committed to the fight against
illicit trafficking and the uncontrolled proliferation of
small arms and light weapons.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I also congratulate your
predecessor, the Ambassador of Viet Nam. I commend
your choice of the important topic that we are discussing
today. It is a topic that is also very close to our hearts.
Lastly, I commend Mrs. Nakamitsu and the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2019/1011), which Germany
strongly supports, including its conclusions.
As Mrs. Nakamitsu said, first and foremost, it is an
issue that is specific to almost each conflict. I therefore
think that it is important that, in our deliberations when
we discuss mandates, we include the specific aspect
of small arms and light weapons in the mandates.
Secondly, it is also a thematic issue. Mrs. Nakamitsu
and others explained very well that small arms and
light weapons have consequences for sustainable
development, terrorism and organized crime but also,
in particular, women and children. I would like to echo
all those who stressed that issue and requested the
increased participation of women in discussions on this
topic and, more generally, that women be included in
all negotiations and talks concerning conflicts.
With regard to the dimension, the French
representative has just said that every year there are
some 500,000 victims. By our estimation, there is a
victim every 15 minutes, which perhaps adds to the
20-02899

05/02/2020

Small arms

S/PV. 8713

number. It is unacceptable. With regard to what should
be done now at the operational level, I agree with the
remarks made by the Ambassador of the Dominican
Republic, who just said that it is now time to update
resolution 2220 (2015), which we adopted in 2015.

the world. Through you, Mr. President, we sincerely
congratulate our colleague from Viet Nam on a very
successful presidency. I would also like to commend
you for your selection of today’s agenda item, as the
subject is crucial for our region, Africa.

Secondly, several speakers have already said it,
and I agree, that we must support regional activities.
I would also like to congratulate Africa on its very
important Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative, as
well as on its regional activities. The representative of
France just mentioned the Franco-German initiative on
small arms and light weapons in the Western Balkans,
which is essential for that region and can be replicated
in others.

I would like to thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her
very informative and useful briefing. I also thank
Mr. Spleeters for being here and for his briefing.

Thirdly, we must request that States meet their
obligations on the issue. The representative of China,
Mr. Spleeters, in his briefing, and others have said that
States are under obligation to secure their weapons.
An export control system that grants export licenses
is needed. Tracing mechanisms are also required. In
particular, embargoes and sanctions that have been
agreed upon in the Chamber must be implemented and
respected. I would again like to raise the issue of Libya.
It is unacceptable that, in spite of the sanctions agreed
upon by the Council, some States openly violate the
embargo — and we see the effects of such actions in
Libya every day.
Lastly, I would like to briefly turn to the discussion
we had in the Council a few days ago on the sanctions
imposed on the Central African Republic (see
S/PV.8712) . Germany was very reticent about the lifting
of the sanctions, not because we do not support the
Government but because we are not yet convinced that
the measures taken to secure weapons are sufficient.
Some around the table have mentioned examples of
weapon theft and looting, which has led to devastating
repercussions in countries of the Sahel, other countries
in Africa, in Afghanistan and elsewhere. It is for that
reason that we are so reticent about lifting that embargo.
The right conditions must be in place.
The President (spoke in French): I would like
to commend the representative of Germany for his
perfect French.
Mr. Baati (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I would like
to begin by sincerely congratulating you, Mr. President,
on your country’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. I look forward to working with you
and your team to ensure peace and security throughout

(spoke in Arabic)
The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
remains one of the elements that contribute to the
exacerbation of internal armed conflict in many
countries and regions, particularly on the African
continent and the Arab world. It results in the targeting
and killing of a large number of innocent civilians,
especially women and children, and in the deepening
of conflict-related humanitarian tragedies. The illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons also undermines
regional security and stability, while supporting
terrorism and transnational organized crime as a key
source of funding.
In that regard, we reiterate our deep concerns about
the continued illicit flow of weapons to Libya and the
Sahel, which hampers the prospects for a political
solution and emboldens terrorist organizations to take
advantage of the ongoing unrest in order to implement
their schemes and further expand in the region.
Therefore, Tunisia reiterates that weapons control
and addressing the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons are sine qua non for reducing tensions,
facilitating peace and security and restoring stability
in hotspot areas, as well as creating an environment
conducive to boosting socioeconomic development in
the countries concerned. In addition, they would also
help ensure the success of the African Union initiative,
Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020, which is greatly
supported by the United Nations. It is a priority for the
Heads of State and Government of the African Union,
in particular at the start of this year and decade. We
thank all delegations that expressed their support for
that initiative today.
As Tunisia calls for concerted efforts to achieve
the goals set, we support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General to continue working to address
multi-dimensional challenges resulting from the
large-scale circulation of small arms and light weapons
and ammunition.

20-0289915/20

S/PV.8713

Small arms

Tunisia is a peaceful country that — I
underscore — does not produce or export weapons of any
kind. Based on our firm commitment to international
peace and security, we are committed to actively
participating in all efforts aimed at finding effective
solutions to the problem of small arms and light
weapons, in addition to redressing the devastating
consequences of the wide-scale availability of such
weapons, in particular instability, violence, insecurity
and the undermining of development in many countries.
In that regard, Tunisia supported the adoption of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, along with the International Instrument
to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and
Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons.
Tunisia is also party to the Protocol against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their
Parts and Components and Ammunition supplementing
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime. As evidence of that orientation in the
foreign policy of Tunisia and its principled positions,
we endorsed the adoption of the Arms Trade Treaty at
the General Assembly. We took that step because we
believe that the Treaty could significantly contribute
to finding solutions to the illicit trade in conventional
weapons, including small arms and light weapons,
without prejudice to the sovereignty, security and
legitimate needs of States in terms of their national
defence and without impacting the regular and legal
trade in arms among States.
In conclusion, I reiterate the position of my
country’s delegation that combating the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons hinges primarily on
the national responsibilities of States and necessarily
requires cooperation among States and with
international organizations. It is also necessary to
increase assistance provided to developing countries in
order to promote their capacity to manage stockpiles,
the marking and tracing of arms, as well as collecting
and destroying illicit weapons. We again commend the
President’s initiative to convene this meeting.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): Please
accept my congratulations, Mr. President, on your
country’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of February. I would also like
to convey our appreciation to the representative of
Viet Nam for an extremely successful presidency
last month. I also thank the High Representative for
16/20

05/02/2020

Disarmament Affairs for presenting the biennial report
of the Secretary-General (S/2019/1011), as well as
Mr. Spleeters for the excellent briefing he delivered to
the Council.
Despite the numerous initiatives constantly being
developed by the international community, the impact
of the proliferation of small arms and light weapons
continues to be a matter of grave concern throughout the
world, as they fuel various conflicts, as the SecretaryGeneral and the High Representative so aptly pointed
out. The issue is extremely important for the Sahel
in general, and for the Niger in particular, given the
prevailing security situation.
The Niger duly commends the Secretary-General’s
Securing Our Common Future: An Agenda for
Disarmament, published in May 2018, which seeks
to contribute to saving lives through a far-reaching
programme that supports national, subregional and
regional efforts to control illicit weapons. I would also
like to commend all such efforts and initiatives aimed
at strengthening control over the illicit flows of small
arms and light weapons at the national, subregional and
regional levels.
In Africa, those initiatives include the Silencing the
Guns by 2020 initiative; the African Union’s Agenda
2063; the Economic Community of West African States
Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their
Ammunition and Other Related Materials; and the
Central African Convention for the Control of Small
Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and All
Parts and Components That Can Be Used for Their
Manufacture, Repair and Assembly, to name just a few.
Since the establishment of the Niger’s National
Commission for the Collection and Control of Illicit
Arms, on 28 November 1994, the Commission has
significantly contributed to the control of illicit
weapons, despite the fact that the porous nature of the
country’s borders does not make it easy. Those efforts
are continuing thanks to the support of bilateral and
multilateral partners, including the United Nations.
However, despite the considerable progress made
over the past two years, as mentioned in the report,
much work remains to be done, commensurate with
the harmful consequences of the proliferation of small
arms, especially in the current context of an increasing
number of conflicts and the expansion of international
terrorism. In March 2000, Kofi Annan, in one of his
many statements on the subject, said that,
20-02899

05/02/2020

Small arms

“In terms of the carnage they cause, small arms,
indeed, could well be described as ‘weapons of
mass destruction’” (A/54/2000, para.238).
That observation is unfortunately still valid today.
Furthermore, the report stresses the fact that small
arms remain the primary cause of human suffering,
particularly among women and children, who are
generally the innocent victims of the perpetrators of
violence. That reality obliges us to be fully aware of the
situation in order to take the necessary actions to avoid
the humanitarian crises flowing from the violence
caused by the illicit circulation of small arms and the
conflicts that they provoke, perpetuate and fuel.
The Niger welcomes the special attention that the
Secretary-General is paying to the Central African
region, and in particular the Sahel, where the impact of
the trafficking in small arms has been magnified by the
Libyan crisis. Since the diversion in 2011 of the Libyan
arsenal to terrorist groups, the situation in the Sahel has
only worsened. Continuing to supply arms to Libya,
despite the embargo, is to continue inundate the Sahel
with weapons, contributing to the destabilization of the
region and encouraging serious violations of human
security and human rights. My delegation once again
takes the opportunity of this meeting to appeal for strict
compliance with the arms embargo on Libya, which is
one of the indispensable conditions for the return to
peace and stability in both Libya and the Sahel.
The impact of conflicts also compromises the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) and imposes exorbitant costs on the States,
communities and individuals who suffer from them on
a daily basis. Hence the need to take that dimension
into consideration in assessing the implementation of
the SDGs by the countries affected. The scale of the
damage caused by the proliferation and circulation of
small arms and light weapons should be a concern to all
countries around the world. That is why the Niger calls
for greater mobilization of the international community
on the issue, with a view to reducing the harmful
impacts of the proliferation of small arms on human
security in general and development in particular.
From that standpoint, while recalling the need
for cross-border cooperation to strengthen measures
to control small arms and light weapons, the Niger
encourages and supports all subregional, regional and
international initiatives on the issue. We particularly
welcome the efforts made by the United Nations to

S/PV. 8713

ensure the protection of civilians, especially in conflict
zones, including through the management of weapon
and ammunition stockpiles and the development of
strategies to ensure enhanced protection for civilians
and peacekeepers, some of whom, unfortunately, have
paid the ultimate price in discharging their duties.
In conclusion, the Niger calls on all Member
States, especially manufacturing countries, to shoulder
more responsibility and give greater consideration to
the involvement of women and children in national
strategies and to establish an effective system for the
control and management of those types of weapons and
their ammunition.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I congratulate Belgium on
presiding over the Security Council in February. I also
thank all members of the Council for their support,
cooperation and guidance during our presidency last
month. I would furthermore like to thank the two
briefers for their insightful remarks today.
Twenty years have passed since the Council first
took up the issue of small arms and light weapons
(SALW) (see S/PV.4048). Yet, according to the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/1011), in many
places, illicit small arms and light weapons remain
the main cause of human suffering, regional conflicts,
humanitarian crises, terrorism and transnational crime
and pose serious risks to peacekeepers and civilian
personnel alike. Despite international efforts over the
years, the illicit trade and misuse of small arms and
light weapons continue to threaten many regions and
countries, such as the Sahel and Libya, among others.
Viet Nam supports international efforts, with the
central role of the United Nations, to prevent and combat
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. But
such efforts should be made on the basis of international
law and the Charter of the United Nations, including
full respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States and non-interference in their internal affairs.
At the same time, they should not negatively affect
Member States’ legitimate right of self-defence.
We welcome the efforts of States and international
organizations to implement the Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.
We also commend the Council’s considerable efforts
to continue to constructively and effectively address
the issue of the illicit small arms trade in specific
situations. We highly appreciate the work of the

20-0289917/20

S/PV.8713

Small arms

United Nations and its specialized agencies, including
through the publishing of the relevant aide-mémoires,
including the aide-mémoires for the consideration of
issues pertaining to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and that on options for reflecting weapons and
ammunition management in decisions of the Security
Council. As for the way forward, we would like to
stress the following.
First, Members States bear the primary
responsibility in combating the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons. States should strictly
implement the Programme of Action and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2220
(2015). Capacity-building and technical assistance
should further be considered and provided, particularly
for those countries most in need of dealing with SALWrelated issues.
Secondly, the Council should focus on improving
the design and implementation of relevant mission
mandates in specific situations. That activity could
include assistance to the host country and ensuring
the effectiveness of arms embargoes, but it should not
excessively restrict the legitimate security needs of
the Governments concerned. The desirable outcome
should always be achieving immediate peace, longterm stability and strong Governments that are capable
of combating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. In that process, priority should be given to the
protection of civilians, the security of peace operations
and personnel, combating terrorism and organized
crime and enhancing role of women as agents for peace.
Thirdly, United Nations organs and agencies and
international and regional organizations should work
together in a cohesive manner to strengthen cooperation
and complementarity in achieving their common goal.
The importance of sharing good practices cannot be
over-emphasized.
In conclusion, we would like to stress Viet Nam’s
strong commitment to addressing the issue of the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons. We are ready
to cooperate with Member States, the United Nations
system and regional organizations to move forward this
very important agenda.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I
thank both of our briefers.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines has a front-row
seat to the damage that the illicit trade in small arms
18/20

05/02/2020

and light weapons can cause. Although the Caribbean
does not produce arms itself, the illicit traffic in small
arms profoundly affects our region. Resolution 2220
(2015) underscored that small arms and light weapons
are the most frequently used weapons in the majority of
recent armed conflicts. The illicit flow of small arms
fuels conflict, terrorism and crimes around the world,
and thereby threatens international peace and security.
Let us cite a recent example.
In August 2019, the Government of Chad closed the
border that it shares with the Sudan in response to the
illegal entry of small arms and light weapons. Those
weapons are easier and cheaper to access in the Sudan.
Their presence in Chad contributed to the escalating
intercommunal violence in the region. Unfortunately,
such situations are not isolated events. Around the world,
we see that the increased presence of small arms and
light weapons is directly related to increased violence.
The Secretary-General puts it best in paragraph 9 of
his report (S/2019/1011), when he states that the illicit
trade in small arms continues to exacerbate ongoing
conflicts and contribute to the outbreak of others.
Trafficking in small arms and light weapons
cannot be divorced from other forms of trafficking that
provoke tensions between rival groups that compete
for power and profit. The illegal exploitation of, and
trade in, natural resources and wildlife form part of the
same political economy as the illicit arms trade. Such
complex webs of criminality operate across borders,
as they often thrive on the fringes of State authority.
The strength of those networks, however, begets their
greatest weakness. They can flourish only in the absence
of a well-organized governance framework. Regional
and subregional organizations and their member States
must work collectively to manage their shared borders
and regulate the movement of people.
On the African continent, the illicit flow of small
arms and light weapons has taken its toll on far too
many generations of people. Our delegation welcomes
the ongoing initiatives towards silencing the guns in
Africa. We recall, however, that key mechanisms like
the Nairobi Protocol and the Kinshasa Convention will
be successful only if they are accompanied by structural
economic developments.
We cannot pursue sustainable development where
we do not have peace. Increasingly, armed conflicts
in destabilized regions are moving out of battlefields
and into villages, towns and cities, where civilians
20-02899

05/02/2020

Small arms

are deeply affected. That creates humanitarian crises
that endanger those who are most vulnerable. Indeed,
the gendered implications and violence occasioned by
small-arms use cannot be ignored and should not be
minimized. We cannot sit idly by as those disturbing
trends continue.
As a State party to the Arms Trade Treaty, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines appreciates that Member
States have the right to order their internal affairs
as they see fit, including in the area of arms control.
However, that right is not absolute when domestic
policies have negative implications beyond borders.
Given the nature of small-arms trafficking, regional
cooperation is critical.
As a member of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM), we reiterate CARICOM’s 2011 declaration
on small arms and light weapons. The Caribbean
Community has vowed to support the implementation
and enforcement of policies and legislation against
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons. We
encourage the efforts that are being made at the regional
level around the world.
Small arms and illicit weapons have been a concern
of the international community for years. However,
now is the time for concerted action. Across the world,
small arms find their way into countries that do not
even produce them and wreak havoc on vulnerable
communities within them. It is time to enforce
greater accountability.
Mr. Barkin (United States of America): I
congratulate Belgium on its assumption of the
presidency. I would also extend congratulations to Viet
Nam for a very successful presidency last month. I also
thank High Representative Nakamitsu and Mr. Spleeters
for their briefings.
In 2001, the General Assembly adopted by
consensus the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. In
this landmark achievement of the international
community, we committed to concrete actions to
reduce the illicit trafficking of small arms and light
weapons. The United States remains fully committed
to implementing the Programme of Action, as well as
the 2005 International Tracing Instrument. We have
worked and continue to work side by side with other
countries and international and regional organizations
to combat the illicit small arms trade. For example,

S/PV. 8713

our conventional weapons destruction programme
has provided more than $3.6 billion in assistance to
more than 100 countries since 1993. The programme
includes assistance to countries to destroy their excess
weapons and munitions and enhance their stockpile
security through the provision of technical expertise
and physical security upgrades.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/1011)
rightly indicates the cross-cutting nature of issues
associated with illicit small arms, which span numerous
lines of effort, including conflict prevention, crime
and human rights. We agree with the conclusion that
the international community must focus on the root
causes of illicit arms flows, including poor stockpile
management of State-owned stockpiles and crossborder trafficking. Additionally, we must remember
that, in many of those cross-cutting areas, work is
already being done, including by the SecretaryGeneral and the Security Council. We must ensure
that there is coordination between those efforts rather
than redundancy. That includes items on the Security
Council’s agenda, such as women, peace and security
and the protection of civilians.
The Secretary-General’s report gives some cause
for optimism regarding that important issue. Notably,
in 2018 States explicitly acknowledged for the first
time the relationship between the implementation
of the Programme of Action and combating genderbased violence. In addition, we commend the report’s
focus on regional and subregional efforts to enhance
coordination in small arms and light weapons control,
making particular note of the focus on silencing the
guns in Africa by 2020 and on the road map 2024
initiative in the western Balkans region. We would
like to see future reports address regional issues more
comprehensively, such as the ongoing efforts in the
western hemisphere.
The report also rightly indicates that the
international community is struggling to fulfil existing
commitments on small arms. For example, it notes
that the success rate for tracing seized weapons was
less than 13 per cent between 2016 and 2017. Full
implementation of United Nations sanctions regimes,
in particular arms embargoes, would help to improve
record-keeping of government stockpiles, which have
long been a source of weapons for armed groups
operating in fragile States, particularly in the Central
African Republic, South Sudan and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Simply keeping records of

20-0289919/20

S/PV.8713

Small arms

weapons is not enough, however. We called for greater
efforts to implement existing commitments at the last
briefing on this matter in 2017 (see S/PV.8140) and we
reiterate that call today.
Unfortunately, we do have several concerns about
the Secretary-General’s report, including with regard to
civilian ownership of firearms. We urge the SecretaryGeneral to carefully differentiate between lawful
ownership of small arms and the illegal use of small
arms in non-conflict settings and the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons, which fuels conflict and
instability. Despite those concerns, the United States
welcomes today’s discussion and will continue to lead
efforts to reduce the threat that illicit small arms and
light weapons pose. We will continue to take concrete
steps at the national, regional and global levels to
combat the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
and urge all countries to join us in strengthening
implementation of our existing commitments and
obligations to combat the illicit transfer, accumulation
and misuse of such weapons.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Belgium.
The uncontrolled circulation of small arms and
light weapons (SALWs) clearly poses a serious threat to
international peace and security. As we have heard, it
is estimated that more than 1 billion such weapons are
in circulation worldwide, 85 per cent of which are in
civilian hands. The consequences of that situation are as
dramatic as they are predictable. Every year, SALWs kill
hundreds of thousands of people. They are responsible
for 90 per cent of the victims of armed conflicts,
mainly civilians and too often women and children. To
avoid such tragedies, we must stop the flow of illicit
arms. Arms embargoes are an effective instrument to
that end, provided that they are fully implemented. The
Libyan case is a dramatic counterexample in that regard.
A collective surge of effort on the part of the Council
is necessary today in order to reaffirm its authority and
the unequivocal nature of the embargoes it imposes.
Furthermore, a satisfactory response to the illicit
trafficking of SALWs requires us to take into account
their entire life cycle, as well as the ammunition
they need to function. Belgium has been firmly
committed for several years to a more systematic
tracing of illicit weapons in conflict and post-conflict
zones, which requires sufficient technical and human
resources. Indeed, tracing is the cornerstone of an

20/20

05/02/2020

effective approach that is informed by the reality on
the ground. The briefing by Mr. Damien Spleeters
clearly demonstrated that. The tracing of SALWs
contributes to preventing diversions and improving
stockpile security policies. Moreover, it facilitates
informed decision-making on export licences, enables
the assessment of embargo enforcement and helps to
dismantle trafficking networks.
The monitoring of SALWs, as well as direct
investigations on the ground, enable United Nations
peacekeeping operations to more effectively prevent
the resurgence of violence. That said, cooperation
between peacekeeping operations and groups of experts
responsible for monitoring embargoes should be
strengthened, which would enhance their ability to trace
the origin of illicit SALWs and limit their availability.
That is why Belgium calls for the monitoring and
tracing of illicit weapons to be included in the mandates
of the relevant peacekeeping operations.
In addition, the role of regional organizations and
their member States in the fight against illicit arms
trafficking is fundamental, and several tools are at
their disposal. In that regard, Belgium welcomes the
African Union’s Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative
and the establishment of action plans for Africa and
its subregions. Those decisions demonstrate the
importance of better coordination among the various
regional and international arms control mechanisms.
As mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2019/1011), particular focus on the Sahel region and
central Africa is sorely needed.
In conclusion, I underscore the technological
evolution of small arms and light weapons and the
challenges that it poses to existing commitments.
Thus, there is an urgent need to supplement the 2005
International Instrument to Enable States to Identify
and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit
Small Arms and Light Weapons with an annex that takes
into account the increase in the number of polymer and
modular weapons. If we want to be effective, we must
ensure that our tools remain relevant.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers.
The meeting rose at noon.

20-02899
