S/2019/352

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 April 2019
Original: English

Twenty-second report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013), covers developments pertaining to the issues of missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the
national archives, since my previous report, dated 25 January 2019 ( S/2019/78).

II. Recent activities with regard to the repatriation and return
of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals, or their remains
2.
On 19 February, the Ministry of Defence of Iraq organized a field trip to a
potential burial site of Kuwaiti nationals at Khamisiyah, in Dhi Qar Governorate, in
the presence of a witness brought by the Ministry, as agreed at the 106th meeting of
the Technical Subcommittee of the tripartite mechanism, held on 11 December 2018.
The Kuwaiti National Committee for Missing Persons and Prisoners of War Affairs,
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), representatives of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and a United Nations expert from the
Service for Geospatial, Information and Telecommunications Technologies at the
Global Service Centre in Brindisi, Italy, participated in the field trip. The key
objectives of the field trip were to ascertain facts on the ground in the presence of the
witness and to assess the feasibility of using ground-penetrating radar to search for
human remains at the Khamisiyah site. During the field trip, the representatives
exchanged information with the witness. They were also approached by local civilians
claiming to have information about possible burial sites. The United Nations expert
on ground-penetrating radar made an assessment of the area of interest and collected
soil samples for laboratory analysis, in order to ascertain whether such radar might
indeed be suitable for locating potential burial sites.
3.
On 19 February, the Security Council adopted a statement by the President of
the Council on the situation between Iraq and Kuwait (S/PRST/2019/1), in which the
Council welcomed the strong bilateral relations between Iraq and Kuwait and
commended the Kuwaiti Government’s continued support for Iraq in its efforts to
achieve stability. The Council also welcomed the ongoing cooperation between Iraq
and Kuwait in the search for missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and
expressed its strong support for the efforts undertaken by the Governments of Iraq
and Kuwait through the tripartite mechanism and its Chair, ICRC, with respect to the

19-06425 (E)

030519

*1906425*

S/2019/352

file. The Council noted with regret that 369 cases of missing Kuwaiti and third country nationals remained unresolved and that no human remains had been exhumed
since 2004. It encouraged the Iraqi Government to continue its search for missing
Kuwaiti property, in particular the missing Kuwaiti national archives. Following the
adoption of the statement, the Permanent Representative of Kuwait to the United
Nations, Mansour al-Otaibi, said that the statement sent an important message to
bereaved Kuwaiti families, Iraqis and the international community regarding the
importance that the Council attaches to the need for progress on the issue.
4.
On 21 February, UNAMI, in its observer capacity, and the United Nations expert
attended the 107th meeting of the Technical Subcommittee of the tripartite
mechanism, held in Baghdad. An update was provided on information gathered
through excavation work, witness testimonies and an analysis of maps and satellite
imagery. The Ministry of Defence of Iraq reported on excavation and exploration
works carried out at the potential burial site of Karbala’, following the provision by
ICRC of excavation equipment and external forensic expertise. Some bone fragments
found during the excavation works had been sent to the Iraqi Medico-Legal
Directorate for DNA analysis and genetic profiling, to determine whether they
belonged to human remains previously retrieved. The members of the Tripartite
Commission agreed to continue exploration work at the Karbal a’ site.
5.
At the 107th meeting, the members of the subcommittee also had the opportunity
to interview a witness who had information on the Samawah site. The members of the
tripartite mechanism agreed to keep communication channels open with the witness.
The Kuwaiti delegation informed the Technical Subcommittee that it was in the
process of investigating new information regarding the Samawah site and that it
would share that information with the members of the tripartite mechanism once it
had been verified. It was agreed that exploration and investigation work at the
Samawah site should continue.
6.
During the reporting period, the Ministry of Defence of Iraq continued its
investigation, through the tripartite mechanism, of the naval base site in Kuwait and
of the Radwaniyah, Barjisiyah and Salman Pak sites in Iraq. The Ministry continued
to follow up on earlier leads, contacting relevant government bodies to cross -check
and verify information. While no new developments had been registered, the sites in
question would remain open as the Ministry continued to search for more information.
7.
The Office of the Spokesperson of the Ministry of Defence of Iraq continued to
issue calls for witnesses, through official newspapers and on all available satellite
television stations, on a regular basis, most recently on 13 February, inviting those
with information on missing Kuwaiti persons and missing Kuwaiti property to come
forward.
8.
The delegations of France, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America provided the Technical Subcommittee of the
tripartite mechanism with an update on information they had shared with ICRC
pertaining to maps, imagery or the analysis of imagery from the 1990–1991 period.
Thus far, no information regarding potential burial sites has surfaced from the review
of the French diplomatic archives. An archival review process by ICRC is ongoing,
while the handover of satellite imagery from the United States to ICRC is still
pending. The United Kingdom is currently investigating the archives of the Royal
Army Chaplains’ Department to identify whether any other relevant records could be
made accessible to ICRC researchers.
9.
The United Nations expert gave a presentation to the Technical Subcommittee
on the methodology and potential use of ground-penetrating radar and complementary
electrical resistivity tomography to confirm or refute the existence of clandestine
burials, initially in a smaller segment of the Khamisiyah site. The expert’s final report
2/4

19-06425

S/2019/352

and a project proposal on the use of that integrated approach will be circulated to the
members of the tripartite mechanism.
10. My Special Representative for Iraq carried out her first official visit to Kuwait
on 3 February, where she met separately with the Prime Minister of Kuwait,
Sheikh Jaber Al-Mubarak Al-Hamad Al Sabah, and the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah Khalid Al Hamad Al Sabah. At
both meetings, the Kuwaiti representatives emphasized the importance of the file for
the families of the missing persons and reiterated their wish to see the Iraqi
Government make greater efforts to identify and return the remaining Kuwaiti
missing property, including the national archives. My Special Representative
acknowledged the disappointment of Kuwait at the lack of tangible results and
underlined her intention to continue to spare no effort regarding this important
humanitarian file.
11. Also on 3 February, my Special Representative met with members of the
Kuwaiti National Committee for Missing Persons and Prisoners of War Affairs, who
called for greater efforts to identify witnesses as part of the search for burial sites and
emphasized the need for appropriate excavation equipment capable of reaching
deeper into the soil and for greater advocacy with the members of the Tripartite
Commission in order to acquire aerial and satellite imagery that would help pinpoint
potential burial locations. My Special Representative reiterated the commitment of
UNAMI to the file, including its support to the members of the Tripartite Commission.
12. On 19 February, my Special Representative met the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Iraq, Mohamed Ali Alhakim, with whom she discussed the issue of missing
Kuwaiti persons and property, including the national archives. The Minister
emphasized his Government’s commitment to helping to locate the remains of
missing Kuwaiti persons, as well as missing Kuwaiti property. My Special
Representative underlined the continued support of UNAMI to the Government of
Iraq and encouraged the Minister and the Government to continue their active
engagement on the file.
13. On 18 March, my Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs and
Electoral Assistance of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq met the
Undersecretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Iraq, Hazem al-Youssifi, to brief
him on the recent efforts of UNAMI on the file of Kuwaiti missing persons and
property, including the national archives. The Undersecretary underlined th e close
relations between the two neighbouring countries and reiterated the determination of
Iraq to resolve all outstanding issues. He encouraged the members of the Tripartite
Commission to step up their efforts to assist with the process, through the provision
of appropriate satellite imagery and specialized drilling equipment to facilitate
excavation works.
14. On 20 March, my Deputy Special Representative met Brigadier General Hazem
Qassem Majid, the head of the technical committee in charge of the file on missing
Kuwaiti persons in the Ministry of Defence of Iraq, to brief him on the report of the
United Nations expert regarding the potential use of ground-penetrating radar at the
Khamisiyah site. She agreed with the Brigadier General that contextual information,
such as corroborated eyewitness accounts or an analysis of historic satellite imagery,
would be required to narrow down the search area. The Brigadier General reported
on some encouraging discoveries made during excavations conducted by the Mini stry
of Defence of Iraq at the Samawah site on 6 March, which are currently being
examined and identified by experts.

19-06425

3/4

S/2019/352

III. Recent activities with regard to the return of
Kuwaiti property
15. During my Special Representative’s visit to Kuwait on 3 February, the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait emphasized the
importance of the return of missing Kuwaiti property, particularly the national
archives, which constitute an important part of the history of the State of Kuwait. My
Deputy Special Representative further discussed the issue of missing Kuwaiti
property on 18 March during her meeting with the Undersecretary of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of Iraq, who announced that the Ministry had formed a committee to
identify and collect outstanding Kuwaiti property and archives. He explained that the
national archives were most probably dispersed across the governorates of Iraq,
making it challenging to locate and retrieve them. Once a substantive number of items
had been collected, the Ministry would proceed with their handover at the earliest
possible opportunity. My Deputy Special Representative underlined the readiness of
UNAMI to assist Iraq in that effort.

IV. Observations
16. I am encouraged by the dedication and hard work of the Governments of Iraq
and Kuwait and the other members of the tripartite mechanism, as well as its Chair,
ICRC, whose efforts have remained focused on addressing the issue of missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals. I would like to pay particular tribute to the
leadership of ICRC for providing valuable guidance, ideas and recommendations in
this process.
17. Despite a number of challenges, the Ministry of Defence of Iraq has
demonstrated commendable perseverance in moving the file forward, reinvigorating
fieldwork, exploring new sources of information, looking for further witnesses and
accepting the recommendations of and acting on the proposals of the members of the
tripartite mechanism. I regret that 369 cases of missing Kuwaiti and third -country
nationals remain unresolved and that no human remains have been exhumed since
2004. I call upon the Government of Iraq to continue investing its energy in the file
until tangible results are achieved.
18. I express my gratitude to the Government of Kuwait for its patience,
understanding and continuous support for the efforts of the Government of Iraq over
the years.
19. The dedication of the members of the tripartite mechanism and their
contributions to the mechanism have been vital in maintaining the necessary
determination to move the process forward. I strongly urge the members of the
tripartite mechanism in possession of relevant aerial and satellite imagery to
accelerate the handover process to ICRC, as such imagery will be integral to
identifying the location of remaining burial sites.
20. As regards the outstanding missing Kuwaiti property, I welcome the efforts of
the Government of Iraq to achieve concrete results by forming a team and expanding
the search nationwide for missing Kuwaiti items, including the national archives.
21. My Special Representative, Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, and my Deputy Special
Representative for Political Affairs and Electoral Assistance, Alice Walpole, remain
committed to making progress on the file by promoting, supporting and facilitating
the efforts of the Government of Iraq.

4/4

19-06425
