S/2021/685

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 July 2021
English
Original: French

Letter dated 30 July 2021 addressed to the Secretary-General and
the Permanent Representatives of Security Council members by
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the 8826th meeting of the Security Council
convened on 28 July 2001 under the agenda item “The situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question”. The interventions of the briefers, Council
members as well as the Observer State of Palestine and Israel will be published as an
official record of the Security Council (S/PV.8826).
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members fo r the
8826th meeting, the following delegations and entities submitted written statements,
copies of which are enclosed (see annexes): Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Brazil, the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, Costa
Rica, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, the European Union, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, Oman, Peru, Qatar, the Republic of
Korea, South Africa, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab
Emirates, and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the
Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security Council
members dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of the
extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID -19)
pandemic, these statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council, and
reference to the document will be made in the verbatim record (S/PV.8826)
President of the Security Council
(Signed) Nicolas de Riviere

21-10605 (E)

200821

*2110605*

170921

S/2021/685

Annex I
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Azerbaijan to the
United Nations on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries
[Original: English]
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the 120 Member States of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
At the outset, I would like to congratulate France on its successful presidency
of the Security Council this month and thank it for providing an opportunity for the
Non-Aligned Movement to present its position on the question of Palestine that has
historically constituted an issue of concern and vital importance to the Movement.
Having considered the critical developments and deteriorating situation in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, the Coordinating Bureau of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries issued a communiqué, on 13 May 2021, on
the escalating violations and provocations in the Occupied Palestinian Territory and
condemned in the strongest terms the acts of aggression by Israel, the occupying
Power, against the Palestinian civilian population. The Non-Aligned Movement
laments the grave impact on innocent and defenceless children, women and men,
many of whom were tragically killed in the sanctity of their own homes, in particular
in the Gaza Strip.
Israel’s provocative, illegal actions, including its ongoing settlement
colonization of the Palestinian land, including East Jerusalem, and all measures of
annexation, constitute grave breaches of international law, including the Charter of
the United Nations, the Fourth Geneva Convention and numerous relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions, and in blatant disrespect of the advisory
opinion rendered on 9 July 2004 by the International Court of Justice on the Legal
Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory.
The Non-Aligned Movement calls for a halt to all such illegal actions, including the
construction and expansion of settlements and the Wall, and a halt to the seizure of
Palestinian property, the demolition of Palestinian homes and the expulsion of
Palestinian families from their homes, including in occ upied East Jerusalem in the
neighbourhoods of Shaykh Jarrah and Silwan and in the Jordan Valley. Israel, the
occupying Power, must cease forthwith its colonization measures and the forced
displacement and transfer of the Palestinian civilian population and must fully respect
its obligations under international law without exception.
The Non-Aligned Movement cautions that, if not averted, such plans will have
far-reaching and devastating repercussions for stability and the already dire
humanitarian conditions on the ground in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem, and for the prospects for realizing the rights of the
Palestinian people, including to self-determination and independence; the two-State
solution based on the pre-1967 borders; and just and lasting peace and security.
The Non-Aligned Movement calls on the international community to enact
serious accountability measures in the light of Israel’s continued non-compliance.
These should include the halting of business with the illegal Israeli settlements and
the banning of entry to markets for settlement products, among other measures, in
line with international norms and rules, including relevant United Nations resolutions
and the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights.
The Non-Aligned Movement continues to believe that Security Council
resolution 2334 (2016) provides the most viable path to a just peace and calls for its
2/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

full and effective implementation. The resolution sets forth the essential requirements
and parameters for the achievement of the two-State solution based on the pre-1967
borders, with respect for the long-standing terms of reference of peace endorsed by
the international community and in accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions; the Madrid Guiding Principles, including the principle of land for peace;
the Arab Peace Initiative; and the Quartet road map.
The Non-Aligned Movement calls for the cessation of all violations,
provocations and aggressions in this regard and for respect for the sanctity of holy
sites in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including in East Jerusalem, rejecting any
attempts to breach their sanctity and to alter the historical and legal status quo. The
Movement also expresses support for Jordan in preserving and administrating the
Islamic and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem, including the Aqsa Mosque/Haram
Al-Sharif and the Hashemite historical custodianship of the holy sites as exercised by
His Majesty King Abdullah II Ibn al-Husain of Jordan.
The Non-Aligned Movement further welcomes the call for Al-Quds Day/
Jerusalem Day signed in Rabat, on 30 March 2019, by His Majesty King Mohammed VI
of Morocco and His Holiness Pope Francis to stress the important ro le that
Al-Quds/Jerusalem plays as a city of tolerance and mutual respect among the people
of the three monotheistic religions and to stress the need to preserve its specificities
and its features as a city of peaceful coexistence.
The Non-Aligned Movement demands once again that Israel abide by Security
Council resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw fully from the Occupied Syrian Golan to
the borders of 4 June 1967, in implementation of Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973).
We reiterate the call on the Security Council to uphold its duties, to implement
its resolutions vis-à-vis the Question of Palestine and to act urgently to address
Israel’s annexation plans, which threaten regional and international peace and
security.
The Non-Aligned Movement calls for urgent measures to ensure the protection
of the Palestinian civilian population, in accordance with international law, and
stresses the need for the full respect of the recently agreed ceasefire and an end to the
repeated breaches by Israel, the occupying Power, including military air strikes
against the Gaza Strip and illegal actions in occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of
the Occupied Palestinian Territory. The Movement urges the international community
to respond generously to the emergency appeal launched by the United Nations on
27 May 2021 with a view to providing urgently needed humanitarian assistance to
alleviate the vast humanitarian suffering of the Palestinian civilian population in Gaza
and to support reconstruction efforts following the widespread destruction of homes,
infrastructure, health clinics, schools and businesses as a result of the recent Israeli
military aggression. The Movement also reiterates its long-standing call for the full
lifting of the Israeli blockade.
In the light of the continuously deteriorating humanitarian and socioeconomic
situation of the Palestinian people, including the Palestine refugees, which is
challenged even further by the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID -19), the
members of the Non-Aligned Movement express deep appreciation for the invaluable
work done by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East, including its essential emergency assistance provided to help Palestine
refugees to confront the COVID-19 pandemic. We once again urge the sufficient and
predictable funding of the Agency to enable the continuity of its operations, in line
with its General Assembly mandate, and encourage support for the Agency ’s core
programme budget, as well as for the COVID-19 response plan of the United Nations

21-10605

3/61

S/2021/685

for the Occupied Palestinian Territory and the COVID -19 flash appeal for Palestine
refugees.
In conclusion, the Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms its abiding solidarity with
the Palestinian people, as well as its unwavering support for their just cause, and
renews its commitment to further supporting, strengthening and coordinating the
international efforts to achieve a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful solution
to the question of Palestine in all its aspects, including the plight of the Palestine
refugees on the basis of General Assembly resolution 194 (III). We express our sincere
hope that this year will witness tangible progress in the heroic quest of the Palestinian
people to attain justice and fulfil their inalienable rights and legitimate nati onal
aspirations, including their right to self-determination, freedom and independence in
their sovereign and independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
This will most certainly open a new chapter for regional as well as global pe ace and
stability, a goal strongly supported by our Movement and one that requires urgent
international action to avert the looming dangers and salvage the prospects for a just
and lasting peace.

4/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

Annex II
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the
United Nations, Rabab Fatima
[Original: English]
I wish to commend the Presidency of France for its dynamic stewardship of the
work of the Council in July 2021. I also thank all the briefers for their comprehensive
briefing.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements made by Niger on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and by Azerbaijan on behalf of the Non -Aligned
Movement. In addition, I wish to highlight the following points in m y national
capacity.
We have once again witnessed the violation of the “ceasefire” of May 2021 by
the Israeli Occupation Forces. This phenomenon has been common, and Israel has
demonstrated a pattern of repeatedly violating ceasefires. The lack of strong action
by the international community or any international mechanism against such abuse of
trust, which is often based on a false premise, emboldens the occupying power. As a
result, brutal attacks and acts of aggression by Israel have been going on in th e
occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem.
In the first half of 2021, even amid the coronavirus disease (COVID -19)
outbreak, settler violence has increased by 33 per cent. Home demolitions; deliberate
attacks on civilian infrastructure, including schools and water sources; forced
displacement; and arrests and killings of Palestinian civilians, including children,
have been rampant in the occupied territory of Palestine. These have made the
humanitarian situation worse during this pandemic situation. The systemic targeting
of health infrastructure and health workers and the decision to withhold some of the
Palestinian tax revenues have added an additional burden on an already debilitated
health system, leading to more suffering and deaths a mong COVID-19 patients.
The international community, including the United Nations, had, in the past,
repeatedly expressed serious concerns at the cycles of violence, allegations of
excessive use of force by the Israeli Occupying power, and violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law in the occupied Palestinian
territory. These concerns remain valid even today. So many attempts have been made
in this Council and in other international forums to stop such flagrant violati ons of
international instruments, including the Charter of the United Nations, the Fourth
Geneva Convention and United Nations resolutions. Yet the ardent appeals by the
international community went unheeded by the Israeli Occupying power. It is
unfortunate that our collective effort has failed to ensure the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, including the right to self-determination.
In this regard, today, I would like to emphasize the following issues.
First, the international community must make genuine efforts to address the root
causes of the Palestine crisis and to end this cycle of violence and injustice by the
Israeli Occupation Forces and extremist settlers.
Second, Israeli settlement activity and the dismantlement and seizure of
Palestinian structures in the West Bank must stop immediately. An independent
international investigation must be conducted and legal action must be taken against
the Israeli authorities for the crimes and atrocities perpetrated against the Palestinian
people.

21-10605

5/61

S/2021/685

Third, the urgent humanitarian needs of the Palestinian people, including
COVID-19-related needs, should be addressed urgently. Facilitating the work of the
health workers and ensuring the availability of COVID -19 vaccines should be on the
priority list. Reconstruction work in the Gaza Strip should be started now.
Fourth, the Israeli authorities and all relevant stakeholders should take all
necessary steps to facilitate the rescheduling of elections so that the Palestinian
people can exercise their sovereign rights.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming Bangladesh ’s unwavering support for
the Palestinian people and their just struggle. I also reiterate Bangladesh ’s steadfast
support and principled position for the establishment of an independent, viable,
contiguous and sovereign Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, under
a two-State solution.
The international community, including the Security Council, must take true and
effective initiatives for a comprehensive, just and lastin g solution to the Palestinian
cause and peace in the region.

6/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Brazil to the
United Nations
[Original: English]
Brazil would like to thank France for convening this quarterly debate on the
situation in the Middle East. It has now been over two months since a ceasefire
agreement was reached between Israel and Hamas, putting a pause to the escalation
of violence in Gaza. It is essential that all steps are taken to prevent violence and that
every party refrain from provocative actions in order to consolidate the ceasefire
agreement.
In the wake of the recent conflict, it is important to give priority to the provision
of humanitarian aid to the population of Gaza and to the recovery of its infrastructure.
Brazil echoes the Secretary-General’s call for an integrated, robust package of support
for a swift, sustainable reconstruction and recovery that supports the Palestinian
people and strengthens their institutions. We call on all parties to work together to
ensure the rapid, safe and unimpeded access of humanitarian assistance to Gaza.
Brazil welcomes the new Israeli Government and looks forward to its
constructive engagement in political dialogue. We also hope that unlocking the
process of reforming the Palestinian leadership may create the political conditions for
direct contacts between the parties and the resumption of the peace negotiations.
Brazil reiterates its commitment to a two-State solution to the conflict, where Israel
and Palestine can live side by side, in peace and security, within secure and recognized
borders.
Turning to the situation in Syria, we were glad to see the unanimous adoption
by the Security Council of its resolution 2585 (2021), renewing the cross-border
assistance mechanism. Aid provided through the Bab al-Hawa crossing represents a
lifeline to millions of civilians in north-west Syria, whose needs have become even
greater with the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Operations in the
crossline modality should also be scaled up and closely monitored. In addition,
humanitarian exemptions for any sanctions programme related to Syria must be
observed to ensure that the sanctions do not undermine access to food and essential
health supplies for those most in need.
Brazil reiterates its condemnation of the indiscriminate attacks against civilians,
the targeting of medical and humanitarian workers, and the forced disappearances,
arbitrary detentions and summary killings that have become all too common
throughout the conflict.
Progress on the political track is urgent. Brazil reaffirms its support for the
efforts of the Special Envoy, Geir Pedersen, in facilitating a solution to the conflict
through the implementation of Security Council resolution 2254 (2015). We urge the
members of the Constitutional Committee to bridge their differences and make
substantial progress in their upcoming sessions. Brazil remains convinced that only a
“Syrian-owned and Syrian led”, United Nations-facilitated political process, with due
regard for the preservation of Syria’s territorial integrity, will bring lasting peace and
provide relief for the suffering of the Syrian population.
Regarding the dire situation in Yemen, we reiterate our call on all parties to
renounce the escalation of violence and adhere to a nation -wide ceasefire. We urge
all parties to engage in good faith in peace negotiations, without pre conditions. The
impasse surrounding the repair of the SAFER oil tanker is an additional cause of

21-10605

7/61

S/2021/685

concern, and we call on the Houthis and the United Nations to reach an agreement on
this pressing issue as soon as possible.
Brazil welcomes the appointment of Hans Grundberg as the new Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen and wishes him a successful mandate in his urgent
mission to bring Yemen to the path to peace.
We are glad to see the progress made this year towards achieving a political
solution in Libya. We consider the formation of the Libyan unity Government as a
major breakthrough that demonstrates the determination of the Libyan people to reach
a lasting peace. It is important now to secure the integrity of the upcoming elections,
beginning by adopting a constitutional basis and enacting the necessary legislation in
time to hold the elections by December.
We hope that progress on the political track will have an impact on the situation
on the ground, helping to improve the daily lives of Libyans and to consolidate a
lasting and comprehensive ceasefire. The departure of all foreign fighters and
mercenaries should be coupled with a robust disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme to prevent the further destabilization of the re gion. The arms
embargo is also an indispensable element for de-escalating the conflict, and we
reiterate our call for its full implementation.
As we consider the situation in the Middle East, it is necessary to bear in mind
that long-term political stability and economic prosperity are interdependent and
mutually reinforcing. Efforts to support the peaceful resolution of conflicts should be
combined with initiatives to promote socioeconomic growth, which are key to
building resilient and inclusive societies.
Brazil is fully aware of the challenges ahead in the road to de-escalation, peace
and recovery in Middle Eastern conflicts. As a newly elected member of the Security
Council for the 2022–2023 mandate, we will continue our long-standing tradition of
seeking the constructive engagement of all parties, including the members of the
Security Council, while keeping in mind the centrality of the protection of civilians,
the respect for international humanitarian law and the support for peace and mediation
efforts.

8/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Senegal to the
United Nations, Cheikh Niang
[Original: English]
On behalf of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People, I would like to congratulate France for its able presidency of the
Security Council this month.
So far, 2021 has proven particularly challenging for the Palestinian people on
all fronts. Not only have we witnessed terrible loss of life, a humanitarian crisis, and
destruction during an 11-day conflict in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including
East Jerusalem, affecting the Gaza Strip in particular, but cases of coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) infections are also rising in the Occupied Palestinian Territory owing to
the lack of access to vaccines.
The hostilities in May, the most severe and deadly escalation of violence since
2014, tragically claimed the lives of at least 245 Palestinians in Gaza, including 68
children and 37 women, killed by Israel air strikes on civilian areas, and 12 persons
killed in Israel by indiscriminate rocket fire from Gaza. The Committee stresses the
imperative of the full respect for international humanitarian law and human rights law
and the protection of civilian persons. The Committee calls on all p arties to the
conflict to respect the ceasefire and allow for unhindered humanitarian and
reconstruction efforts, which are urgently needed to alleviate the dire socioeconomic
conditions and hardships borne by the Palestinian population in Gaza.
On 10 May, the Bureau, on behalf of the Committee, issued a statement
expressing its deep alarm at the escalation of violence and acts of provocation and
incitement, in particular by Israeli extremists in occupied East Jerusalem and at the
Aqsa Mosque compound. It also condemned the planned evictions of Palestinian
families from their homes in the Shaykh Jarrah and Silwan neighbourhoods of
occupied East Jerusalem. The Committee further urged the Security Council and the
Middle East Quartet to revitalize the stalled peace process with a view to resuming
meaningful negotiations towards the achievement of a just peace on the basis of
international law and the relevant United Nations resolutions that have long been at
the heart of the international consensus on a just so lution.
As we heard today from the Deputy Special Coordinator and Humanitarian
Coordinator, Lynn Hastings, the violent escalation has had severe humanitarian
consequences for the civilian population, in particular in Gaza, which remains under
a 14-year blockade by Israel, the occupying Power. The Committee reiterates its long standing call for the lifting of the blockade and for the freedom of movement of
persons and goods to be respected in accordance with international law. The
Committee also calls on donors to support the reconstruction needs of the Gaza Strip
as outlined in the rapid damage and needs assessment by the World Bank Group, the
United Nations and the European Union, in close cooperation with the Palestinian
Authority, which estimated recovery needs of up to $485 million during the first 24
months.
In this context, let me reiterate the Committee’s full support for the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and
underscore our call for the adequate and reliable funding of the Agency for its lifesaving activities in support of Palestine refugees.
We support the international community’s swift and resolute response calling
for the respect of international law and accountability. Following a General Assembly
21-10605

9/61

S/2021/685

debate on 20 May, when I delivered a statement on behalf of the Committee, the
Human Rights Council, through its resolution S-30 of 27 May at its emergency special
session, decided “to urgently establish an ongoing independent, international
commission of inquiry” to investigate, in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem, and in Israel, all alleged violations of international
humanitarian law and all alleged violations and abuses of international human rights
law leading up to and since 13 April 2021. The Committee welcomes the appointment,
on 22 July, of Navi Pillay (South Africa), Miloon Kothari (India) and Chris Sidoti
(Australia) by the Human Rights Council to serve as the three members of the
commission of inquiry. The Committee, once more, calls on Israel, the occupying
Power, to abide by international law, including international humanitarian and human
rights law, and urges it to cooperate fully with the commission of inquiry, stressing
that accountability is central for the achievement of justice and peace.
There is no doubt that the escalation in May was directly linked to the
continuous human rights violations that the Palestinian people are enduring as a result
of the decades-long Israeli occupation of their territory, leading to pro vocations and
incitement in East Jerusalem and followed by a heavy response from the Israeli
security forces. In addition, arbitrary detentions of Palestinian civilians, restrictions
to the freedom of movement, settler violence, demolitions and the confisc ation of
Palestinian property across the occupied West Bank and East Jerusalem continue
relentlessly, affecting communities and displacing entire families. The Committee
calls for a stop to ongoing Israeli violations in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including in the Aqsa Mosque, which were among the root causes of the latest
escalation.
Similarly, the Committee urges Israel, the occupying Power, to abide by its
responsibilities under international humanitarian law to supply prompt and adequate
vaccine protection to all in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, in order to avert the further spread of the virus and damage to the health
and well-being of the Palestinian population under occupation.
The inalienable rights of the Palestinian people continue to be denied, and the
illegal occupation of the Palestinian territory continues as well through, inter alia, the
construction and expansion of illegal settlements despite the provisions of Security
Council resolution 2334 (2016), which have so far been disrespected.
At a time when the international community had generated the momentum to
revitalize the peace process, with the support of the Quartet and other concerned
partners, the hostilities brought the revival of a political process to another standstill,
posing a real threat to the efforts to salvage the two -State solution based on the
pre-1967 borders.
Through its outreach to Member States, the Committee continues to en courage
all supporters of the two-State solution to assist the parties in resuming negotiations
towards the achievement of a peaceful settlement in line with international law and
the relevant United Nations resolutions.
The Committee also regrets the postponement of parliamentary and presidential
elections in the State of Palestine and encourages the organization of the elections as
soon as possible, including in East Jerusalem. We also call on Israel, the occupying
Power, to uphold its obligations and commitments in this regard.
The Committee also reiterates its call for all Palestinian factions to accelerate
reconciliation efforts towards the achievement of unity for the benefit of the
Palestinian people.
The full realization of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, the idea
of a just solution based on the relevant United Nations resolutions that ensures that
10/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

the two States, Israel and Palestine, live side by side in peace and security along the
pre-1967 lines and with East Jerusalem as the capital of the Palestinian State, and a
just solution for the Palestine refugees in line with General Assembly resolution 194
(III) will require the cooperation of everyone in order for the light to be seen. The
Committee is committed to upholding its responsibilities towards this principled goal,
in line with its Assembly mandate.
The international community is called on to engage with the parties with the aim
of de-escalation and of maintaining the ceasefire in full compliance with international
law, including respect for the human rights of the Palestinian people.
In the coming weeks, the international community, including an expanded
Middle East Quartet, will be called on to create the conditions w ith relevant
stakeholders, including regional organizations, with a view to garnering wider global
support for the resolution of the question of Palestine and the realization of the two State solution. The Committee will remain a reliable partner in the pu rsuit of the full
realization of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including to self determination and independence.

21-10605

11/61

S/2021/685

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Costa Rica to the
United Nations, Rodrigo Carazo
[Original: English]
I thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Tor
Wennesland, for his briefing. We also welcome the new Israeli Government under the
leadership of the Prime Minister, Naftali Bennett, and the Alternate Prime Minister
and Foreign Minister, Yair Lapid.
Costa Rica welcomes the lifting of the Citizenship and Entry into Israel Law,
which prohibited Israelis married to Palestinians residing in the Gaza Strip or in the
West Bank from passing on Israeli citizenship or residency to their spouses for family
reunification purposes. With the Citizenship Law no longer in force, Palestinians
married to Israelis can start a gradual path to citizenship. Costa Rica looks forward to
discussing, in this and future sessions, how new avenues can b e opened up for
Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza to enjoy full citizenship.
We are also deeply concerned about the postponement of the Palestinian
elections, including the legislative elections originally scheduled for 22 May. We call
on all Palestinian actors to resume talks and set a new date for elections as soon as
possible. We also urge Israel to facilitate the holding of elections across all of the
Palestinian territory, including in East Jerusalem.
On this note, Costa Rica would like to stress the following points.
First, Costa Rica urges Israel to halt the continued settlement in the occupied
Palestinian Territories, including in East Jerusalem, as well as forced transfers,
expansions, evictions, demolitions and confiscation, as they constitute a flagrant
violation of United Nations resolutions and international law. Costa Rica calls on both
parties to act in a restrained manner and to refrain from unilateral actions that would
further aggravate tensions and undermine the viability of the tw o-State solution and
a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the best interests of the constituents of
both. Today, there are more than 680,000 Israeli settlers living in the West Bank,
compared with 116,000 in 1993. They are spread across nearly 300 settlements in East
Jerusalem and the West Bank. As stated by the Special Rapporteur on the situation of
human rights in the Palestinian Territory occupied since 1967, this situation
constitutes a war crime under the Rome Statute of the International Crimina l Court.
Second, we urge both parties to put an end to all acts of provocation, incitement
and violence. Costa Rica condemns the indiscriminate launching of rockets and
mortars towards the Israeli civilian population by Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad
and other militant groups from the Gaza Strip into Israel. Palestinian militants must
cease this practice immediately. And, while we acknowledge Israel ’s legitimate
security concerns, we reiterate that self-defence must be exercised in a proportionate
manner and in accordance with international humanitarian law. In the conduct of its
military activity, the Israeli Government must take all feasible precautions to ensure
the safety and security of the civilian population and civilian objects.
Third, the 11 days of hostilities in May 2021 resulted in the loss of the lives of
over 260 Palestinians – including 66 children – and 13 people in Israel, of whom were
children. This humanitarian crisis created damage and losses that affected
infrastructure and the productive and financial sectors and exacerbated previous
traumas, affecting children in particular. Costa Rica reiterates the need to solidify the
ceasefire in order allow the entry of unhindered and sustained humanitarian assistance
that will help to stabilize the situation in Gaza. We also commend the important role
12/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

played by the United Nations, the United States, Egypt, Qatar and other international
partners in this regard.
The situation in Israel and the Palestinian territories is unsustainable as it stands;
Israeli and Palestinian civilians need to modify their attitudes and stances fast. This
is not a situation that will be resolved through attrition: it is a situation that demands
decisive, disciplined, direct dialogue. Increased violence may be politically
opportune, but it does not benefit anyone in the long run. We call on both parties, with
the support of the Middle East Quartet, to resume direct negotiations as soon as
possible in order to achieve a two-State solution based on the pre-1967 lines and in
accordance with international law and the relevant Security Council resolutions.

21-10605

13/61

S/2021/685

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Cuba to the
United Nations, Pedro Luis Pedroso Cuesta
[Original: English]
We endorse the statements delivered by Azerbaijan on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement and by the Permanent Representative of Senegal, in his
capacity as the Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People.
We reiterate our profound concern about the impact of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic on the countries of the Middle East. In particular, the
socioeconomic and humanitarian situation of the Palestinian people continues to
worsen. Tackling the pandemic requires joint actions that prioritize cooperation and
solidarity over political differences.
It is regrettable that, in the midst of this complex scenario, the Security Council
continues to fail to adopt measures to put an end to the Israeli military aggression and
occupation of the Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, in accordance with
its resolution 2334 (2016).
We reaffirm the strong condemnation of the indiscriminate bombings by the
State of Israel against the Palestinian population in Gaza last May, which resulted in
the loss of hundreds of lives and extensive material damage.
These aggressions constitute yet another grave and flagrant violation of the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and international humanitarian law
by Israel, which continues the occupation, consolidates its annexation policies and
increases its illegal colonization practices and measures, including the construction
and expansion of settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory, punitive
demolitions, the forced displacement of hundreds of civilians, the blockade of the
Gaza Strip, and plans for the annexation of the Palestinian territories in the Jordan
Valley and other parts of the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
These deplorable actions by Israel count on the complicity and impunity
guaranteed by the United States, whose Government obstructs the action of the
Security Council. We call once again on this body to fulfil its responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and security
and to demand an immediate end to the occupation of the Palestinian territories, as
well as compliance with the resolutions on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question.
We ratify our unrestricted support for a comprehensive, just and lasting solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that allows the Palestinian people to exercise their
right to self-determination and to establish an independent and sovereign State within
the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and that guarantees the right
of return of refugees.
We express our unwavering solidarity with the Palestinian people and
Government. We support the accession of the State of Palestine as a full member of
the United Nations and the call by its President for an international peace conference.
The aggressive, unilateral and unjustified actions of the United States in the
Middle East infringe severely upon the legitimate inter ests of Arab and Islamic
nations and lead to a dangerous escalation in the region.
We reiterate our rejection of the so-called “deal of the century” drawn up by the
Government of the United States, which disregards the two-State solution that has
14/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

enjoyed the historic support of the United Nations, the Non-Aligned Movement, the
League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and other
international actors.
The unilateral decision of the Government of the United States to recognize
Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, to establish its diplomatic representation in that city,
disrespecting its historical status, and to recognize Israel ’s sovereignty over the
Syrian Golan constitute serious violations of the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and the relevant Security Council resolutions. We hope that the
current Government will reverse such decisions, which, far from helping, further
distance the possibility of a negotiated solution.
We demand, once again, the total and unconditional withdrawal of Israel from
the Syrian Golan and all occupied Arab territories.
We support the search for a peaceful and negotiated solution to the situation
imposed on Syria, without external interference and with full respect for its
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We reiterate our strongest condemnation of the
implementation of the “Caesar Act”, which hinders the reconstruction of that country
even more in the complex scenario of the COVID-19 pandemic.
We ratify our full support for the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action with Iran
and the rejection of the withdrawal of the United States from that Plan.
We demand the immediate and unconditional end to the arbitrary and illegal
unilateral coercive measures imposed on sovereign States, which are in violation of
the human rights of their peoples, international law and the Charter of the United
Nations and which generate additional difficulties in the current context of
confronting the pandemic.
We reiterate our support for the urgent call of the Secretary-General to put an
end to armed conflicts, hostilities and wars and instead to open up opportunities for
diplomacy and cooperation, which will allow us to face this devastating pandemic
together. The right to peace remains a fundamental priority.
It is the duty of all States, and in particular of the members of the Security
Council, to defend multilateralism and the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, including respect for the sovereign equality of States and for their
political independence, unity and territorial integrity; non -interference in the internal
affairs of States; the peaceful settlement of disputes; and refraining from the use or
threat of use of force in international relations.

21-10605

15/61

S/2021/685

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Ecuador to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
First, I would like to congratulate France for its successful Presidency of the
Security Council during the month of July 2021.
We reiterate that our statements made on 22 April and 16 May in the open
debates on the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question, remain
valid.
We express our concern at the escalation of violence reported in the last few
months in the region, at a time when we are calling on the parties to make bilateral
and collective efforts to conduct credible negotiations in order to achieve a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East without delay.
According to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), demolitions are continuing at alarming levels. The properties
destroyed include houses, animal shelters, latrines and solar power systems essential
for the livelihood, well-being and dignity of the members of the community, which
has been much more severely affected because of the threat of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic.
According to OCHA, between the months of January and July, 456 Palestinian
structures were demolished, displacing 644 persons. At the current rate, the
demolitions and resulting displacements will exceed the numbers for last year (854
structures demolished and 1,001 persons displaced). Ecuador expresses its concern at
the humanitarian situation, the violations of human rights and th e failure to comply
with international humanitarian law in the Occupied Palestinian Territory.
It is essential to refrain from causing any type of harm to the civilian population
and the life and security of persons must be respected, in accordance with t he
obligations under international humanitarian law.
We find unacceptable the hostility between the parties that has led to destruction
and death, especially when the two nations are under the obligation to observe the
norms of international law.
Furthermore, we express our profound concern at the annexation measures that
constitute serious violations of international law, and in addition gravely affect the
possibility of a two-State solution and undermine the prospects for a resumption of
negotiations.
In that regard, the international community must reject any type of policy of
illegal settlements, in particular the demolition and confiscation of Palestinian
structures, including water and sanitation and humanitarian assistance infrastructure,
throughout the occupied West Bank and East Jerusalem.
COVID-19 remains a major problem in the Palestinian territory, considering that
over 3,800 people have died from this disease in Palestine since the beginning of the
pandemic. We call on the international community to strengthen the COVID-19
Vaccines Global Access (COVAX) mechanism and other initiatives that promote and
expand the national vaccination campaign in Gaza and the West Bank.
We believe that it is essential for the international co mmunity to redouble its
efforts to enable the parties to return to the table for significant negotiations, with the

16/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

aim of achieving a definitive and just political solution for the parties, on the basis of
the two-State solution.
Lastly, the Security Council should ensure the effective implementation of its
resolution 2532 (2020) which was adopted a year ago in July and resolution 2565
(2021), both calling for the cessation of hostilities throughout the world.

21-10605

17/61

S/2021/685

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Egypt to the
United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
During the month of May 2021, the Occupied Palestinian Territory witnessed a
major escalation of already existing tensions in the occupied city of Jerusalem
resulting from attempts to expel some Palestinian families in the Shaykh Jarrah and
Silwan neighbourhoods. Tensions were also heightened by attempts by militant
Jewish groups to storm the Aqsa Mosque during the holy month of Ramadan. All this
brought about a serious escalation of the situation, against the backdrop of ongoing
Israeli practices such as land appropriation, home demolition and settlement
construction in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, as well as continued attacks
by settlers on unarmed Palestinian civilians in the West Bank.
This dangerous escalation has led to a spillover of clashes and tensions into
Israel itself. Clashes and armed action also broke out between Palestinian resistance
factions in the Gaza Strip and Israel, leading to dozens of civilian deaths and injuries.
That prompted Egypt, in cooperation with several regional, international and United
Nations partners, to intervene to contain the situation and reach a ceasefire. Egypt is
currently working in cooperation with various partners to shore up that ceasefire.
Egypt also emphasizes the need to refrain from any unilateral measures that would
reignite the situation and to respect the legal and historical status quo in East
Jerusalem under Hashemite Jordanian custodianship of the holy places.
Egypt has not stopped there. It has tried to address the wider situation by calling
for comprehensive reconstruction in the Gaza Strip. It has announced the allocati on
of $500 million for reconstruction in conjunction with Egyptian companies active in
such work. That is in addition to the continued humanitarian assistance provided by
Egypt during and after the recent escalation to contain the coronavirus (COVID -19)
pandemic in the Gaza Strip. Egypt has also facilitated the entry of humanitarian
assistance being provided to the Palestinian people by several friendly and fraternal
countries.
Despite all our efforts in cooperation with regional and international partners to
reinforce the ceasefire, we were surprised when Israel allowed more than 1,000
settlers to enter the Aqsa Mosque courtyard on 18 July 2021, while our Palestinian
brothers and the rest of the Muslim world were celebrating the Day of Arafat and Eid
al-Adha. That was calculated to provoke Muslim sentiment during those holy days
and was in fact a repetition of the same violations that led to the latest escalation last
May. In our view, that move adversely impacted stability in the Occupied Territory
and reignited escalation.
In a communiqué issued by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Egypt expressed its
condemnation of these renewed infringements by Israeli extremists under the
protection of the occupying forces and warned against any defilement of the Aqsa
Mosque, which has a special place in the hearts of Muslims around the world. In this
context, it must be recalled that the clashes occurring during the recent escalation in
the Gaza Strip between Palestinian resistance factions and Israel had their origin in
clashes that took place in occupied East Jerusalem between Jerusalemites and the
Israeli occupying forces as a result of violations at the Holy Al-Aqsa Mosque.
Any honest assessment of the Palestinian crisis all these decades after the
founding of the United Nations and the introduction of the Palestinian issue to its
agenda can leave no doubt that the Palestinian people must be granted their legitimate
rights, above all their right to self-determination. The Palestinian people have suffered
18/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

for decades. It is now time for them to have respite from that decades-long suffering
that has been passed down from generation to generation.
The Palestinian cause – like it or not – remains the key to security and stability
in the Middle East and the central issue for the Arab nation. It is from this standpoint
that we reiterate the call for the Palestinian people to obtain their legitimate rights
through the establishment of an independent Palestinian State with the borders of
4 June 1967 and East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with the agreed
international references, including Security Council resolution 2334 (2016), the Arab
Peace Initiative and the two-State solution.
Egypt also calls for a high-level meeting of the international Quartet to pave the
way for an international peace conference. Trust must be built between the Palestinian
and Israeli sides to create a climate conducive to the resumption of negotiations. All
unilateral actions, especially settlement-building, must be stopped so as not to
compromise the legal and historical status of East Jerusalem.
Egypt urges all donors to provide the necessary support to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and other
relevant United Nations agencies to cope with the humanitarian repercussions of the
recent escalation, as well as to address the repercussions of the COVID -19 pandemic.
In that connection, Egypt appreciates the support the United Sta tes is providing to
UNRWA and urges all donor countries to follow suit in the light of the pressing needs
of the Palestinian people.
At the regional level, Egypt endorses calls for a global ceasefire, including those
made by the Secretary-General, to enable the peoples of the region to address the
enormous challenges arising from the pandemic and pave the way for inclusive
political processes based on the terms of reference set out in the relevant Council
resolutions for resolving various protracted regional conflicts. The United Nations
must ensure that efforts to resolve the crises in Syria and Yemen peacefully are guided
by the peoples of those countries, free from intervention by foreign parties, and that
those countries’ sovereignty and independence, and the unity and integrity of their
peoples and territories, are preserved.
Egypt also supports United Nations efforts in Syria and Yemen to push forward
the political process and bring about a comprehensive ceasefire within the parameters
set forth in the relevant Security Council resolutions. We stress the need for the
Security Council to play a more active role to bring about political settlements of
those crises, impose ceasefires, and combat terrorism and illegal terrorist organizations.
Egypt reiterates its deep concern about the continued attacks on ships, which
threaten the freedom of international navigation. It condemns in the strongest terms
the attacks against Saudi Arabia and the escalating use of force outside internationally
agreed frameworks by certain parties in the region, a course of action that violates
international law and the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and threatens
regional and international peace and security. Also of concern is the continued
interference by certain countries in the internal affairs of other States and the fuelling
of sectarian divisions to inflame conflicts. That trend requires coordinated and urgent
international efforts to restore calm, promote dialogue and build confidence among
countries in the region, under Security Council auspices, with a view to establishing
a stable and robust security system that will achieve equitable and just security for all
countries in the Middle East.
Egypt continues to support all efforts to reach a politi cal settlement in Libya in
order to restore the peace, stability and prosperity that the Libyan people deserve, and
reiterates that Libyans themselves must take the primary responsibility in that regard.
In that connection, Egypt welcomes the outcomes of the Second Berlin Conference
21-10605

19/61

S/2021/685

and calls for presidential and parliamentary elections to be held on schedule in
December 2021. The fraternal Libyan people must be able to choose their
Government fairly and freely on the date set by the road map.
Egypt also stresses that all foreign forces, whatever their description, must leave
Libya, and that the mechanism for monitoring implementation of the Libyan -led
ceasefire agreement should monitor the departure of all such troops from Libyan
territory without further delay. The Security Council must play its part in helping
Libya get through this crucial stage, in accordance with the Council presidential
statement of 15 January 2021.
A just and comprehensive peace can be achieved in our region only if there is
full compliance with internationally recognized resolutions and the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, especially respect for the sovereignty and regional
integration of States and non-intervention in the domestic affairs of States, and only
if all occupied Arab territories are liberated, especially in Palestine and the Syrian
Golan.

20/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

Annex IX
Statement by the Head of Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations, Olof Skoog
[Original: English]
The candidate countries the Republic of North Macedonia,* Montenegro* and
Albania,* as well as the Republic of Moldova, align themselves with this statement.
The European Union reaffirms its commitment to a just and comprehensive
resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, based on the two-State solution, with the
State of Israel and an independent, democratic, contiguous, sovereign and viable State
of Palestine living side by side in peace and security and mutual recognition.
The European Union remains deeply concerned by the situation in the Middle
East. The latest escalation in Gaza led to deplorable civilian deaths and injuries,
including a high number of children and women. The European Union has condemned
the indiscriminate rocket attacks by Hamas and other terrorist group s on Israeli
territory, has fully supported Israel’s right to defend itself and has underlined how
that right must be exercised in a proportionate manner and in full respect of
international humanitarian law.
The European Union has welcomed the ceasefire and calls for its consolidation.
The European Union welcomes the steps that Israel has taken to ease some restrictions
on Gaza and calls for the further lifting of restrictions to allow for reconstruction
efforts and basic service delivery as well as unimpeded humanitarian access to Gaza.
The situation in the Gaza Strip has long been unsustainable: only a political solution
will bring an end to the conflict. Restoring a political horizon towards a two -State
solution, for which the European Union reaffirms there is no alternative, remains of
utmost importance.
The viability of the two-State solution is being constantly eroded by new facts
on the ground. The European Union urges both parties to demonstrate their stated
commitment to a two-State solution through concrete actions and to avoid unilateral
actions which threaten it. Actions by either side which call into question this
commitment must be avoided. The European Union will actively support the parties
to restore confidence and create the environment of trust necessary to engage in
meaningful negotiations as soon as possible.
In this regard, the European Union has welcomed the establishment of
diplomatic relations between Israel and a number of countries, namely the United
Arab Emirates, Bahrain, Sudan and Morocco. The European Union believes that these
developments represent a positive contribution to peace and stability in the Middle
East.
The preservation of the viability of the two-State solution is at the core of
European Union policy and will remain a priority.
Settlements are illegal under international law. The European Union ’s
opposition to Israel’s settlement policy and actions taken in this context, including in
East Jerusalem, is well known. Such actions as building the separation barrier beyond
the 1967 line; demolitions and confiscation – including of European Union-funded
projects; evictions; forced transfers, including of Bedouins; illegal outposts; settler
violence; and restrictions of movement and access will only escalate tensions in an
already tense environment. It will be important not to proceed with any planned
evictions. The status quo of the holy sites must be fully respected, and in this regard,
* The Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania continue to be part of the
Stabilization and Association Process.
21-10605

21/61

S/2021/685

the European Union recalls the importance of the Hashemite custodianship of
Jerusalem’s holy sites. The European Union will continue to closely monitor
developments on the ground and their broader implications and remains ready to take
further action in order to protect the viability of the two -State solution.
The European Union calls for all parties to take swift steps to produce a
fundamental change in the political, security and economic situation in the Gaza Strip,
including the end of the closure of, and the full opening of, the crossing points while
addressing Israel’s legitimate security concerns. Rocket fire and the launching of
incendiary balloons and other attacks by Hamas and other m ilitant groups is
unacceptable. All stakeholders must commit to non-violence and peace.
The decision to postpone the planned Palestinian elections, including the
legislative elections originally scheduled for 22 May, is deeply disappointing. The
European Union has consistently expressed its support for credible, inclusive and
transparent elections for all Palestinians. We firmly believe that strong, inclusive,
accountable and functioning democratic Palestinian institutions based on respect for
the rule of law and human rights are vital for the Palestinian people, for democratic
legitimacy and, ultimately, for the two-State solution. We strongly encourage all
Palestinian actors to resume efforts to build on the successful talks between the
factions over recent months, to adhere to previous agreements, to renounce violence
and terrorism, to recognize Israel’s right to exist and to commit to democratic
principles, including the rule of law. A new date for elections should be set without
delay. We reiterate our call on Israel to facilitate the holding of such elections across
all of the Palestinian territory, including in East Jerusalem. The European Union
continues to stand ready to work with all of those involved in order to facilitate
European Union observation of any electoral process. Palestinian civil society
organizations and actors must be allowed to carry out their important task free from
obstruction, harassment and intimidation. The European Union is shocked and
saddened by the death of activist Nizar Banat following his arrest by the security
forces of the Palestinian Authority, and we call for a full, independent investigation
into his death and for those responsible to be held accountable. The European Union
calls for the fundamental right to freedom of expression in areas under Palestinian
Authority control to be upheld.
The European Union reiterates its deep and genuine appreciation for the work
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) and for its dedicated staff, who are working in an extremely difficult
and challenging context. UNRWA is an essential provider of vital services to millions
of Palestine refugees and a stabilizing force in the region. Until a just, fair, agreed
and realistic solution to the refugee issue in accordance with international law is
found, UNRWA remains crucial for providing the necessary protection and essential
services for Palestine refugees, and we will continue to support UNRWA in all of its
fields of operations, including in East Jerusalem. The European Union recalls that,
together with its member States, it provided 75 per cent of last year ’s funding for
UNRWA; it welcomes the additional financial support from other and new donors,
including the renewed commitment from the United States, and calls upon all
partners, including the Arab Gulf States, to increase their contributions to UNRWA.
Looking ahead, we need to explore the space for meaningful re -engagement
between the parties, to develop confidence-building measures, to improve living
conditions for ordinary people and to open up the path to the potential relaunch of the
peace process, and we stand ready to engage with the new Israeli Government
bilaterally as well as to support efforts to rebuild a meaningful po litical process.

22/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

The European Union will renew its engagement with key international partners,
including the United States and other partners in the region, as well as with a revived
Middle East Quartet.
Please allow me to turn to the situation in Syria.
The European Union welcomes the unanimous adoption of Security Council
resolution 2585 (2021), on 9 July 2021, which constitutes a considerable relief for the
next 12 months for millions of Syrians who rely on the humanitarian assistance
delivered through this mechanism for their survival. The renewal of the Council
resolution on cross-border assistance continues to be vital, although by no means
sufficient, as long as there is no adequate alternative to meet the immense, and
growing, humanitarian needs in north-west Syria.
After a decade of conflict, a political solution has yet to be reached. Conflict,
violence and instability in Syria continue to have profound repercussions for the
stability of the entire region, causing enormous human suffering, with millions of
Syrians still displaced or living as refugees in other countries.
The European Union remains committed to the unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Syrian State and recalls that any sustainable solution to the conflict
requires a genuine, inclusive political transition in line with Security Council
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué of 2012 negotiated by the Syrian
parties within the United Nations-led Geneva process, with the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women.
The elections that took place in Syria on 26 May met none of the criteria for a
genuinely democratic vote and did not contribute to the settlement of the conflict, and
the European Union considers that these elections undermine efforts to find a
sustainable solution to the Syrian conflict. Elections in Syria should take place only
within the framework of a genuine political process, in line with Security Council
resolution 2254 (2015). The political process must be fully inclusive to ensure that
all segments of Syria’s society are involved in shaping the country’s future unity and
reconciliation.
The European Union fully supports the efforts of the Special Envoy, Geir
Pedersen, towards the full implementation of Security Council resolution 2254 (2015)
in a comprehensive approach, including on the issue of detainees and missing persons
and the establishment of a safe and neutral environment in order f or free and fair
elections to be held under United Nations supervision, and continues to encourage the
work of the Syrian-led Constitutional Committee, under United Nations auspices. The
European Union recalls that a sixth meeting must take place as soon a s possible, this
time on the basis of a clear understanding of the working methodology and objectives.
The European Union insists on engagement in good faith by all parties, and in
particular by the Syrian regime, in the work of the Constitutional Committe e with the
aim of achieving meaningful progress on constitutional reform.
The European Union notes with interest Special Envoy Pedersen ’s proposals for
a new political format and for a “step-for-step” approach to move forward in the
political process.
In the north-west of Syria, the situation continues to be highly insecure. The
ceasefire agreed in March 2020 is fragile and must be upheld and strengthened,
civilians must be protected at all times, and attacks on civilian objects, including
hospitals, must cease.
The European Union continues to call upon the Syrian regime and its allies, and
indeed upon all parties to the conflict, to fully respect international humanitarian law,

21-10605

23/61

S/2021/685

and in particular to permanently cease indiscriminate air strikes and the s helling of
civilians and humanitarian workers.
The European Union also notes with concern the ongoing insecurity in the north east of Syria. Military action by any party in Syria renders ordinary life dangerous
and intolerable for the civilian population. The European Union once again echoes
the call made on a number of occasions by the United Nations and the Security
Council for the implementation of a nationwide ceasefire, in line with Council
resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2532 (2020).
Turkey is a key partner of the European Union and a critically important actor
in the Syrian crisis and the region. Turkey’s security concerns in the north-east of
Syria should be addressed through political and diplomatic means, not by military
action, and in full respect of international humanitarian law.
Within Syria, violations of international law, including violations and abuses of
human rights law and violations of international humanitarian law by all parties, in
particular the Syrian regime and its allies, remain persistent.
The European Union continues to demand an end to repression, the release of
detainees, and meaningful engagement by the Syrian regime and its allies towards the
full implementation of Security Council resolution 2254 (2015).
The European Union further insists that the Syrian regime must cooperate fully
with the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), including
in its investigations of the use of chemical weapons in the conflict, and deplores the
continued lack of cooperation of the regime with OPCW.
All those responsible for breaches of international humanitarian law and human
rights law, some of which may constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity,
must be held accountable. The European Union reiterates its call to have the situation
in Syria referred to the International Criminal Court.
In the absence of avenues for international justice, the prosecution of war crimes
under national jurisdictions where possible, now under way in several European
Union member States, represents an important contribution towards securing justice.
The European Union will continue to support efforts to gather evidence with a
view to future legal action, including by the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism for Syria and the work of the Commission of Inquiry. We welcome the
initiative of the Netherlands, together with Canada, to invoke Syria’s responsibility
for human rights violations.
The Syrian refugee crisis is the largest displacement crisis in the world, with 5.6
million registered refugees and another 6.7 million people displaced within S yria, and
with conditions not in place for their safe, voluntary, dignified and sustainable return
in line with the parameters defined by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and in accordance with international law. The European
Union insists that the return of refugees and internally displaced persons to their
places of origin will only be encouraged once these conditions are met. The
underlying causes of the refugee and displacement crisis must be addressed through
the implementation of Security Council resolution 2254 (2015).
The European Union continues to warn against any further displacements in any
part of Syria, as well as against the potential exploitation of such d isplacements for
the purposes of social and demographic engineering.
The European Union, in line with the conclusions of the European Council, will
be ready to assist in the reconstruction of Syria only when a comprehensive, genuine

24/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

and inclusive political transition, within the framework of Security Council resolution
2254 (2015) and the Geneva process, is firmly under way.
Allow me to reiterate once more: only a credible, sustainable and inclusive
political solution based on the full and comprehensive implementation of Security
Council resolution 2254 (2015) can bring sustainable peace to Syria and open the way
for Syria to become once again the united, sovereign, prosperous and free country
that we all want to see. The European Union will continue to support the Office of
the Special Envoy in its efforts to bring about an inclusive political solution.

21-10605

25/61

S/2021/685

Annex X
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Mohammad Kurniadi Koba
[Original: English]
Indonesia aligns itself with the statements made by the Non-Aligned Movement
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
Indonesia remains concerned about the situation in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, which has not yet shown improvement.
We deplore the continued violations of the Aqsa Mosque/Haram Al-Sharif by
Israel, including the latest attack on worshippers.
We have pointed out on many occasions that such illegal actions constitute a
grave breach of international law and are a threat to peace.
• They will make the prospect of peace remain elusive.
We would therefore like to reiterate our call on the Security Council to uphold
its responsibility and act decisively to address the core of the problem and ensure
international peace and security.
In this regard, allow me to reiterate three points.
First, the Security Council must call on Israel to cease its acts of aggression and
respect international law.
The aggression, provocations and violations perpetrated by Israel in
contravention of international law continue unabated.
• They include the expansion of settlements, the seizure and demolition of
Palestinian homes, and threats of expulsion of Palestinian families.
• This must not be the status quo.
The Security Council must take up its responsibility and stop these illegal
actions that undermine the prospects of a just peace.
Second, the Security Council must provide protection to Palestinian civilian
populations, in accordance with international law.
To address the root causes and prevent future atrocities, we must also end
impunity to ensure accountability for human rights violations.
Indonesia welcomes the decision by the Human Rights Council to investigate
systematic abuses in Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territories, in cluding
occupied East Jerusalem.
Third, the Security Council must support and actively revive the stalled peace
process on the basis of the two-State solution and in line with internationally agreed
parameters.
• This is crucial to achieve a just, comprehensive, and durable solution.
In conclusion, Indonesia would like to reiterate that the time for words is long
past.
• We expect this august body to shoulder its responsibility.
• Concrete steps to ensure the safety of the Palestinian people, and the status quo
of holy sites, must be explored.

26/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

At the same time, we must guard against actions that will undermine a peaceful
future.
Indonesia remains committed to the people and the State of Palestine.
• We stand ready to support the Palestinian people and all efforts to achieve a just,
comprehensive and lasting solution.

21-10605

27/61

S/2021/685

Annex XI
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission
of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the United Nations, Zahra Ershadi
[Original: English]
Since the previous quarterly open debate of the Security Council on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question, the situation in Palestine has
been drastically aggravated owing to the unlawful policies and barbaric practices of
the Israeli regime, including the desecration of Haram Al-Sharif, the confiscation,
demolition, seizure and confiscation of Palestinian homes, and the killing and
wounding of thousands of Palestinians in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip by the
Occupying forces.
For example, in its 11-day brutal and all-out war on Gaza in May 2021 alone,
Israeli forces killed 256 Palestinians, including 66 children and 40 women. This
includes 13 members of an extended family who were killed and buried in the rubble
of their own home – many of whom were children, one as young as six months.
According to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, almost
2,000 Palestinians were also injured during attacks on Gaza, including “over 600
children and 400 women, some of whom may suffer from a long-term disability
requiring rehabilitation”.
Besides, according to the Secretary-General, from 1 April 2020 to 31 March
2021, “Israeli military and security forces killed 21 Palestinians, including 6 boys,
and injured another 1,662 Palestinians, including 185 children (7 girls and 178 boys)
and 21 women”.
The Israeli regime also continues to commit the most systematic and gross
violation of the rights of the child. According to the annual report of the Secretary General, in 2020, the United Nations verified 1,031 cases of grave violations against
340 Palestinian children, of whom 11 were killed, 324 maimed and 361 detained.
In addition, as reported by the Secretary-General, from 1 April 2020 to 31 March
2021, “4,450 Palestinians were held as ‘security prisoners’ in Israeli prisons,
including 140 children, 37 women and 10 members of the Palestinian Legislative
Council”. In a barbaric act on 8 July 2021, Israeli troops detonated explosives,
destroying the family home of a Palestinian prisoner, Muntasir Shalabi.
Furthermore, one of the unlawful and brutal actions of the Israeli regime has
been the confiscation and demolition of Palestinian homes. According to the
Secretary-General, from 1 April 2020 to 31 March 2021, “Israeli authorities
demolished 1,015 Palestinian-owned structures … Demolitions more than tripled
during Ramadan in 2020, compared with the same period in 2019”. Such measures
“resulted in the displacement of 1,255 Palestinians, the majority of whom were
women (296) and children (666, including 305 girls)”. On 7 July 2021, the Israeli
regime entirely demolished the Palestinian village of Humsah al -Fawqa for the fifth
time.
During its 11-day attack on Gaza in May 2021, the Israeli regime destroyed over
2,300 housing units, and according to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, “an estimated 16,250 housing units sustained some degree of damage, as did
multiple water and sanitation facilities and infrastructure, 58 education facilities, 9
hospitals and 19 primary healthcare centres”.
Likewise, in referring to the brutalities of the Israeli regime, one must not lose
sight of the blockade of Gaza, imposed since 2007, which, according to the Secretary 28/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

General, “continues to severely restrict the movement of persons and goods to and
from Gaza, and has affected every aspect of Palestinians’ rights, including freedom
of movement, the right to life, the right to health, the right to an adequate standard of
living and the right to food”, and, according to a report of the Special Committee to
Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and
Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories, by undermining all aspects of a viable
economic and social life, “has transformed Gaza from a low -income society with
modest but growing export ties into the regional and international economy to an
impoverished ghetto with a decimated economy and a collapsing social service
system”.
As clearly stated by the Secretary-General in his note on the economic and social
repercussions of the Israeli occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian
people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and of the
Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan, the blockade “may amount to
collective punishment, which is prohibited under international law”. Yet the Israeli
regime continues occasionally striking the Gaza Strip.
Of course, these are only the tip of the iceberg of the inhumane crimes and
unlawful practices committed by the Israeli regime against the Palestinians,
constituting war crimes and crimes against humanity and entailing the international
responsibility of the Israeli regime, whose officials must therefore be brought to
justice for committing such heinous crimes.
Moreover, we must also refer to the continued destabilizing measures and
military adventurism of the Israeli regime in the region, clear examples of which are
the continued occupation of the Syrian Golan and parts of Lebanon, as well as the
systematic violation of the sovereignty of these two countries in contravention of
international law, in particular article 2(4) of the Charter of the United Nations.
The history of mankind testifies that, when unlawful acts go unpunished, they
are repeated. Therefore, the Israeli regime commits all such crimes with total
impunity because, for well over seven decades, the Security Council has been dead
silent against all unlawful acts committed by that regime, and the Council’s decades long utter and inexcusable inaction has seriously emboldened that regime to commit
more crimes with more brutality.
At the same time, it is evident that the decades-long silence and inaction of the
Security Council against such grave breaches of the peace constituting a serious threat
to international peace and security is because the United States has systematically
shielded the Israeli regime against any action by the Council, one example of which
is the use of the veto 44 times to prevent the adoption of draft resolutions of the
Council against Israel, which is unprecedented in the Council’s history. The latest
example of such measures was the act of the United States, in May 2021, to block the
Council from issuing even a simple press statement calling for an end to Israel’s
bombardment of Gaza.
Such unwavering support for Israel from the United States is against the inherent
rights of the oppressed Palestinians, including their right to life, dignity, liberation,
self-defence and self-determination and to establish their own independent State.
The Security Council must put an immediate end to this unjustifiable and
unacceptable trend and to compel the Israeli regime to cease, immediately
and completely, all of its crimes against Palestinians; to remove the unlawful and
inhumane blockade of the Gaza Strip; to end the occupation of all Palestinian
territories, the occupied Syrian Golan and parts of Lebanon; and to hold that regime
accountable for committing the gravest international crimes for several decades.

21-10605

29/61

S/2021/685

Condemning, in the strongest possible terms, all crimes of the Israeli regime
against Palestinians, the Islamic Republic of Iran reiterates its support for the just
cause of the Palestinian people and the full realization of all of their inalienable rights,
in particular their inherent right to self-determination and to the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State throughout Palestine, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital.
In conclusion, I would like to recall the thirty-ninth anniversary of the abduction
of three members of the embassy of the Islamic Republic of Iran in Beirut, as well as
an Iranian journalist, who were captured in July 1982 during the occupation of Beirut
by the Israeli regime. There are various news reports and indications that, after being
stopped and detained in the north of Beirut, which was then under the occupation of
the Israeli regime, said Iranians were immediately handed over to the Israeli military
forces. Likewise, there are various pieces of evidence, including assertions by some
of those who were in Israeli prisons and released later or who have visited the prisons,
suggesting that they are still alive and are in the hands of the Israeli regime. We
underline the responsibility of the United Nations in properly addressing this criminal
act, as well as its assistance in returning the abducted diplomats and journalist to Iran.
Finally, in his statement today, the Israeli regime’s representative once again
played the victim and, to distract attention from the brutal crimes that the regime
continues to commit, accused others in the region and the world. Instead of proposing
to address the challenges of others, the Israeli regime must stop the murder and
bloodshed and cease expanding its terrorist activities to the entire region. Israel’s
accusations regarding Iran’s peaceful nuclear programme are completely absurd,
irrelevant and baseless, and its objective is to cover up the danger that the nuclear
weapons of that regime pose to the region and beyond. To remove this threat, the
international community must compel the regime to renounce the possession of
nuclear weapons, join the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and
put all of its nuclear activities and facilities under the comprehensive safeguards of
the International Atomic Energy Agency. Other accusations of the Israeli regime’s
representative were mere fabrication and disinformation too.

30/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

Annex XII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Japan to
the United Nations, Osuga Takeshi
[Original: English]
First and foremost, I would like to reaffirm Japan’s commitment to supporting
a two-State solution based on the relevant Security Council resolutions and
internationally agreed parameters.
The devastating acts of violence exchanged between Israel and Palestinian
militants in May hindered the prospects for building trust between the parties and
making progress on the Middle East peace process. The ceasefire declared by both
parties brought some relief, and Japan welcomes the mediation efforts by countries
concerned, including the United States and Egypt. However, the situation on the
ground, including settlement activities and the destruction of Palestinian homes by
Israeli authorities in the West Bank, as well as acts of hostility by both Palestinian
militants in Gaza and the Israel Defense Forces, remains worrisome. These actions
jeopardize the ceasefire and could lead to a re-escalation. Japan calls upon all parties
to halt any activities that would hinder progress towards the full realization of peace
in the Middle East. Japan also reiterates that the solution could never be achieved
through violence, only through negotiations and through efforts to build mutual trust
between the parties.
The dire humanitarian situation in Gaza persists as a result of th e escalation in
May. Japan decided in June to extend an emergency grant aid of $10 million to the
Gaza Strip and is committed to playing an active role in providing support to
reconstruction efforts. While welcoming the international efforts to meet the
enormous humanitarian needs since the escalation, in particular by Egypt, Japan calls
upon the international society to respond to the appeals by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to provide further support
for the people affected in Gaza and encourages Israel to ensure sufficient
humanitarian access to Gaza through the Kerem Shalom and Erez crossings.
More broadly, Japan has been extending multifaceted assistance to meet the
socioeconomic needs of Palestinians and strengthen human security. To counter the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, Japan decided to provide cold-chain
equipment and related assistance amounting to approximately $8. 1 million. Japan
highly values its long-standing partnership with UNRWA and has already disbursed
$32 million to the Agency this year.
Furthermore, Japan has been taking the lead in two important initiatives, the
Corridor for Peace and Prosperity and the Conference on Cooperation among East
Asian Countries for Palestinian Development, with the aim of supporting political
dialogue among the parties concerned, Palestinian State-building efforts, and
confidence-building between the two sides.
Since the last open debate of the Council in April, we have seen important
developments on the political front. The Prime Minister of Japan, Suga Yoshihide,
wrote in his congratulatory letter to Naftali Bennett, upon his taking office as the
Prime Minister of Israel in June, that Japan would spare no effort to achieve a two State solution, recognizing that progress in the peace process is of paramount
importance for peace and stability in the region.
On the other hand, we regret that the series of elections in Palestine have been
postponed until undetermined dates. Japan is convinced that only democratically
21-10605

31/61

S/2021/685

elected leaders on both sides would have the legitimate power to advance direct
negotiations towards realizing a two-State solution. Japan again urges all parties
concerned to collaborate in order to ensure the successful holding of Palestinian
elections in a free, fair and inclusive manner that will include voting by Palestinian
residents of the Gaza Strip and East Jerusalem. Japan stands ready to help make these
elections happen.

32/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Jordan to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
A more peaceful world cannot come to pass without a stable Middle East.
However, stability in the Middle East will remain elusive unless a just and
comprehensive peace is attained, in the form of the establishment of an independent
and sovereign Palestinian State with the 4 June 1967 borders and East Jerusalem as
its capital, living side by side with Israel in peace and security, in accordance with
the two-State solution, international law, internationally recognized resolutions and
the Arab Peace Initiative.
In order to achieve that objective, efforts must be redoubled to protect the peace
process and the right of all the peoples of the region to live in security and peace. The
two-State solution is the only way to achieve a just and lasting peace based o n
international law. It is the strategic Arab choice, a regional and international necessity,
and a right for all the peoples of the region.
Time is of the essence. We must use all means at our disposal to launch effective
international action to guarantee the legitimate rights of Palestinians, protect the holy
places, make sure that Jerusalemites remain on their land, and instil calm throughout
the Occupied Palestinian Territory.
Now is the time to move from taking positions to taking action. We must cre ate
the political prospect of restoring confidence in the peace process and making the
necessary progress towards the two-State solution. No lasting and comprehensive
peace can be achieved without an end to the conflict on the basis of the two -State
solution, international law and the Arab Peace Initiative. The latter remains the most
comprehensive proposal to put an end to the conflict and uphold the right of the
peoples of the region to genuine peace. Such peace would allow all energies to be
directed towards development and a future filled with opportunities and achievements
rather than oppression and conflicts.
Protecting the chances of the two-State solution, and thus achieving a
comprehensive and lasting peace, requires Israel to desist from illegal a cts that
undermine it. Continued settlement construction and expansion violate international
law, and undermine the chances for peace. Displacement of Jerusalemites from their
homes in the Shaykh Jarrah and Silwan neighbourhoods should be prohibited and
punished as a war crime if it takes place. Continued violations at the Aqsa Mosque/
Haram Al-Sharif must cease. They violate the legal obligations of Israel as the
occupying Power and create provocations to further escalation.
We therefore condemn the continued Israeli violations at the Aqsa Mosque/
Haram Al-Sharif. The most recent violations include the unilateral actions taken by
the Israeli police at the Aqsa Mosque/Haram Al-Sharif without regard for Islamic
religious rites or the sanctity of the mosque. Worshippers and the staff of the
Jerusalem Waqf and Aqsa Mosque Affairs Administration of Jordan were harassed,
while large numbers of extremists were permitted to enter under the protection of the
Israeli police. Mindful of the Hashemite dynasty’s historical duty of custodianship of
the Islamic and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem, under His Majesty King Abdullah II
as custodian, Jordan will continue its efforts to protect the holy sites and preserve the
city’s legal and historic status. We affirm that the entire 144-square-dunum area of
the Aqsa Mosque/Haram al-Sharif compound is a dedicated place of worship for
Muslims, supervised exclusively by the Jerusalem Endowments Department and the
Al-Aqsa Mosque Affairs Administration of Jordan.

21-10605

33/61

S/2021/685

The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) must continue to provide the vital services it is mandated by the
Organization to provide pending a just and lasting solution to the question of Palestine
refugees that would uphold their right of return and compensation in accordance with
international law and the relevant United Nations resolutions, particularly General
Assembly resolution 194 (III) dated 11 December 1948, in the context of a
comprehensive solution to the conflict on the basis of a two -State solution bringing
an end to the occupation that began in 1967. In coordination with the United Nations,
Jordan and Sweden are preparing to hold a donor conference for the Age ncy in the
coming period, to mobilize political support that translates into sustainable financial
support that will enable UNRWA to carry out its mandate.
In conclusion, we must act to protect the chances for peace and the right of the
peoples of the Middle East to peace. We must create a political horizon that will
enable us to reach a solution to the conflict and achieve true peace.

34/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Kuwait to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
Today, the Security Council is holding its quarterly open debate under the item
on the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. The
international community is continuing its efforts to maintain the ceasefire agreement
between Israel, the occupying Power and Palestine, and is making efforts to ensure
that urgent humanitarian assistance is provided and delivered to those affected by the
major escalation in the Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem, which has
been brought about by crimes and attacks committed by Israel, the occupying Power,
against the Palestinian people.
Unfortunately, even with all those efforts, and despite the ceasefire agreement,
Israel, the occupying Power, continues to implement its hostile policies against the
Palestinian people, including plans to annex more Palestinian territory in the West
Bank, in addition to obstructing and delaying the delivery of humanitarian assistance
in the Gaza Strip.
Such policies show yet again that Israel seeks to entrench the occupation by
extending its illegal activities and policies, in particular through the expansion,
construction and establishment of settlement units and the annexation of land, in open
violation of resolution 2334 (2016).
Recent United Nations reports have shown that settlement activities in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, have escalated since the Israeli Government gave the
green light for the construction of 540 new residential units in illegal se ttlements in
East Jerusalem. These reports have warned that the construction of these housing units
would connect two Israeli settlements and separate Bethlehem and the southern West
Bank from East Jerusalem. Such decisions not only adversely affect the ch ances of a
resumption of negotiations, but also seek to judaize Jerusalem, thereby diminishing
the Palestinians’ chances for an independent, contiguous, viable, sustainable and
independent Palestinian State. Kuwait adds its voice to that of the internation al
community in condemning these plans. It stresses that the special status of Jerusalem
should not be compromised, that any action aimed at changing its nature should be
considered null and void, and that Israel should be compelled to put an end to its
illegal practices and required to implement the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2334 (2016).
We are further troubled by the fact that this green light from the Israeli
authorities for the construction of illegal housing units has been accompanied by acts
of violence perpetrated by Israeli settlers against the defenceless Palestinian people
right before the eyes of the Israeli security forces. There have also been racist chants
against Arabs and Muslims and destruction of Palestinian buildings and property. In
the past three months, 72 buildings have been destroyed, resulting in the forced
displacement of 78 people, including 47 children and 15 women. These acts and
policies violate the most basic human rights laws, international law and the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949. The occupying Power must honour its obligation to
protect private property in the Occupied Territory, and refrain from appropriating it.
The prevailing climate of impunity gives Israeli settlers greater freedom to seize
land and property and displace Palestinian families from their homes. Now more than
ever, we must utilize international political and legal mechanisms to make sure that
Israel, the occupying Power, is held accountable for its continued violations of the
rights of the Palestinian people, who are protected under international law, and make

21-10605

35/61

S/2021/685

it put a stop to encroachments by Israeli settlers involving both the seizure and
destruction of Palestinian property.
In closing, the State of Kuwait reaffirms its commitment to the Arab, Islamic
and international position affirming the centrality of the Palestinian issue for the Arab
and Islamic communities and the Arab identity of occupied East Jerusalem. We also
reaffirm our commitment to peace as a strategic choice and the resolution of the Arab Israeli conflict in accordance with international law, the relevant internationall y
recognized resolutions, the principle of land for peace and the 2002 Arab Peace
Initiative, in a way that allows the Palestinian people to enjoy their full legitimate
political rights and establish an independent State on their territory with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

36/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the
United Nations, Amal Mudallali
[Original: English]
I wish to congratulate France on its assumption of the presidency of the Council,
and I commend the Ambassador and his mission on their active work during this
month.
I seize this opportunity to thank Estonia on a good job as President of the
Council last month.
After nine months of political gridlock, Lebanon seems to be inching towards
forming a much-needed Government. The parliamentary consultations that were held
this week tasked the former Prime Minister, Najib Mikati, to form such a Government.
The challenges are daunting. The financial crisis left the Lebanese people with
little or no electricity on a daily basis; skyrocketing inflation and prices, with the
Lebanese pound losing over 90 per cent of its value; and water, fuel and medicine
shortages at a time of renewed resurgence of the coronavirus disease (COVID -19)
pandemic. A brain drain is depriving Lebanon of its young people, who are leaving
out of despair at the situation and at rising poverty and inequality rates that are
changing the character of the country. Suffice it to say that the two latest
communiqués from the United Nations Children’s Fund report that millions of
Lebanese are at risk of losing access to safe water and that a majority of families in
Lebanon can no longer afford to meet the basic needs of their children.
Forming a government is the first step on a long road towards impl ementing the
indispensable reforms needed to help Lebanon out of this dire crisis.
As the mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) is
nearing its annual term, Lebanon has expressed its willingness, at the highest level in
the country, to extend the mandate of UNIFIL without changes. UNIFIL continues to
play an important and indispensable role in maintaining security and stability in South
Lebanon, for the benefit not only of the southern borders but also of the region. The
French delegation put it correctly – in a Security Council meeting in 2017 – when it
described UNIFIL as a regional public good.
In this regard, we welcome the renewal of the UNIFIL budget on 30 June and
reaffirm the Government’s commitment to the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006) in its entirety.
The Israeli violations of Lebanese sovereignty, in particular by air, persist,
causing damage to villages along the border and creating an imminent danger to civil
aviation. The violations are well documented in letters of complaints addressed to the
Security Council. Once again, we call on the Council to compel Israel to stop its
violation of Lebanese sovereignty, to stop endangering peace and security in the
region and to abide by its obligations under international law.
Needless to say, today the Palestinian people continue to live under the
oppression of the Israeli authorities, and the occupation continues unabated, with its
destruction of Palestinian homes and the approval of settlement projects.
The latest approval of settlement plans seeks to connect East Jerusalem with the
rest of the West Bank. No matter the Government in power in Israel, the
intensification of the occupation of the Palestinian territory remains the norm. This,
along with the other illegal settlement activities, threatens the fu ture of a Palestinian
State and ends any hope of a just and peaceful solution to the conflict.
21-10605

37/61

S/2021/685

The policy of mere condemnation from the international community has
unfortunately empowered Israeli authorities over the years, creating and enshrining a
culture of impunity.
In its press statement of 22 May 2021, the Security Council members “reiterated
the importance of achieving a comprehensive peace based on the vision of a region
where two democratic States, Israel and Palestine, live side by side in peace with
secure and recognized borders”. The Security Council must live up to its
responsibility and act swiftly and decisively towards its commitment, on the basis of
international law, including the relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions. We must learn from the Gaza attack of May of this year that military
power and violence do not solve the problem. On the contrary, they create a cycle of
violence and new grievances. Only by addressing the root cause of this long -standing
injustice, occupation, can the region live in peace and security.
A state of permanent occupation has led, over the years, to what Human Rights
Watch recently described in a report as “crimes against humanity of apartheid and
persecution” against Palestinians. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of France warned
of a risk of “long-lasting apartheid” in Israel if there was no Palestinian State.
A few days ago, we marked Nelson Mandela International Day to commemorate
the life and legacy of the iconic anti-apartheid figure who uttered these powerful
words: “We know too well that our freedom is incomplete without the freedom of the
Palestinians”.

38/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Malaysia to the
United Nations, Syed Mohamad Hasrin Aidid
[Original: English]
I thank the President of the Security Council for convening this important open
debate. Malaysia aligns itself with the statements delivered by Niger on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) and Azerbaijan on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
For more than 70 years, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has affected the Middle
East landscape, yet it gains only “seasonal” attention and coverage when tensions
flare and the international community takes notice. We must not allow this to be the
trend as the suffering in the occupied territories continues unabated. The Security
Council, as the custodian for maintaining international peace and security, must
continue to intensify efforts in finding a final solution to the conflict.
Malaysia welcomes the ceasefire in Gaza on 21 May 2021 and commends all
parties, including Egypt, that facilitated the ceasefire. Malaysia, together with Egypt
and other cross-regional partners, also issued a joint communiqué on a global
ceasefire on 22 June 2021 calling on all Member States and relevant parties to
redouble their efforts to bring peace in the conflicts to which they are parties or in
which they have influence, through the effective participation of all stakeholders. We
also stress the importance of addressing the root causes of conflict, as well as the
inequalities, injustices and discriminations that have made some of the conflicts and
wars protracted. My delegation hopes that this message will receive due attention
from the Council in addressing the world’s most enduring conflicts, such as the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Malaysia also calls on the international community to continue to support the
reconstruction efforts in Gaza and to provide urgent relief and humanitarian aid to the
thousands injured and made homeless by Israel’s attacks.
At the same time, the international community must not lose sight of the
prolonged suffering of the Palestinians and the urgent need to end the illegal Israeli
occupation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory. We must come to grips with the
reality that the Palestinians continue to live under brutal occupation and within a
repressive blockade zone; their fundamental rights are denied while illegal
settlements are being expanded. Regrettably and evidently, the intensity of the
ferocious and apartheid policies of Israel against Palestinians has become rampant
owing to the lack of accountability by the international community.
Earlier this month, the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967 told the Human Rights Council that
the Israeli settlements amounted to a war crime. He further called on the international
community to develop a menu of accountability measures to be applied to Israel if it
continued to defy international law, including reviewing trade, investment, and
cultural agreements and ending arms sales with Israel.
The international community must respond to this call. We cannot sit idly and
stop all plots against the Palestinian people, which clearly violate numerous United
Nations resolutions and international law, including humanitarian law. We reiterate
the call on the Security Council to uphold its duties, to implement its resolutions
vis-à-vis the question of Palestine and to act urgently to address Israel’s annexation
plans, which threaten regional and international peace and security.

21-10605

39/61

S/2021/685

Malaysia continues to reaffirm its unwavering support and solidarity towards
the Palestinian cause in realizing their inalienable rights to self -determination,
freedom and independence, including the establishment of an independent and
sovereign State of Palestine based on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital. We will continue our bilateral assistance to Palestine and support the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to ease the
conditions of the Palestinian people.
Malaysia believes that there is no alternative to sustainable peace without a
negotiated political settlement of a two-State solution. In this context, Malaysia
supports the call by the international community, including by the Secretary -General,
on the Middle East Quartet to find a mutually agreeable path for the parties to
re-engage towards a negotiated peaceful settlement.

40/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

Annex XVII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Oman to the
United Nations on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation
[Original: English]
I have the honour to deliver this statement, on behalf of Member States of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, in my capacity as Vice Chair of OIC Group.
This meeting is taking place against the backdrop of a deteriorating and grave
situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, due to
Israel’s unlawful and fait accompli policies of ethnic cleansing, racist practices and
collective punishment against the Palestinian people and of colonial settlement
construction and expansion. Israel, the occupying power, continues its violations and
aggressions by the escalation in acts of provocation, incitement and violence, in
particular by extremist settlers, along with repeated attacks against the Aqsa
Mosque/Haram Al-Sharif, the destruction of Palestinian homes and properties, and
the forced expulsion of Palestinian families from their homes, in particular in the
Shaykh Jarrah and Silwan neighbourhoods in East Jerusalem, and Bedouin families
in the Jordan Valley. We are particularly concerned by the raiding of the Aqsa Mosque,
attacks on Palestinian civilians praying in the area, and the detention of Palestinian
civilians on 18 July, which represents the latest attempt to undermine the status quo
of Haram Al-Sharif.
We forewarn once again that the continuation of such illegal, oppressive and
destructive policies would transform a solvable politic al conflict into a global
religious imbroglio, with unpredictable repercussions for peace and security in an
already volatile region and beyond. We therefore reiterate that the Security Council
should assume its responsibility in upholding international la w and implementing its
own resolutions aimed at bringing a halt to these illegal acts and salvaging the
prospects for a just peace.
In the same vein, OIC reaffirms that all measures or decisions by any party
aimed at entrenching the illegal Israeli occupation and unlawfully altering the legal,
historical, cultural and political status of the occupied city of Jerusalem constitute a
blatant violation of the political and legal rights of the Palestinian people and
systematic breaches of international humanitarian law and of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolutions 476 (1980), 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016).
OIC also continues to monitor with grave concern the dire humanitarian
situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory as a result of the recent devastating
outcomes of the brutal Israeli air strikes on the besieged Gaza Stri p that claimed more
than 290 Palestinian lives, including 66 children and 40 women, and injured over
1,900 people, in addition to the thousands of families displaced and made homeless
following the Israeli military’s widespread destruction and damage to ho mes, vital
infrastructure and civil facilities, including hospitals, schools, and water and
sanitation facilities. OIC calls upon the international community to set up political
and legal mechanisms to ensure Israel’s respect for and compliance with intern ational
law and the enforcement of the Geneva Convention Relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, as called for long ago by the General Assembly and the High Contracting
Parties.
Moreover, the dire socioeconomic situation in Palestine caused by Israel’s
illegal occupation and blockade and exacerbated by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic risks becoming even worse owing to the decision of the Israeli
21-10605

41/61

S/2021/685

authorities to withhold parts of the Palestinian tax revenues. Such an illegal decision
is an act of piracy and collective punishment of the Palestinian people, constitutes a
violation of international law and Israel’s commitments under signed agreements, and
must be ceased forthwith.
We affirm that the current dangerous developments warrant this esteemed
Council, more than ever, intervening earnestly and immediately to provide
international protection for the Palestinian people as guaranteed by international
norms and conventions, including the Fourth Geneva Convention. It is unacceptable
to continue to deal with Israel as a State above the law in the face of such relentless
crimes and violations against the Palestinian people, of blatant colonization and of
contempt for international law and the international community.
OIC believes that urgent efforts should be deployed to promote the role and
expand the composition of the international Quartet and to mobilize further
international engagement in order to effectively inspire new momentum for reviving
the current deadlocked peace process that should henceforth be based on clear
political terms of reference and parameters, as enshrined in United Nations
resolutions, and with a specific time frame and international guara ntees, aimed at
achieving a just, comprehensive and durable solution that brings an end to the Israeli
colonial occupation; realizes the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including to self-determination and the independence of their State of Pa lestine on
the basis of pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital; and ensures a just
solution to the question of Palestine refugees, in accordance with the relevant United
Nations resolutions, in particular resolution 194 (III), and the Arab Peace Initiative.

42/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

Annex XVIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Peru to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
We welcome the holding of this quarterly open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine. We thank the distinguished speakers
for their comprehensive briefings.
Peru has been closely following the development of the events surrounding the
question of Palestine. Although we welcome the relative decl ine in the levels of
violence through the ceasefire agreed on 20 May, we cannot help but underline the
extremely fragile nature of the current situation, given the lack of trust that still
prevails between the parties and the rigidity of their positions.
We believe that we find ourselves at a critical juncture, and it is essential to act
swiftly and firmly to realize the only solution that we believe is viable and in keeping
with international law: the two-State solution with internationally recognized and
secure borders, to be directly negotiated between Israel and Palestine on the basis of
the 1967 borders, which should also lead to the determination of the final status of
Jerusalem.
We note that the resumption of a political process requires leaving be hind
hatred, antisemitism and discrimination, as well as any other manifestation of
violence. From this perspective, we condemn the holding of anti-Palestinian marches
in East Jerusalem in June, promoted by Israeli extremist groups, as well as the
continued launching of incendiary devices by Hamas, putting at risk the lives of
Israeli civilians and causing property damage.
To achieve this, we stress the obligation of Israel to observe in its responses the
basic principles of international humanitarian law, in particular proportionality and
distinction. Deadly force should be utilized only as a last resort, under imminent threat
of death or serious injury.
In the same way, actions that weaken the required trust must be replaced. We
are referring to the harmful practices of settlements, demolitions of homes and
displacement in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, which undermine the
two-State solution and violate the terms set by this Council in its resolution 2334
(2016). These illegal practices, like the recent demolition of property belonging to the
Bedouin community of Humsa al-Baqai’a or the planned expansion of settlements in
East Jerusalem, must cease.
Peru believes that the renewal of the commitment by the parties to the peace
process should also include urgent action to alleviate human suffering. We deplore
the progressive deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Gaza and stress the
urgency of addressing its root causes.
We therefore believe that it is essential to cease retaliation measures against the
civilian population, such as the reduction in the Palestinian fishing zone off Gaza, or
restrictions on the supply of fuel and construction materials through the Kerem
Shalom pass. We welcome the recent announcement by Israel in that regard.
The international community must also support reconstruction efforts after the
serious damage to critical infrastructure in the zone caused by the hostilities which
took place this May.
We would also like to highlight the vital work of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in providing essential services,

21-10605

43/61

S/2021/685

as well as the need to ensure its stable and predictable financing in order for it to
overcome the serious financial crisis it is undergoing.
We would like to conclude by expressing our full support for Tor Wennesland
in his efforts to prevent further escalation and promote dialogue among the parties,
and by reaffirming our commitment to seeking a solution to the question of Palestine,
which goes along with the achievement of lasting peace in the region.

44/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

Annex XIX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Qatar to the
United Nations, Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani
[Original: Arabic]
Since the last open debate under this item, the occupied Palestinian territory has
witnessed a major escalation. Everyone has been warning that that might happen,
given the continuing unsustainable status quo and the failure to reach a lasting
settlement of the Palestinian issue.
Occupied Jerusalem has been seeing repeated provocations and attacks by the
occupying Power and settlers against the Muslim and Christian holy places, and most
notably, the Haram al-Sharif, one of the most important holy sites for Muslims. That
threatens to exacerbate the conflict and diminish the chances of it being resolved. Any
attempts to alter the legal, historical and cultural status of the occupied city of
Jerusalem constitute violations of international law and the relevant Securit y Council
and General Assembly resolutions.
These provocative practices, along with other illegal measures, such as the
confiscation and demolition of Palestinian property, including in the Shaykh Jarrah
and Silwan neighbourhoods, reflect a policy of juda ization of Jerusalem, expansion
of settlements and disregard for international law and internationally recognized
resolutions. All this is what has brought about the recent escalation, which has
resulted in hundreds of civilian casualties, including dozens of children, from aerial
bombardment of residential neighbourhoods in the Gaza Strip. In an effort to restore
security and stability, Qatar has engaged in diplomatic activity in coordination with
the United Nations and fraternal and friendly States to fac ilitate a ceasefire
agreement. It is of the utmost importance to maintain that ceasefire at this stage in
order to avoid re-escalation.
We must address the urgent needs of 2 million Palestinians whose suffering has
worsened this year as they continue to endure the siege of the Gaza Strip. The State
of Qatar continues to be in the forefront of efforts to provide humanitarian and
development aid to meet the urgent needs of the fraternal Palestinian people. This
past May, His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani, Emir of Qatar, provided
a $500 million grant for reconstruction in the Gaza Strip. That was on top of funds
already provided by Qatar for government salaries, financial assistance to families in
hardship, restoration of electric power stations and infrastructure development.
The Security Council must carry out its responsibilities by enforcing
international law, implementing its resolutions, putting an end to occupation and
illegal settlement, and supporting peace, which must be achieved through negotiations
between the two parties on the basis of international law, United Nations resolutions,
the Arab Peace Initiative, the principle of a two-State solution under which the State
of Palestine will be established with the 1967 borders and East Jerus alem as its
capital, an end to the occupation of other Arab territories, and a just solution to the
refugee issue. We reaffirm the continued commitment of Qatar to support and join in
all genuine international efforts to achieve a just, lasting and compreh ensive peace.
This year marked the 10th anniversary of the outbreak of peaceful protests by
the fraternal Syrian people. Today, the Syrian crisis still awaits resolution. That will
not happen through the military option but rather a deliberate political process leading
to a political transition in accordance with the first Geneva communiqué and
implementation of Security Council resolution 2254 (2015). The constitutional
committee must complete its tasks, and confidence-building measures must be taken.
That includes settling the issue of forcibly detentions and disappearances, and
21-10605

45/61

S/2021/685

creating conditions for the safe, voluntary and dignified return of refugees and
displaced persons. It is also important to ensure accountability for war crimes
and crimes against humanity, including the use of chemical weapons, because
accountability is conducive to sustainable peace. Millions in Syria depend on
international assistance and the cross-border assistance delivery mechanism, and we
commend the efforts of the United Nations in that regard. We note that the State of
Qatar is in the forefront of those donating to alleviate the human suffering of the
fraternal Syrian people.
Bringing an end to the crisis in Yemen requires negotiations between the Yemeni
parties on the basis of the outcomes of the National Dialogue, the Initiative of the
Gulf Cooperation Council and the relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
Resolution 2216 (2015). That would help to overcome humanitarian difficulties and
preserve the unity, sovereignty and independence of Yemen. Qatar has been
conscientious about contributing to alleviating the humanitarian situation of the
fraternal Yemeni people. On instructions from His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin
Hamad Al Thani, Emir of Qatar, some $100 million was allocated to support World
Food Programme initiatives in Yemen that support food security and prevent famine.
With regard to the situation in Libya, the efforts of Libyans and the support of
the international community have produced some encouraging developments over the
past year, including a ceasefire agreement, the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum and
the formation of an interim Government of National Unity. There can be no questions
but that we must demonstrate our commitment to maintaining this progress on the
political, economic and security tracks by making sure that that elections are held on
time. That will be vital to establishing and sustaining stability in the interest of the
fraternal Libyan people.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar is unshakeable in its faith in the principle of
resolving disputes through peaceful means. In that connection, it is maki ng ongoing
efforts, through mediation and other means, to help lay the foundations of sustainable
peace at the regional and international levels, and continuing to work with
international partners to reduce tensions, bring an end to crises and realize stab ility,
security and the common interest of all.

46/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

Annex XX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations, Cho Hyun
[Original: English]
My delegation would like to thank the Special Coordinator for the Middl e East
Peace Process, Tor Wennesland, for his briefing, and reaffirm my Government’s full
support for his efforts and dedication.
My Government welcomed the agreement on 20 May between Israel and
Palestine to cease hostilities, emphasizing the importance of its faithful
implementation. In this vein, we are deeply concerned by the Special Coordinator’s
recent report that the ceasefire agreement remains very fragile. It is particularly
worrisome to hear that violent incidents continue on a daily basis throu ghout the
occupied Palestinian territory.
The Republic of Korea urges all sides to exercise maximum restraint, to refrain
from unilateral steps and provocations, to take steps to reduce tensions and, most
importantly, to solidify the ceasefire. We must do everything we can to avoid another
deadly escalation.
My delegation takes this opportunity to welcome the new Israeli coalition
Government sworn in last month. We reiterate our commitment to continue to support
a two-State solution in line with the relevant Security Council resolutions, as well as
international law and bilateral agreements. My delegation encourages the Israeli and
Palestinian leaders to resume meaningful negotiations toward this goal, and we
further express our support for efforts made by international partners, including the
Middle East Quartet, to enable the parties to re-engage.
The Republic of Korea emphasizes the importance of respecting Security
Council resolution 2334 (2016) and international law. My delegation believes that
confidence-building measures are urgently required to create a more favourable
environment and encourages Israelis and Palestinians to refrain from any activity that
undermines the prospect of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace.
Intra-Palestinian reconciliation must be reinvigorated, and the Republic of
Korea expresses its support for the efforts made by international partners in this
regard. We reiterate that unity and consensus among the Palestinian people are crucial
in achieving peace and an independent, sovereign and democratic State.
My delegation is deeply concerned by the urgent humanitarian needs in Gaza
and the West Bank, aggravated by the recent hostilities and the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. In order to help address this challenge, the Republic of Korea
has recently provided $1.5 million to fund the emergency appeal of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and the
humanitarian fund for Palestinians of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs. My delegation reaffirms its strong support for efforts by UNRWA and the
Office to improve the humanitarian situation in Palestine, and we call on all parties
to ensure full, unimpeded humanitarian access and to respect international law,
including international humanitarian law.
In addition, my delegation would like to touch upon an important recent
development at the Security Council. The Republic of Korea welcomes the unanimous
adoption of Council resolution 2585 (2021), which extended the cross-border
humanitarian assistance to Syria. The resolution will help to provide timely and
essential assistance to millions of Syrian people in need, and we commend the close
and constructive cooperation demonstrated by the members of the Security Council.
21-10605

47/61

S/2021/685

The Republic of Korea reaffirms its commitment to continue its constructive
role in advancing peace and stability in the region, in cooperation with the United
Nations and the international community.

48/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

Annex XXI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Mathu Joyini
[Original: English]
My delegation is grateful to the President of the Security Council for convening
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question.
At the outset, South Africa remains concerned over the recurring tensions,
instability, and the protraction of conflict, including the systematic discrimination and
repression based on national, ethnic, racial and religious identity exercised against
Palestinians.
It is disconcerting to note that, 69 days since the ceasefire agreement between
Israel and Hamas was reached, tensions remain high, as both parties have been in
breach of the ceasefire. South Africa calls on the parties to abide by the ceasefire
agreement and to work towards intensifying efforts, with the support of the
international community, to foster trust and initiate dialogue among the parties in
order to resuscitate a political track.
As much as we would all want to see a resuscitated political track between the
Palestinians and the Israelis, we should be cognisant of the fact that this cannot
happen if we do not address the root cause of the problem. Palestinians continue to
be subjected to daily targeted violations of human rights and discriminatory practices,
as enforced by the Israeli Government through its laws.
Israeli laws which discriminate against Palestinian people are an unjust system
which accommodates a different set of rules for different peoples. As the international
community, we cannot be bystanders and allow this form of discrimination to
continue. Therefore, the Security Council and the international community at large
must redouble their efforts to strengthen international action and uphold international
norms and standards. A key aspect of this would be for the Security Council to
implement its resolutions and uphold international law.
In this regard, Council resolution 2334 (2016) reaffirms “that the establishment
by Israel of settlements in the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem, has no legal validity and constitutes a flagrant violation under
international law”, yet the Government of Israel continues unabatedly to advance its
settlement plans in the occupied West Bank. Relentless provocation is the order of the
day as Palestinians are subjected to forced expulsions and demolitions of their homes
in occupied Jerusalem. In recent weeks, we have again witnessed the increasing of
violence against Palestinians and the violation of their religious symbols. It is
particularly disturbing that security services and defence forces carry out this violence
with almost full impunity, with total disregard for the human suffering to which it
leads. South Africa condemns these acts of aggression by Israel and its use of
excessive force, including lethal force, which is unlawful, unjustified and
disproportionate. Moreover, these actions have the potential to escalate hostilities and
jeopardize the already fragile ceasefire agreement.
The 11-day hostilities which erupted in May between Israel and Palestinians
living in Gaza has crippled the infrastructure and livelihoods of those Palestinians,
further exacerbating the dire humanitarian conditions on the ground. This is of grave
concern to South Africa, and in this regard, we appeal to the international community
to provide the necessary support in the form of much-needed humanitarian aid to
assist with the reconstruction of Gaza.
21-10605

49/61

S/2021/685

In conclusion, I appeal to all Member States to actively support efforts aimed at
the establishment of a viable Palestinian State, existin g side by side in peace with
Israel within internationally recognized borders based on those existing on 4 June
1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in line with all relevant United Nations
resolutions, international law and internationally agreed par ameters.

50/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

Annex XXII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic to the United Nations, Bassam Sabbagh
[Original: Arabic]
The Israeli occupation authorities continue to escalate their systematic attacks
and violations against the Palestinian people in the Occupied P alestinian Territory.
On top of their barbaric shelling and suffocating siege of the Gaza Strip, the Israeli
authorities are allowing settlers to attack unarmed Palestinian citizens – as has
happened in the Jerusalem neighbourhoods of Shaykh Jarrah, Bab al-Amud and
Silwan – against the backdrop of their attempts to expropriate Palestinian homes on
the basis of arbitrary decrees. The Israeli occupation authorities also recently allowed
Israeli extremists to storm the Aqsa Mosque in large numbers under the pr otection of
the Israeli police, and attack worshippers inside and outside the mosque. That is not
even to mention their continued violations of international law and disregard for
internationally recognized resolutions on the cause of the Palestinian peopl e.
The Syrian Arab Republic condemns all these Israeli practices perpetrated
against the Palestinian people, and considers them to be immoral acts that reflect the
true face of the Israeli entity. They are serious violations of the rights of the
Palestinian people in Jerusalem and the historical and legal status of the Aqsa
Mosque, which the occupying Power is supposed to respect. These practices would
not be able to continue without the sponsorship and protection provided to the
occupying authorities by successive United States administrations and certain
Western countries.
The Syrian Arab Republic reiterates its support for the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and the establishment of an independent State over all of
its national soil with Jerusalem as its capital, as well as for the right of refugees to
return to their homes in accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III) of
1948. We stress that any decisions, measures or deals that are inconsistent with the
relevant United Nations resolutions or fail to safeguard the established rights of the
Palestinians should be rejected in form and substance and are fundamentally unviable.
Syria calls on the countries of the world and the United Nations, including the
Security Council, to put an end to these shameful and inhumane practices, to enable
the Palestinian people to exercise their legitimate historical rights, and to grant the
State of Palestine full membership in the United Nations.
The commitment of Syria to the cause of the Palestinian people is inseparable
from our commitment to our people in the occupied Syrian Golan, where Israel
continues to entrench its occupation in an unprecedented challenge to international
will and to the relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981). The Israeli occupation authorities continue to
escalate their expansionist policies in the occupied Syrian Golan. They have expanded
and accelerated settlement construction on the ruins of Syrian villages and lands
destroyed and confiscated by the Israeli occupation. They are expropriating the land
of Syrian Arab citizens for settlement activities, including a project to construct giant
wind turbines on an area equivalent to one fifth of the agricultural land still owned
the people of the Golan that serves as the green lung of the occupied Syrian villages.
That is in addition to ongoing efforts by the Israeli authorities to displace people from
their homes and land.
They have also recently set up several water facilities in the occupied S yrian
Golan, where they are storing more than 33 million m³ of water to be used for

21-10605

51/61

S/2021/685

irrigation and drinking by Zionist settlers at no charge while it is off limits to our
people.
In addition, the Israeli occupation authorities continue to engage in racia l
discrimination against the people of the occupied Syrian Golan. They practice
arbitrary detention, torture, displacement and abduction. They are trying to bring
about demographic change by imposing Israeli citizenship and Israeli educational
curricula. They are stealing the Golan’s natural resources by constantly drilling for
underground resources. They are looting the archaeological heritage of Syria and
tampering with historical and archaeological sites and monuments in an attempt to
judaize them and obliterate their Syrian Arab identity.
Since 1967, the Israeli occupation authorities have made sure to prevent any
United Nations fact-finding missions, including those provided for by World Health
Assembly resolutions, from gaining access to the occupied Syrian Golan to
investigate conditions and make recommendations. Israel also prevents the World
Health Organization from gaining unrestricted access to the people of the occupied
Golan to assess their conditions and attend to their humanitarian ne eds, particularly
during the coronavirus (COVID-19) disease pandemic, in total disregard of its
obligations as an occupying Power.
Since 27 August 2014, the Israeli occupying authorities have closed the
Qunaytirah crossing, the only authorized crossing point through which the people of
the occupied Syrian Golan are able to remain in contact with their motherland. The
occupying Israeli authorities continue to plant and expand minefields in the occupied
Syrian Golan, which maim and kill mostly children. They also continue to bury
nuclear waste at a number of sites in the Syrian Golan, in a major violation of
international law and the relevant international agreements that poses an imminent
environmental threat to the region and its inhabitants.
The Syrian Arab Republic calls on the international community to pressure
Israel, the occupying Power, to immediately and without delay reopen the Qunaytirah
crossing, which is the artery that connects our people in the occupied Syrian Golan to
their motherland and the lung through which they breathe. Syria also calls on the
Security Council to put an end to illegal Israeli settlement practices and repressive
measures against our people in the occupied Syrian Golan, to hold Israel accountable
for these violations, and to take resolute and immediate action to prevent their
recurrence.
The Israeli policy of State terrorism and attacks against the sovereignty of the
Syrian Arab Republic constitutes a flagrant violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, the provisions of international law and Security Council resolutions
affirming respect for the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Syria. The
continuing series of Israeli attacks on the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic, the
most recent of which occurred on Thursday, 22 July 2021, further entrenches Israeli
policies of State terrorism and continued support for armed terrorist groups in Syria,
which is also in flagrant violation of international counter-terrorism instruments. The
Syrian Arab Republic has kept the Secretary-General and the President of the Security
Council informed of all these attacks by sending identical letters conveying the details
and warning of the major threat they pose to the security and stability of the region.
The Syrian Arab Republic condemns in the strongest terms recent United States
statements and declarations on the occupied Syrian Golan, which confirm that United
States policy is made from the perspective of Israel and serves the latter’s aggressive
and expansionist policies in the region. Syria stresses that these declarations are null
and void and have no legal effect; the occupied Golan will inevitably be restored to
the motherland, using all means guaranteed by international law.

52/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

In closing, Syria regrets that reports from the Secretariat continue to turn a blind
eye to the dangerous reality of systematic Israeli practices and violations against our
people suffering under occupation in the Golan. It reiterates its call for the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Tor Wennesland, to give the situation
in the occupied Syrian Golan the attention demanded by his mandate, and to include
in his reports detailed information on the violations and practices of the Israeli
occupation authorities being perpetrated against our people in the occupied Syrian
Golan.

21-10605

53/61

S/2021/685

Annex XXIII
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission
of Turkey to the United Nations, Bilge Koçyiğit Grba
[Original: English]
It has been two months since the ceasefire was established in Gaza. However,
tensions remain high, and the ceasefire is very fragile. Israel’s latest air strikes
targeting Gaza are testimony to the precariousness of the situation. We cannot grow
complacent. The international community can no longer afford to put the Palestinian
question on the back burner until another violent eruption occurs.
We need to remember what prompted the escalation in May. It was Israel’s
systematic provocations in Jerusalem. It was the restrictions imposed on and
aggression unleashed against Palestinians worshipping in the Aqsa Mosque during
the holy month of Ramadan. It was the blatant desecration of Haram Al-Sharif. It was
the forced evictions of Palestinian families from their homes in Shaykh Jarrah. It was
the brutal use of lethal force against peaceful protestors in East Jerusalem, who have
no other democratic means to express their views owing to the occupying power’s
denial of political participation.
We are dismayed to observe that some Member States fall into the trap o f
portraying these developments as a mutual escalation. We would like to remind them
that, if they continue to turn a blind eye to the root causes of the conflict, it is only a
matter of time before the next round of violence flares up. In May, 278 Palesti nians,
including 67 children, were killed as a result of Israeli attacks on Gaza. The right to
self-defence does not give carte blanche for the excessive, disproportionate and
indiscriminate use of force on civilians and civilian targets. There is no justi fication
for Israel’s attacks on the buildings of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) or on schools, international media
outlets, and international relief organizations such as the Red Crescent.
If the international community genuinely wants a sustainable ceasefire, it must
take concrete steps to ensure that Israel stops using excessive and disproportionate
force against civilians. It must also put an end to Israel’s continued attempts to erode
the status of Jerusalem and the inhumane blockade in Gaza. There can be no lasting
peace while Israel continues its annexation policies through illegal settlements and
demolitions. This recurring pattern is part of Israel’s encroachment on Palestinian
people, aimed at curtailing their fundamental rights and freedoms and gradually
depriving them of their homeland.
Unfortunately, Israel’s provocations and violations in the occupied Palestinian
territories still continue. Despite the fragility of the ceasefire, Isra el is still fanning
the flames of flashpoints in Jerusalem even today. It appears that the new Israeli
Government has not drawn any lessons from the latest escalation in May. We continue
to witness growing settler violence, home demolitions, forced displac ement, and
arrests and killings of Palestinian civilians, including children. We are particularly
appalled by the fact that settler violence is enabled and permitted by the Israeli
authorities, through employing extreme and far-right Israelis to advance the
annexation agenda. Settlers are also increasingly being used to provoke Palestinians
in Jerusalem. In this connection, we condemn that, on the eve of Eid al-Adha on
18 July, Israeli security forces once again violated the sanctity of Haram Al -Sharif by
allowing racist Jewish groups to raid the Aqsa Mosque, attacking Palestinian civilians
praying in the area and detaining Palestinian civilians, including children and women.
We are also gravely concerned by the demolition orders for Silwan and by the
fact that families in Shaykh Jarrah continue to face the threat of eviction. These
54/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

practices also continue unabated in the West Bank. The latest displacement of 70
people, of whom 35 are children, as a result of the demolition of Palestinian
households in the village of Khirbat Humsah in the occupied West Bank, is yet another
flagrant violation of the international law.
Israel has demolished or seized 848 Palestinian structures in the occupied West
Bank in 2020, leaving 996 Palestinians, including 518 children, displaced. Since the
beginning of 2021 alone, at least 152 structures, of which 37 were donated, have been
destroyed, rendering at least 184 Palestinians homeless. In 2020, 11 new illegal
settlement outposts were established, 2,433 new illegal housing u nits began
construction and 12,159 illegal housing units were advanced through plans in 55
settlements. These are clear manifestations of a creeping annexation.
We condemn Israel’s unlawful and inhumane practices. Israel has been
emboldened by decades of international inaction. Due to the lack of accountability,
its systematic violations and human rights abuses were practically rewarded with
impunity. Currently, Israel has no incentive to change its behaviour while it bears no
tangible cost for its violations. Therefore, we strongly support judicial processes to
hold Israel accountable for its crimes in the Occupied Palestinian Territories. In this
regard, the processes of the Human Rights Council and of the International Criminal
Court are important instruments for putting an end to the impunity with which Israel
is continuing to perpetrate these serious crimes.
We welcome the resolution adopted by the Human Rights Council at the special
session on Palestine on 27 May, which established an independent in ternational
commission of inquiry to investigate Israel’s violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law in both the Occupied Palestinian Territories
and Israel. This body could play an important role in documenting the com mission of
serious crimes, provide input to judicial proceedings and galvanize diplomatic,
economic and political measures to uphold the rights of the Palestinian people. It is
time to employ all possible avenues to pursue accountability for crimes committ ed in
the Occupied Palestinian Territory. We will support the work of this commission and
welcome the recent appointment of its commissioners.
Returning to the path of peace negotiations and accelerating all efforts,
including by the Quartet, to revitalize the peace process is an urgent necessity. We
support the proposal of President Abbas to convene an international peace conference
to this end. The establishment of an independent, sovereign and contiguous State of
Palestine on the basis of the 1967 borders with East Jerusalem as its capital is the only
way to find a viable solution to this conflict.
We are concerned by the intention of third countries to open embassies in
Jerusalem or relocate their embassies from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. Opening embassi es
in Jerusalem not only violates international law but also undermines the prospects of
achieving a two-State solution and establishing peace in the region. The status of
Jerusalem is a fundamental issue that remains at the heart of the Israeli -Palestinian
conflict. The final status of Jerusalem will be one of the most important components
of the comprehensive solution of this conflict. We condemn the decision of Kosovo
to open its embassy in Jerusalem and the recent decision of Honduras to relocate its
embassy in Tel Aviv to Jerusalem in defiance of international law. We urge all Member
States to respect Security Council and General Assembly resolutions on the status of
Jerusalem.
Following the attacks by Israel on Gaza in May, the humanitarian situation in
Gaza has further deteriorated. At a time when swift humanitarian access is vital, the
blockade has become even stricter. It is imperative to provide unhindered access to
Gaza in order to ensure the delivery of humanitarian aid. Notwithstanding the crucial
role of aid in supporting the resilience of the population in Gaza, the dependence on
21-10605

55/61

S/2021/685

humanitarian assistance is unsustainable. Reliance on external aid delays finding a
permanent and sustainable solution to the existing challenges of Gaza.
The Gaza rapid damage and needs assessment conducted jointly by the United
Nations, the World Bank and the European Union following the conflict in May
estimates the damages incurred in Gaza to fall between $290–380 million. The
immediate and short-term recovery and reconstruction needs during the first 24
months are estimated at between $345–485 million. The reconstruction and
rehabilitation requirements of the Gaza Strip cannot be effectivel y addressed while
the current blockade remains in force. The international community needs to force
Israel to change its policies on Gaza and should increase its assistance to the State of
Palestine in this critical period. Turkey will continue to provide development and
humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian people in order to improve their living
conditions.
UNRWA continues to operate in extremely difficult circumstances. The
challenges faced by the Agency have been compounded by the devastating imp act of
the latest round of violence in Gaza. After barely managing to keep essential services
running in 2020, the Agency faces yet another imminent cash crisis. By the end of
May 2021, UNRWA had received cash and confirmed pledges for only 45 per cent of
its programme budget. Its total expected income in 2021 remains far below
requirements, and on the basis of current income predictions, UNRWA is facing an
end-of-year programme budget shortfall of over $150 million in 2021. Current
information indicates that the Agency will face cash payment difficulties by the third
quarter, potentially affecting the Agency’s ability to pay full salaries and vendors as
early as August 2021. UNRWA is indispensable for providing vital health, relief and
emergency assistance to millions of Palestinian refugees. We call on all donors to step
up their support and to work together to address the structural reasons for the
Agency’s chronic funding shortfall.
We regret that the presidential and legislative elections have been postponed
owing to Israel’s position on Jerusalem. It is imperative that all Palestinians, including
those residing in East Jerusalem, be allowed to exercise their democratic rights and
elect their representatives. We call upon the Israeli Government to end i ts obstructive
policies and to respect the provisions of the Interim Agreement on the West Bank and
Gaza Strip of 1995, so that the Palestinian elections can be held at the earliest
occasion. For a negotiated two-State solution, achieving intra-Palestinian
reconciliation is an urgent necessity. Therefore, we encourage all Palestinian groups
to continue to work towards unity and reconciliation. We urge the United Nations and
the international community to support Palestinian reconciliation and the elections.
Turkey is ready to extend all of the support needed for the successful conduct of
Palestinian elections.
I would like to conclude with an urgent call to action: in order to put an end to
the longest conflict in the history of the United Nations, we canno t continue with
business as usual. It is time for the international community to take decisive and bold
action. Revitalizing the Middle East peace process is essential for fulfilling our long overdue promise to the Palestinian people of a life in dignity. It is also indispensable
for the stability of our region. The international community has a key role to play:
collectively, we must help to revitalize negotiations for a two -State solution in
accordance with international law and the relevant United Nation s resolutions.

56/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

Annex XXIV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Ukraine to the
United Nations
[Original: English]
The Middle East Peace process remains at the very core of any efforts aimed at
restoring regional stability. Ukraine consistently supports the Middle East peace
process with Israel and Palestine coexisting in peace and security.
Ukraine condemned the serious escalation of the situation in the Middle East
region, in particular the indiscriminate firing of rockets into the territory of Israel by
Hamas in Gaza in May 2021.
We also welcomed the ceasefire, which was reached after a few weeks of
violence in the region, and commended the mediation efforts of all international
stakeholders who facilitated this important progress.
However, we are concerned by new instances of violence caused again by
Hamas from the territory of Gaza. We take this opportunity to reiterate that Israel has
the right to defend itself from attacks.
Notwithstanding the extremely volatile and unstable situation, we cannot but
note the recent positive developments in the region. In this context, Ukraine
welcomed the establishment of diplomatic relations between Israel and a number of
countries, in particular the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain, Sudan and Morocco. We
consider this an important step towards peace and stability in the region.
Ukraine reiterates its position that an Israeli-Palestinian peace settlement lies
within the framework of the unconditional fulfilment of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. It is essential to refrain from taking any action that could undermine the
prospects for a peaceful agreement.
The tenth anniversary of the Syrian conflict was earlier this year. The Syrian
regime’s actions against its own population led to one of the mos t brutal and bloody
armed conflicts in this century that caused the deaths of hundreds of thousands of
Syrians, including many women and children.
Today, despite the numerous calls from the international community, the Syrian
regime continues to disregard its obligations towards the protection of the civilian
population. We urge the Syrian regime to immediately cease attacks against civilians
and civilian infrastructure, including massive air strikes.
Ukraine reiterates its strong condemnation of the Syri an regime and its allies,
primarily Russia, for the massive, systematic and grave violations and abuses of
human rights and international humanitarian law. We reiterate that all perpetrators of
the most horrific crimes must be brought to justice, and we ex press our full support
for the activities of the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism for Syria
and the commission of Inquiry.
We also condemn the use of chemical weapons by the Syrian regime and the
refusal of the regime to fully cooperate with the Organisation for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons in terms of investigations of the use of these weapons in the
conflict.
Ukraine is deeply alarmed by the dire humanitarian situation in Syria, which
was caused by the armed conflict. Today, millions of civilians continue to be at risk,
with over half of the population forced to flee their homes while others continue to
live under severe conditions.
21-10605

57/61

S/2021/685

Therefore, it is important to provide stable humanitarian assistance to all Syrians
in need. In this regard, the adoption of the Security Council resolution 2585 (2021)
on 9 July 2021 is vital in terms of ensuring cross-border humanitarian assistance,
including food, medical and surgical supplies, and coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
vaccines. However, much more practical steps need to be taken to support the long suffering Syrian population.
Ukraine reiterates its support for a sustainable political solution to the conflict
in Syria and recalls that the political transition should be implemented in line with
Security Council resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué of 2012.

58/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

Annex XXV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the United Arab Emirates
[Original: Arabic]
Today’s meeting comes at a time when the fraternal Palestinian people are
suffering from difficult humanitarian, political and economic challenges –
exacerbated by the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID -19) pandemic – that
are complicating the political process. The only sustainable solution for overcoming
these deteriorating situations remains the two-State solution and the establishment of
an independent and sovereign Palestinian State with the 4 June 1967 borders and East
Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions, the
Madrid terms of reference and the Arab Peace Initiative.
As an immediate priority, the international community must support vital sectors
in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including health and education, in a tangible,
effective and urgent manner. The recent food and health assistance provided by the
United Arab Emirates reflects my country’s historic commitment to the Palestinian
people. From 2013–2020, we provided more than $840 million to finance vital sectors
and support development in the Palestinian territories. More recently, the United Arab
Emirates has provided the Gaza Strip with $6.2 million in food aid to help thousands
of Palestinian families there. That is in addition to having sent more than 30
ambulances and a range of medical supplies and vaccines since the onset of the
pandemic.
While these humanitarian efforts are important, the events of May 2021
underscore the fragility of the situation in the occupied territories, including East
Jerusalem. The international community must preserve and maintain the recent
ceasefire, promote efforts and actions that prevent escalation and are conducive to the
choice for negotiations, and work to protect the prospects for a two -State solution by
breaking the deadlock in the political process so that a credible peace process can be
relaunched.
In that connection, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms its support for regional
and international efforts to advance the Middle East peace process. We particularly
commend the Arab Republic of Egypt and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan for their
efforts that helped to reach a ceasefire.
We stress the need for an end all illegal practices in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory that imperil the two-State solution and violate international law and relevant
Security Council resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016). That includes
above all settlement construction and expansion, confiscation and destruction of
Palestinian property, and forced displacement of the population. We also stress the
need to preserve the legal status of the city of East Jerusalem, to enable Palestinians
to practice their religious rights, and to respect the historical role of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan as custodian of the holy places in Jerusalem.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reiterates its firm belief that the peoples
of the region – Palestinian, Arab and Israeli – have the same right as other peoples of
the world to a life of dignity in stable States and safe communities characterized by
tolerance and prosperity, where a person can realize their hopes and aspirations. We
will work with our regional and international partners to end the cycle of conflict in
the Middle East and realize this future for all the peoples of the region.

21-10605

59/61

S/2021/685

Annex XXVI
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, by aligning itself with the statement by
the Republic of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
reaffirms its position both of history and of principle, not just in support of the
legitimate national aspirations of the Palestinian people, but also in rejection of
violence in all its forms and manifestations. Thus, we categorically condemn th e
indiscriminate bombing by Israel of the civilian population in the Palestinian
territories, as well as the escalation of the cruel and deadly violence against the
Palestinian people, under a systematic policy of aggression and apartheid that
endangers regional peace and security.
During the most recent escalation of violence, which took place in May,
indiscriminate attacks and airstrikes resulted in over 140 deaths, including 39 children
and 22 women, and left over 1,000 wounded, as well as 77,000 newly displaced and
hundreds of homes destroyed. Vital public and private infrastructure was deliberately
attacked, and the legitimate residents of the Sheikh Jarrah community in East
Jerusalem were expelled by force. These are all criminal acts, and furth ermore they
were accompanied by systematic assaults by extremist and fanatic groups organized
throughout Israel, who committed hate crimes and racist attacks in dozens of towns
and cities against the resident Palestinian population.
In view of the severity of these acts, we must recognize that such an escalation
represents a new military phase in the colonial war being waged for over 50 years
against the Palestinian people, on whom has been imposed a regime of ethnic
domination that truly constitutes apartheid, in the midst of the twenty-first century.
We must recognize this Israeli policy of aggression for what it is: the commission of
ongoing war crimes and crimes against humanity with impunity, through
extermination, torture, ethnic cleansing, persecution, forced disappearance and other
inhumane treatment.
The increase in the level of violence by the Israeli colonizers against Palestinian
citizens is alarming. This takes place with total impunity, including in the presence of
the Israeli security forces, and represents one of the many forms of oppression against
the heroic Palestinian people, the objective of which is to advance Israeli plans for
annexation.
We are facing a real tragedy. Today, the Palestinian State is dealing with two
pandemics: the one caused by coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and the one caused
by brutal Israeli military aggression, which included the bombing of the only existing
laboratory on the Gaza Strip for processing coronavirus tests. Despite this barbaric
act, the Security Council remains paralyzed due to the obstruction of just one country:
the United States of America, which has facilitated the situation of international
impunity that encourages Israel’s crimes.
Israel daily violates international law in the Occupied Palestini an Territories and
ignores its obligations under the relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions as well as international law. Not only does the occupying Power expand
its colonial occupation every day, but it also couples its apartheid poli cy with the
demolition of homes, expropriation of lands and houses, the proliferation of illegal
settlements, extrajudicial executions, mass arrests and ethnic cleansing.

60/61

21-10605

S/2021/685

Thus, while we are not surprised, we are extremely concerned at the violation
of the ceasefire announced on 21 May by Israel, which again conducted airstrikes on
the Gaza Strip and left dozens wounded. We are referring to the Gaza Strip, which for
over 14 years has been subjected to a criminal Israeli blockade resulting in severe
shortages of fuel, water and electricity; the Gaza Strip, which is known as the largest
open-air prison on the planet and which Secretary-General Antonio Guterres
described as “hell on earth”.
These inhumane violations of the ceasefire, which disregard appeals by the
United Nations and the great majority of the international community, have the
potential to lead to a resumption of violence on the ground, revive provocations and
intolerance and deepen the humanitarian disaster created by the cold calculations of
the Israeli Government, and in no way do they contribute towards the resumption of
the necessary political dialogue and credible and serious negotiations to achieve a
just, comprehensive and lasting peace, on the basis of the two -State solution.
Without further delay, the United Nations Security Council should take
decisions to bring an immediate end to the violence and hostilities, which guarantee
international protection to the Palestinian civilian population, prevent the commission
of crimes against the dignity and human rights of the Palestinian people and ensure
that those responsible for these crimes are held accountable by international justice.
In conclusion, we reaffirm the position of Venezuela in defence of the
sovereignty, independence and the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination. We are committed to continuing to work actively and decisively to
achieve a just, lasting and peaceful solution to one of the most unjust, painful and
prolonged conflicts faced by humanity, and to enable the establishment of an
independent and sovereign Palestinian State, within the pre-1967 borders and with
East Jerusalem as its capital.

21-10605

61/61
