S/PV.7285

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7285th meeting

Thursday, 23 October 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Perceval .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Argentina)

Members:

Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Bante
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Jones

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)
Security Council working methods
Letter dated 8 October 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Argentina to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2014/725)

14-58547 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1458547*

S/PV.7285

Security Council working methods

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

the concept paper (S/2014/725, annex), beginning
with the question of extending the mandate of the
Ombudsperson to other sanction regimes.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/507)
Security Council Working Methods
Letter dated 8 October 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of Argentina
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2014/725 )
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, the Czech Republic, Egypt,
Estonia, Germany, Guatemala, India, Indonesia,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mexico, Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Portugal, Poland,
Romania, Saint Lucia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, Ukraine and Uruguay to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Kimberly
Prost, Ombudsperson, a position established pursuant
to resolution 1904 (2009), and Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/725, which contains the text of
a letter dated 8 October 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Argentina to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept paper on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Ms. Prost.
Ms. Prost: I thank you, Madam President, for this
opportunity to address the Security Council at this
open debate on the topic of enhancing due process in
sanctions regimes. I hope that the reflections based on
my experience as Ombudsperson will help to inform
the discussion today. I will touch on three issues from

2/31

23/10/2014

While international law in this area continues to
evolve, from experience one point is clear: the relevant
jurisprudence, as well as interaction with human rights
officials, courts and bodies, conveys a consistent
message. The imposition of targeted sanctions, which
directly affect the rights of individuals and entities,
without the availability of an independent review
mechanism that can deliver an effective remedy,
is a practice inconsistent with fundamental human
rights obligations. The Office of the Ombudsperson
has been criticized for not going far enough in that
respect in principle, in particular as to the absence of
a binding decision-making power. However, it has not
been disputed — in fact, it has been acknowledged
in some quarters — that if the recommendations
of the Ombudsperson are followed, in practice the
mechanism provides a fair process and can and does
deliver an effective remedy. However, it remains a
procedure applicable only in the context of one targeted
sanctions regime. The ramifications of this, given the
requirements of Article I of the Charter of the United
Nations, in terms of international law and human rights
obligations, is evidently a matter for the consideration
of the Security Council and of States.
A second and related point on the same issue is
that, on a principled basis, there is no evident rationale
as to why an independent review mechanism is made
available to one set of individuals subject to targeted
sanctions, but not to others. That is particularly the case
when the matter is considered from the perspective of
those subject to the sanctions. I have been exposed to
that perspective on several occasions when I have been
contacted by individuals listed on other regimes, and
I must advise them that the mandate of the Office of
the Ombudsperson is not applicable. The inequality of
that mechanism was particularly clear a few years back
where an individual was delisted from the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime and on the same day placed on
another sanctions list. In one context he had access to
a review mechanism, in the other context he did not.
Of course, the other regimes benefit from the focal
point mechanism, which was an important and helpful
mechanism in respect to fair and clear procedures. But
the law is clear that, even with improvements, the focal
point mechanism, by its very nature and structure, does
not have the fundamental characteristics necessary to

14-58547

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

serve as an independent review mechanism or to deliver
an effective remedy.
The point is made that the justification for that
distinction arises from the differing nature and differing
criteria of the regimes, and the need for flexibility in
order to employ sanctions in other regimes effectively
against pressing threats. For the consideration and the
discussion on that point, I simply stress the limited
role that the Ombudsperson plays in this context.
Responsibility to decide upon and interpret the criteria
for listing rests exclusively with the Security Council
and its Committees. The role of the Ombudsperson is
a factual one: to analyze the information to determine
whether the person or entity meets the criteria that have
been set by the Security Council.
The final point on that issue is one which, in my
view, rarely gets sufficient attention, but it is continually
made clear to me in my practice as Ombudsperson.
Fair process is supportive of, and in fact essential to,
the effective implementation of sanctions measures.
Repeatedly, I have heard from Government officials,
legislators and judges about the challenges they face in
implementing these significant measures against their
citizens and residents without access to the underlying
information supporting the measures and, most
important, without the availability of an independent
recourse. Moreover, these are not just legal challenges
in the courts. There are difficulties politically and in
terms of policy in developing, adopting and applying
the necessary legislation and related measures for
implementation.
Those challenges are not new, of course, but what
is new is that in the context of the Al-Qaida regime
there is now a response to them. Reference can be made
to the existence of a mechanism at the international
level that can consistently address these fundamental
concerns. That this is helpful to implementation is not
speculation on my part. Recently I saw an example
where information communicated to a State about the
Ombudsperson process during one of my outreach
activities was instrumental in helping the officials
overcome some practical obstacles to implementation.
As to the legal challenges, the experience definitely
shows that there are no measures at the international
level, or otherwise, that can eliminate the potential for
judicial intervention, and appropriately so. However, if
experience with the Al-Qaida regime is any indication,
the introduction of a fair process mechanism

S/PV.7285

significantly reduces the number of domestic and
regional court challenges. Effectively, the issues come
back to the international level. It is clear that cases have
been filtered off to the Ombudsperson process and, as
well, the fundamental unfairness that provided such
fertile ground for legal challenges is no longer present.
In sum, the Al-Qaida experience demonstrates that
fair process is good for the effective implementation of
sanctions.
I turn to the second point I wish to address briefly,
which is the operation of the Office of the Ombudsperson
within the Al-Qaida regime. As I have stated repeatedly,
it is a robust mechanism and it provides a fair process
in the individual cases. However, there remain several
challenges, which — save for one — I will leave to
my written reports to the Council. The one issue is the
provision of reasons with respect to the decisions taken
on delisting requests. I emphasize that this problem
does not in any way relate to the question of confidential
information, which would never be disclosed in the
reasons.
While there have been many improvements to the
Ombudsperson process, the reality remains that it is
not a transparent one. While the petitioner receives
much-needed information in the dialogue phase, the
only view into the actual decision-making process is
through these reasons. The necessity for reasons in
both retention and delisting cases has been recognized
by the Council in successive resolutions, but despite
the requirements of the resolution there remains a
reluctance in the Committee to provide the factual
detail in the reasons, which is essential to making them
meaningful. The problem is less acute for retention
cases, but even in that context it can be a significant
struggle to obtain disclosure of the full reasoning that
is critical to defending the decisions.
For delisting cases, the view has been expressed that
the petitioners have already received their fair process
because the remedy has been granted. With respect,
however, fair and due process can never be assessed on
the bsais of results or outcome. In fact, to the contrary,
fair process means that regardless of the result, fair
and reasonable steps have been taken in reaching the
decision. In this particular case, a reasoned decision is
the distinction between a fair process and an arbitrary
one. It follows, therefore, that substantive reasons with
factual information, as a part of fair process, should be
provided regardless of the result, as has been mandated
by the Council.

14-585473/31

S/PV.7285

Security Council working methods

It also merits noting that, given the confidential
nature of the sanctions process in general, these reasons
provide a rare opportunity to the Security Council and
its Committee to demonstrate to the petitioner and well
beyond what is factually the case — that decisions
within the targeted sanction regimes are reasoned, fair
and based on underlying information. That can only
serve to enhance the credibility and strength of the
regimes. This is therefore another example of how fair
process, by way of more detailed reasons, would aid the
effectiveness of sanction regimes.
My final point relates to the implementation of the
Ombudsperson regime, as established by the Security
Council. I can be brief, because it is a simple point.
While the Office of the Ombudsperson continues to
deliver on its mandate and to operate independently,
as envisaged by the Security Council, it does so based
on the good will and efforts of individuals within the
Office of the Ombudsperson and within the Secretariat.
Structurally, however, the Office of the Ombudsperson
does not exist, and the administrative and contractual
arrangements supporting it in practice do not provide
institutional safeguards for independence. Given
the extraordinary steps that the Council has taken to
introduce an independent review mechanism into a
targeted sanctions regime in aid of fair process, it
seems imperative that it be implemented in a manner
that ensures its sustainability as such.
In closing, I must acknowledge that it was recently
said that I am obsessed with fair process. Upon
reflection, I accept that categorization, and I think it
is a characteristic that the Council would expect from
the Ombudsperson for the Al-Qaida sanctions regime.
More importantly for the discussion today, it is a focus
motivated by the fact that improved due process has
a dual effect in the context of targeted sanctions. It
evidently enhances the protections for individual rights,
but at the same time it strengthens the credibility of the
regime and contributes to improved implementation
of these important sanctions measures, the ultimate
aim of which is to safeguard our collective rights to
life and security. In my view, cumulatively, these are
protections well worth obsessing about.
Once again, I thank the Council for the opportunity
to provide these comments for this important open
debate.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Ms. Prost
for her briefing.

4/31

23/10/2014

I now give the floor to Ms. Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: I am grateful to the presidency
of Argentina for inviting me to join this open debate
before the Council and for preparing the extremely
helpful concept paper (S/2014/725, annex) to help steer
our discussions this morning. I always welcome the
opportunity to brief the Council in its public meetings.
Indeed, my Office, and the Court as a whole, see the
importance in engaging on various issues, including on
how to advance dialogue on specific situations under
investigation and prosecution by the International
Criminal Court (ICC), as well as on thematic issues of
mutual concern to both our organizations. We believe
that the rights of women and children — indeed, the
rights of all civilians in times of conflict, the protection
of peacekeeping missions and the rule of law — are
topics of common importance to both our institutions,
as is the crucial role justice plays in relation to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
This open debate takes place almost exactly
two years after a similar meeting was organized by
Guatemala on 17 October 2012 (see S/PV.6849). Since
then, I have been pleased to see increasing interaction
between my Office and the Council on both the formal
and informal levels. I would like to thank in particular
States parties to the Rome Statute that have served
on the Council for their commitment to bringing the
International Criminal Court into the discussions. It
is important that States parties within and outside the
Council work together and with one voice to make the
most of the opportunities afforded by the Council for
the promotion of justice and the international rule of
law, and to think proactively about how the Council,
the Assembly of States Parties and the International
Criminal Court can work in concert, within their
respective mandates, to advance these crucially
important goals.
My Office has taken note of the concept note’s
recommendation that the mandate of the Ombudsperson
created by resolution 1904 (2009) be extended to all
sanctions committees, bearing on the experience of
the Office of the Ombudsperson within the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime. I agree with this recommendation. As
it currently stands, almost all of the Security Council’s
sanctions regimes that overlap with situations under
investigation by the ICC have included individuals
against whom warrants of arrests have been issued by
the ICC on their lists. This is true in particular for the

14-58547

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

situations of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire and the Central African Republic.
The biggest exception to this rule has been the
Darfur situation. None of the four individuals under
ICC warrants of arrest have been successfully included
in the Darfur sanctions list established under resolution
1590 (2005). The individuals included have been subject
to travel bans and assets freezes. There are important
areas of convergence between the sanctions regimes
and the work of the ICC as a whole that would benefit
from a single focal point to address them. A pertinent
example is the urgent need to confidentially lift travel
bans for persons who have to be transferred to ICC.
I have full confidence in the current Ombudsperson,
Ms. Kimberly Prost, and my Office and I look forward
to the opportunity to work with her in the future.
As for the concept note’s second subject — the
follow-up of Security Council referrals to the ICC — our
work together could similarly benefit from a focal point.
That focal point could take the form of the Working
Group on International Tribunals, although I am open
to discussions about the advantages and disadvantages
of different approaches. It may make sense to identify a
mechanism similar to the Office of the Ombudsperson
for sanctions regimes, with someone who could help to
secure the necessary resources of the Secretariat, States
and other actors to address follow-up challenges on a
case-by-case basis. Such a mechanism could also ensure
that these efforts are properly documented for purposes
of lessons learned and further refining our approach.
With the help of my Office and other relevant actors,
such a focal point could organize situation-specific
activities, not just on referral situations but on situations
of common interest, such as Central African Republic or
Mali, bringing together all the relevant actors from the
United Nations, States and elsewhere. Those activities
would help to assess the progress achieved, identify
challenges and areas in need of improvement and to
facilitate enhanced coordination among the actors, with
the goal of greater follow-up to the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
As I have highlighted in previous briefings,
follow-up on referrals is a concern for my Office,
and I know it is one that we share with the Council.
As with the Darfur situation, failure to implement
aspects of resolutions referring situations to the ICC
can reflect a much deeper problem. For example, by
my Office’s count, as of last June the Council had
adopted 55 resolutions on the Sudan, with very few

S/PV.7285

of them implemented. That suggests that resolutions
requiring follow-up for each relevant situation should
be reviewed collectively as well as individually. If the
Council’s repeated resolutions calling for disarmament
of the Janjaweed had been respected, for example,
it would have almost certainly had an impact on the
implementation of resolution 1593 (2005) and on my
Office’s investigations. We must look at situations in
their totality to understand how to contribute to ending
impunity therein.
I respectfully call on the Council to consider
using stronger language in its referrals, similar to the
language used in past Council resolutions requiring
cooperation from all States with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. The
language of the Darfur and Libya resolutions leaves a
fair amount of ambiguity as to whether all States are
obliged to cooperate. Similarly, stronger language on
State obligations regarding privileges and immunities
afforded to ICC staff, as well as external counsel
and their respective team members, involved in ICC
proceedings when operating in situation countries
referred to the Court by the Council could also be
helpful.
There are many instances in which the ICC needs
to call upon non-States parties to the Rome Statute
for their assistance. While many have responded
positively, those that have not have effectively provided
a safe haven for individuals against whom warrants of
arrests have been issued by the ICC. I believe stronger
language from the Council on this matter would be
helpful to reiterate the need to fully cooperate with the
Court and to uphold its judicial rulings.
I also hope that our deliberations will include
serious discussions and commitment about designing
effective arrest strategies. It is my sincere hope that the
Council can definitively call on all Member States to
provide the necessary assistance. The Council assumes
a crucial role in the emerging system of international
criminal justice and must embrace that role with all
the opportunities for constructive engagement that it
provides.
Again, a focal point for interaction between the
Council and the ICC could be of practical assistance.
If a focal point could take the lead in coordinating
United Nations, ICC, Assembly of States Parties
and individual State efforts to proactively track and

14-585475/31

S/PV.7285

Security Council working methods

document the whereabouts, activities and travel agenda
of accused persons wanted by the ICC, and could
survey and monitor obligations and responses of States
vis-à-vis the arrest of those individuals, such detailed
information could help to better inform Security
Council discussions about how to promote follow-up.
That could also include whether to add elements of
arrest strategy in peacekeeping mandates. A designated
focal point for interaction between the Security Council
and the ICC could also help to document specific
problems and progress achieved in securing bilateral
cooperation. The focal point could make constructive
recommendations to the Council about how to
facilitate effective investigations and thereby ensure
fuller follow-up to the Council’s resolutions referring
situations to my Office.
Finally, a designated focal point could address the
question of the outstanding response of the Security
Council to the ICC’s findings of non-cooperation, and
subsequent correspondence with the Council. It is not
only a question of focusing on non-cooperation on the
part of specific States, but of looking more positively
and proactively at how to encourage cooperation as
specific challenges arise.
Lastly, given that my Office is currently in the
process of discussing its proposed 2015 budget with
the Court’s States parties, this is an opportune moment
to equally inform the Council that the lack of State or
United Nations financing for Security Council referrals
has a real impact on the ability of my Office to conduct
full and effective investigations in the Darfur and
Libya situations. I encourage the Council to take this
fact into consideration in the light of the urgent need to
revitalize both of those investigations.
Let me conclude by thanking the Council for this
opportunity to speak candidly about the needs of the
International Criminal Court to effectively execute
its mandate. I look forward to further interaction on
specific challenges, and to seeking the intersections
and synergies between the ICC’s and the Council’s
separate and independent mandates that will move us
forward in terms of our effectiveness in the pursuit of
humankind’s yearning to end impunity for mass crimes
that shock our collective conscience and threaten the
peace, security and well-being of the world.
The time for general discussions is coming to
fruition. Let us delve into the details and find concrete
solutions to face the specific challenges that will make

6/31

23/10/2014

the greatest difference to the victims of mass atrocities,
and for the benefit of the maintenance of international
peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Bensouda for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank Ombudsperson Kimberly Prost and International
Criminal Court Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for their
briefings. We also thank the Argentinian presidency for
organizing today’s debate.
In recent years, several concerns over the
Council’s working methods have been addressed. Some
notable improvements include greater transparency
of subsidiary bodies, a more productive working
relationship with regional organizations and enhanced
consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries. Nevertheless, we recognize that there is
always room for more transparency, openness and
efficiency in the Council’s work.
In the case of the Al-Qaida sanctions regime,
the Office of the Ombudsperson has significantly
improved its fairness by allowing independent reviews
of listing cases for the past five years. We appreciate
her active contribution in that regard and reiterate our
commitment to the joint endeavour to achieve a fairer,
more transparent process. We support further discussion
to improve the independence of the Office of the
Ombudsperson, which is essential to her important role
in affecting the decisions of the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities on
delisting and listing. More effective functioning of that
Office in the context of the Al-Qaida sanctions regime
should be pursued as a first step towards ensuring the
due process of sanctions regimes.
On the issue of broadening its application, due
process and other values, including the effectiveness of
sanctions and the unique character of various sanctions
regimes need to be taken into account. We welcome
ongoing efforts to improve United Nations sanctions
mechanisms and look forward to the outcome of such
exercises and other creative ideas in that regard.
I would now like to discuss the follow-up of the
Security Council’s referrals to the International
Criminal Court (ICC). Bringing an end to impunity

14-58547

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

is one of our shared goals for building peaceful and
inclusive societies. The international criminal justice
system plays a growing role in fulfilling this goal by
rendering justice to the victims of heinous crimes
and preventing further atrocities. The International
Criminal Court, along with other ad hoc criminal
tribunals, has developed into a core establishment of
the system, yet the international courts and tribunals,
including the ICC, lack enforcement mechanisms. We
believe that is why the Rome Statute stipulates a close
working relationship between the Security Council
and the International Criminal Court. The Council is
expected to work hand-in-hand with the Court and to
close the enforcement gap by mobilizing the political
will of the international community.
The ICC, for its part, has an increasing role to play in
fulfilling the Council’s responsibility to maintain peace
and security. Given the importance of the role played
by the ICC in facilitating the work of the Council, we
believe that the Council’s decisions to refer situations
to the ICC deserve a more practical and responsible
follow-up. Through such follow-up, I believe that the
Council will be able to deal with the various challenges
achieved — on which Prosecutor Bensouda has briefed
the Council many times before — in a more productive
and effective way. In that regard, my delegation is ready
to work with other Council members on the modalities
of following up the ICC referrals, including but not
limited to establishing a separate subsidiary body or
making use of the existing Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.
Improving the working methods of the Security
Council is indeed a crucial component of bolstering
the effectiveness and legitimacy of the Council’s
work. While serving as the President of the Council in
February 2013 and May 2014, the Republic of Korea
made the utmost effort to promote transparency of the
Council’s work and interaction with the wider United
Nations membership. As Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we also
conducted a number of outreach activities to reinforce
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). We
will continue our efforts towards a more transparent,
accountable and effective Security Council.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this debate and for Argentina’s
and your own commitment to improving the Council’s
working methods as a very diligent and insightful
Chair of the Working Group on Documentation and

S/PV.7285

Other Procedural Questions. I would also like to
thank Ombudsperson Kimberly Prost for her insight
and candour, and Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for
her perseverance in a difficult role, which is vitally
complementary to what we do in the Council.
At a time when the number of crises requiring
urgent Council attention is at historic levels and the
number of people displaced around the world at its
highest since Second World War, an open debate on
working methods might be dismissed as an exercise
in Council introspection. But that is certainly not true.
The number of speakers listed for today — almost
60 — attests to that fact. The way in which this Council
works — our procedures and the way in which we engage
with Member States, regional organizations, civil
society and non-governmental organizations — shapes
our understanding of those crises and our ability to
respond effectively.
The breadth and depth of advice the Council
considers has a direct bearing on the quality and
timeliness of our decisions and our actions. We welcome
the fact that the Council is increasingly hearing from
a diverse range of briefers. Critical to our work is
information about human rights and protection-ofcivilian challenges, which are often, as we know, an
indicator of emerging conflicts and escalating crises. So
it has been important that the Council has been briefed
a number of times this year by the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, the Emergency Relief Coordinator
and a wide range of other United Nations agency heads.
But we must also bring more of these voices from
the front lines into the Chamber, particularly those
of civil society and non-governmental organizations,
such as the young woman Sandra from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, who addressed the children and
armed conflict debate last month (see S/PV.7259), and
Jackson Niamah of Médecins Sans Frontières, who told
us about the terrible impact of Ebo1a on the ground in
Liberia (see S/PV.7268).
We must also use all of the forums and tools at
our disposal to do so. In the past year, the Council
has made use of the wide range of formats available
to it. Arria Formula meetings have brought significant
human rights information to the Council and enabled
civil society voices to be heard. Australia has convened
such meetings on the human rights situations in Syria
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea; jointly
with Chile, on the protection needs of internally

14-585477/31

S/PV.7285

Security Council working methods

displaced persons; and on the lessons from the field in
strengthening the implementation of mission mandates
with respect to women, peace and security. Those issues
must also be considered regularly in the Council’s
formal discussions.
The Council’s effectiveness depends on its
legitimacy, as has just been observed by our colleague
from the Republic of Korea, and its legitimacy is
directly impacted by the Council’s willingness to be
informed by and engaged with the broader membership.
It is in that spirit that Australia advanced the proposal
referenced in the concept note (S/2014/725, annex)
to reinforce the Council’s dialogue with Member
States, which led to Note by the President contained
in document S/2013/515. Regular open debates and an
expansive approach to rule 37 have also assisted. The
holding of wrap-up sessions in public is an important
advance. The shifting of format of a number of country
situations, including the monthly Syria humanitarian
discussion, to ensure a briefing in the open Chamber has
been welcome. But we must have more and meaningful
dialogue with troop- and police-contributing countries
in particular.
There is no procedural issue of greater substantive
import to the Council’s effectiveness and credibility
than the constraints around the use of the veto.
Australia welcomes France’s initiative on restraint in
the use of the veto in situations of mass atrocity. This
deserves very close attention and ambitious followup. Also deserving of the Council’s attention is the
application of Article 27 of the Charter of the United
Nations, which provides that a Council member must
refrain from voting on a matter in which it is a party to
a dispute.
While the Council’s rhetoric on the importance
of holding those responsible for serious international
crimes to account is strong, as everybody knows our
words are not always followed by action. The Council
has failed to extend its full support to the International
Criminal Court, the efforts of which vitally complement
those of the Council and can have a multiplying effect.
That is true not only in respect of the two situations
referred by the Council, but also in respect of other
situations, such as those in Mali, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Côte d’Ivoire. While the formal briefings by the
Prosecutor are obviously valuable, the Council needs
to do much more to support justice and to ensure
that impunity does not fuel future conflicts. The

8/31

23/10/2014

establishment of a permanent forum within the Council
enabling formal and informal discussions about support
for the Court is essential.
It is important that the Council also discuss
the working methods of its subsidiary bodies. My
country has worked to improve the transparency of the
Council’s sanctions-related activities, including in the
three Committees we chair on Al-Qaida, the Taliban
and Iran. We have seen significant improvements in
working methods and transparency; more Committee
meetings with key stakeholders, including regional
and affected States; more Committee press releases;
more briefings by Committee Chairs in open Council
meetings; more open briefings to United Nations
Member States on the work of the Committees; and
increased engagement with United Nations entities
that operate where sanctions apply and have a shared
interest on cross-cutting issues.
But we still need to do more. As a sponsor of the
high-level review of United Nations sanctions currently
under way, we have consulted broadly with Member
States on a range of working-methods issues related
to sanctions, including the role of the focal point. We
propose to convene a briefing on sanctions issues
during our presidency next month to enable a more
detailed Council discussion of these issues.
To conclude, our working methods shape and define
the Council’s effectiveness and impact. We have made
some advances in the past year, and are grateful for that,
but we cannot stop here. The Council must continue
to review its working methods in order to ensure that
we are effective, transparent and representative of all
Member States.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you, Madam, for convening this open debate
under the Argentine presidency on the working methods
of the Security Council. We commend this initiative
and the exemplary manner in which this issue has been
addressed under the direction of the Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Matters for two
consecutive years.
My country endorses the statement to be made
by the representative of Switerzeland on behalf of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group.
The results of our work allow us to highlight what
it is possible to achieve in the Council when our efforts
are characterized by commitment, tenacity and team

14-58547

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

spirit. In particular, we believe that the consensus
adoption of six notes of the President, addressing
issues of key importance to the dynamic of this body,
its greater openness to the enlarged membership and
accountability, deliver added value to our work.
The working methods of the Security Council,
designed to improve its efficiency and transparency,
have a direct impact on the legitimacy of our decisions,
and thus in the exercise of democratic practices.
Chile, as a non-permanent member of the Council,
appreciates the performance of the Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Matters and the
progress made in the various issues proposed, aware
that their effects extend beyond this principal organ of
Nations.
One of the issues of greatest concern to Chile with
respect to the Council’s working methods is the need for
greater transparency, inclusiveness and accountability,
and to safeguard the effectiveness and efficiency of
its proceedings. In that respect, we support the two
proposals guiding this debate, concerning the extension
of the mandate of the Office of the Ombudsperson and
the effective follow-up of situations referred to the
International Criminal Court.
In that regard, Chile values the role that has been
played by the Office of the Ombudsperson since 2009
and its contribution to strengthening due process
through a review system for those who request to be
removed from the list of sanctions of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities. Our country supports the initiative to ensure
that other Committees can benefit from this entity, with
a possible extension of the Office’s mandate to other
sanctions committees as a mechanism for promoting
respect for due process in our procedures. While we are
aware that there is room to improve the 1267 Committee
mechanism, as suggested by the Omburdsperson
herself, we are also convinced that the very existence
of the post of Ombudsperson provides the necessary
guarantees of human rights and due process, given
that she can make recommendations to the Al-Qaida
Committee independently and impartially.
Regarding the monitoring of Security Council
referrals to the International Criminal Court, Chile
considers that the responsibility of this organ should
not be understood as being limited to its referral
of situations to the Court and its hearing of an

S/PV.7285

occasional brief presentation of its Prosecutor. The
Council is responsible for maintaining appropriate
dialogue with the Prosecutor and for undertaking
responsible follow-up — and adopting the necessary
measures — of the information that the Prosecutor
and the Court communicate to the Council. That is
so because two years ago the Council, in the context
of its responsibility to maintain international peace
and security, embraced the goal of ensuring justice
and accountability for the most heinous crimes
against humanity, pursuant to the Rome Statute. The
Council’s silence, the Prosecutor’s briefings and the
communications of the Court and the President of the
Assembly of States Parties point, in our opinion, to a
failure in meeting that responsibility. We believe that
enhancing cooperation and communication channels
between the Council and the International Criminal
Court on these cases is desirable and feasible, and we
are willing to pursue this line of work.
We cannot conclude without recalling that the
greatest political challenge that we must continue to
address is the comprehensive reform of the Security
Council. That is why we wish to reiterate in this context
that Chile favours a serious debate in the General
Assembly on the French proposal to limit the veto in
cases of crimes that involve the responsibility to protect,
and to strengthen the preventive role Security Council.
This is one aspect of the irrevocable commitment of
my country to United Nations action and to promoting
the protection, dignity and fundamental rights of all
people.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation thanks Argentina for its initiative
of holding today’s open debate, and for its outstanding
work as Chair of the Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Matters.
In accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, the Council should elaborate its own rules of
procedure. In recent years, while meeting all its other
responsibilities, the Council has paid close attention
to improving its working methods. These efforts have
borne fruit. The number of open meetings convened
by the Council has risen every year and the Council
presidencies have persisted in briefing non-Coucil
Members on a monthly basis, thereby enhancing the
transparency of its work.
Through various flexible means such as informal
interactive dialogues, the Council has attached

14-585479/31

S/PV.7285

Security Council working methods

importance to improving its exchanges and interaction
with the Member States and regional and subregional
organizations. Since the beginning of this year, the
Council has adopted four notes of the President on
improving its working methods. These targeted
measures have strengthened the mechanism-building
process within the Council, contributing to its more
pragmatic and efficient work, and helping the Council
to better fulfil its Charter responsibilities.
The current international security situation is highly
complex. The continual outbreak of regional conflicts
and local wars, coupled with the interlinked threats
and challenges to security posed by terrorism, have
made the responsibilities and mission of the Security
Councileven more arduous. The wider United Nations
membership also has high expectations of the Council.
China supports the ongoing improvement of the working
methods of the Council so that it can conduct its work
more fairly, efficiently and transparently, better meet
the expectations of the international community, and
play a greater role in the maintenance of international
peace and security.
I would now like to focus on the following points.
First, the Council should adhere to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations as its
guide in promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes.
The Council should make use of the prevention, good
offices and mediation tools entrusted to it by the Charter
in an integrated manner in order to actively facilitate
political dialogue and, through consultations and
negotiations, promote reconciliation in order to achieve
lasting peace and stability and safeguard international
peace and security. That is also an important reflection
of the Council’s role in the peaceful resolution of
disputes under the principles of international law and
its fulfilment of the responsibilities entrusted to it by
the Charter.
Secondly, the Council should focus on priorities
and coordinate the division of labour. Under the
Charter, the Council has the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Meanwhile, the Charter also includes provisions on
the responsibilities of other United Nations organs. All
United Nations bodies should fulfil their respective
mandates, and, under the Charter, the Council should
focus its energy and resources on addressing the
most urgent issues that threaten international peace
and security. On thematic issues, it should enhance
its consultation and coordination with the General

10/31

23/10/2014

Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and other
United Nations bodies in order to avoid duplication of
effort.
Thirdly, it should continue to pursue democratic
consultations and political collective decision-making.
Council members share the same responsibilities for
maintaining international peace and security. The more
complex and urgent the crises and challenges are, the
greater the need for Council members to work together
to be united in purpose and efforts and to cooperate
fully in ways that reflect the principles of justice and
democracy. All Council members should have ample
time for studying the draft resolutions and presidential
statements presented and, through patient consultations
and negotiations, reach broad consensus and preserve
the solidarity of the Council, rather than forcing texts
through on which there are still major differences.
Fourthly, there should be stepped-up communication
and pooling of ideas. The Council should pay more
attention to listening to the views of the general
membership, in particular the countries on its agenda,
and should step up communication and dialogue with
the countries contributing troops to the peacekeeping
operations and with the Secretariat.
Questions related to Africa have always been a
major focus of the Security Council. Therefore, the
Council should attach importance to applying the
expertise and experiences of the African Union and
other regional organizations and their advantages in
terms of history, geography and culture; strengthen its
communication with them, and fully hear their opinions
before making decisions; and support the important
role played by regional organizations and the countries
themselves, third-party States and organizations to play
a more important role in the resolution of conflicts.
I thank Ms. Prost, Ombudsperson of the Council’s
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities, and Ms. Bensouda, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for their
briefings. China supports discussions on improving the
sanctions mechanisms of the Council in order to ensure
that the information related to listing applications is
complete and accurate.
The establishment of the post of Ombudsman for
the Council’s Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee has its
own special background and needs. In the light of the
work of other Sanctions Committees, the Council may

14-58547

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

wish to study the question as to whether the mandate
of the Ombudsperson should be extended to other
Sanctions Committees.
In handling relations between the Council and the
ICC, China’s position is consistent. We believe that the
ICC’s efforts to seek justice should take into account
the urgent needs of maintaining regional peace and
stability. The ICC should strictly abide by the principle
of complementarity and support the Council’s efforts to
fulfil its responsibilities under the Charter.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today’s meeting, the seventh the Security
Council has held on the issue of its working methods,
serves as yet another confirmation of the unswerving
attention we give to proposals of States Members of the
United Nations on improving the procedural aspects of
the Council’s work, subject, of course, to the unchanged
understanding that working methods and decisions
to modify them fall exclusively within the remit of
the Council, and relevant dialogue must be balanced,
professional and without any politicization of the topics
discussed. The objectives of changes and improvements
in the work of the Security Council must, by definition,
enhance the effectiveness and the rapid response
capacity in Council’s operations, for a more optimal,
comprehensive implementation of the tasks before it,
namely, to maintain international peace and security,
for which the Council naturally bears the primary
responsibility within the United Nations system.
Very often we hear criticisms of the Council
that it encroaches upon the competencies of other
United Nations bodies. We share such concerns. Our
colleagues on the Council know full well that we show
restraint vis-à-vis the consideration of initiatives to
discuss thematic topics, in particular generic ones in
the socioeconomic, humanitarian, health and human
rights fields, inter alia. We deem that the Council
should focus on country subjects and issues where it
can and indeed must take concrete decisions.
We also understand the reasons for concerns
regarding whether the Council resorts too often to
Chapter VII, including the imposition of sanctions,
especially, to put it gently, with respect to the possibly
ambiguous humanitarian consequences. In that respect,
I would like to underscore that Russia has consistently
championed a more active use by the Security Council
of the instruments of preventive diplomacy, investing
in the development of measures and mechanisms for
the peaceful settlement of conflicts and crises. We

S/PV.7285

must more fully and more broadly use the provisions
of Chapter VI and Chapter VIII of the Charter. All of
that, I repeat, unfortunately falls outside the parameters
of “methods of work of the Security Council” and of
course bears no relation to the working methods of the
Security Council or the basic Charter provision for the
right of veto.
We share the view that only painstaking work on
improving the methods of work of the Security Council
can make it even more effective and in keeping with the
realities of the day. To that end, under the chairmanship
of Argentina, we have a successful and fruitfully
operating Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions. We note that the
Working Group meets on a regular basis and with the
rational and constructive cooperation of all interested
Members of the Organization.
We have participated actively in the work of the
Group. In October, members of the Group agreed to
a note that was prepared upon our initiative, namely,
a note of the President of the Security Council on the
issue of the order of taking the floor in Council, the
first such type in nearly 70 years of operation of this
United Nations body. We are also working on another
draft note, which is designed to tidy up the practice of
holding Arria Formula meetings. Finally, this month, we
submitted a draft note on the issue of the preparation of
the annual report of the Security Council to the General
Assembly.
With regard to that document, we often hear
criticism related, first and foremost, to its informational
nature and the lack of an analytical component. We
believe that the Council must respond to the demands
of the States Members of the Organization in a relevant
way and review the method by which the report is drawn
up. We would propose, inter alia, not overburdening the
document with statistics and data, which are in any case
accessible on the website of the Security Council, and
which are an unnecessary use of budgetary resources.
Instead, we would propose changing the format for the
introduction of the report, including an assessment of
the work of the Security Council by each delegation
serving as a member thereof, which would add a purely
analytical component to the document and allow every
delegation to express its views regarding the outcome
of the work of the Council for the year.
In conclusion, I can say that the Security Council
continues to react in a flexible way to the intensification
of international relations that has led to the expansion

14-5854711/31

S/PV.7285

Security Council working methods

23/10/2014

of the Council’s agenda. Its working methods are
constantly evolving and are being improved as realities
dictate.

The issues of cooperation between the United Nations
and the ICC are also guided by a separate agreement
between the two.

It was with great interest that we listened to the
briefing by the Ombudsman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011), Ms. Kimberly Prost. Her
current authority in enshrined in resolution 2161 (2014);
her role provides the optimal level of transparency and
fairness in the procedures of the Committee’s work.
In that regard, there are serious questions with regard
to proposals aimed at expanding the mandate of the
Ombudsman. We believe that their implementation
will lead only to a dilution of the sanctions regime and
undermine the principles fundamental to the work of
the Committee. The initiative to expand the mandate
of the Ombudsperson to other sanctions bodies of the
Security Council will require careful work and must be
considered in the light of the experience gained by the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, which, we must be
honest, is somewhat ambiguous.

But on the substance of this issue, we would note the
following. In carrying out its mandate of maintaining
international peace and security, the Security Council
consistently deals with issues of impunity. Here it has
solid experience, including the creation of special ad
hoc tribunals and its participation in the setting up of
other judicial bodies with an international element. The
creation in 2002 of the ICC led to a new partner to work
with the United Nations as an organization independent
from the United Nations. The Court and the United
Nations must cooperate within the framework of their
mandate and, of course, with mutual respect for their
prerogatives.

We take note of the large volume of work carried out
by the Ombudsperson in considering delisting requests,
but we are forced to note that the practical activity of
this institution is not always up to the tasks before it.
Quite often we are faced with narrow approaches that
disregard the views of interested States and that also
contain a subjective assessment of the level of terrorist
threat.
In our view, it would be more important,
given today’s realities, to, rather than create new
structures, enhance the existing sanctions mechanism.
Achieving that objective will, of course, hinge on the
implementation by States of the relevant commitments
in that context. We deem unwarranted any references
to national judicial bodies ignoring the restrictions
imposed by the Security Council. Such an approach
brings into question the prerogatives of the Council and
the coordinating role of this international Organization
in combating terrorism.
Regarding the parameters for the cooperation of
the Security Council with the International Criminal
Court (ICC), we are in no way certain that this needs
to be discussed in principle within the context of the
methods of work of the Security Council. This topic, we
believe, touches on a great many aspects of the nature
of the Court itself and its basic founding documents.
12/31

As we can see in the annual reports of the Court
to the General Assembly as well as its Prosecutor’s
briefings to the Council, the key problem for the
ICC’s operations remains the low level of cooperation
between States and the Court, inter alia, in enforcing
the relevant arrest warrants. Here States parties to the
Rome Statute ask on a regular basis about the followup activities of the Council regarding the cases that are
referred by it to the ICC.
No one, we are sure, would claim that the Council
does not cooperate with the ICC. Confirmation of this
is the fact that twice a year we hear and discuss detailed
reports by the Prosecutor of the Court on cases referred
to the ICC. Ms. Bensouda also visits the Council in
the context of its consideration of other items, as she
did today, for example. The Council today therefore
has robust channels for interaction with the Court and
opportunities for the consideration of emerging issues.
We stand ready to continue to participate in such work.
But let us not forget that the ICC, unlike ad hoc
tribunals, was not created by a Security Council
decision, so the Council cannot automatically take upon
itself the functions of the enforcement of ICC decisions.
For these same reasons, we do not deem it justified to
further institutionalize relations between the Council
and the ICC, even less to create new special structures
or artificially expand existing mandates or structures.
In our view, the reasons for States’ lack of
willingness to cooperate with the ICC to a large extent
lie within the Rome Statute itself, as well as with the
Court’s accumulated practice, including on bringing to
justice senior public officials of States. For example,

14-58547

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

the Court’s interpretation of the immunity of these
individuals has been somewhat ambiguous.
By way of conclusion — and I know this is a lengthy
statement — I should like to note that the Court faces
a complex set of tasks in delivering justice in complex
conditions that require a very delicate process and a
careful, tried and balanced approach regarding the
legal activities undertaken. We wish the Court every
possible success in this respect.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank the delegation of
Argentina for having organized this important debate
and for the excellent concept note (S/2014/725) provided
to guide our discussions. I also thank Prosecutor
Bensouda and Ombudsperson Prost for their briefings.
My delegation welcomes this opportunity to share
ideas on the working methods of the Security Council
in the format of an open debate, where the views of
the broader membership of the United Nations can be
heard.
Nigeria aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Saint Lucia on behalf
of the L.69 group.
As it is the main organ of the United Nations
charged with the maintenance of international peace
and security, the way the Security Council conducts its
work is a matter of great interest to the States Members
of the United Nations and, indeed, to the international
community at large. We are therefore pleased to see
that that the Council’s working methods have evolved
over the years to accommodate the concerns of the
broader membership for greater transparency and
closer engagement with non-members. Even then, there
is still considerable room for improvement.
Enhancing due process and sanctions regimes
is a matter of importance to Nigeria. While targeted
sanctions are the critical tool at the disposal of the
Security Council, we see a need for them to be employed
with clarity as to the procedures for listing and
delisting individuals and entities. That is where the role
of the Ombudsperson becomes crucial. In the current
dispensation, the role of the Ombudsperson is limited
to the Al-Qaida sanctions regime by the resolution that
created the office. That means that only individuals
listed on the Al-Qaida sanctions list can benefit from
due process; other sanctions regimes do not have such
a vetting mechanism for individuals and entities facing
targeted sanctions.

S/PV.7285

In the interests of fairness, and to address the
concerns of Council members and the broader
membership, we believe that the Council should
take steps to improve due process in other sanctions
regimes. One way to do this would be by placing
all sanctions regimes under the purview of the
Ombudsperson. We note the concern expressed in the
seventh and eighth reports (S/2014/73 and S/2014/553)
of the Ombudsperson that, while the Ombudsperson has
operated independently in practice, no separate office
has been established for the post, as mandated by the
resolution establishing it. This situation is clearly not
conducive to the autonomy that the Office requires in
terms of administrative independence. Nigeria strongly
supports the establishment of a separate office of the
Ombudsperson, as mandated, as well as measures that
would strengthen its autonomy.
In terms of follow-up action by the Security Council
to its own referrals to the International Criminal Court,
we note the concerns of Member States that the Council
has not been effective. The fact that the Council has
failed to respond to the seven letters it has received from
the President of the ICC on the obligation to cooperate
of the Court would seem to validate this point.
Our view on this is that the Council may benefit
from having a mechanism to handle follow-up action
on referrals similar to the way in which the Council’s
informal working group on international tribunals has
been dealing with issues pertaining to the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and that for Rwanda.
That may help to protect the credibility of the Council
and the integrity of the ICC.
Nigeria would like to acknowledge the value
that the briefings of the Secretariat add to the work
of the Council. These briefings, by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of
Political Affairs, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the heads of
special political missions, the heads of peacekeeping
missions and other senior staff, have been timely and
highly informative.
We would like to make special mention of the
briefings by the Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on the Prevention of Genocide, which have
alerted the Council to situations where populations may
be at risk. The briefings have also allowed the Council
to gain greater insights into the underlying causes

14-5854713/31

S/PV.7285

Security Council working methods

of conflicts while highlighting the need for civilians
to be protected against the risk of mass atrocities.
Accordingly, the Council has emphasized the protection
of civilians in the mandates of peacekeeping missions
where the State lacks the capacity to offer protection.
I would like to conclude by commending you,
Madam President, for your astute leadership, as Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions. Your efforts at making the
Council more responsive to the concerns of the broader
United Nations membership and the adoption of four
presidential notes under your leadership attest to the
commitment you have shown in the attainment of your
mandate.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this important open debate on
the working methods of the Security Council and for the
concept note (S/2014/725, annex) your delegation has
prepared to guide our discussion. I also thank Madam
Kimberly Prost, Ombudsperson of the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, and Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for their respective
briefings.
Rwanda aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Saint Lucia on behalf
of the group of support of draft resolution A/61/L.69.
I will now make additional comments in my national
capacity.
Let me start by congratulating you, Madam
President, and your delegation on your able leadership
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions. Indeed, Argentina’s
chairmanship of the Working Group led to laudable
progress, notably through the adoption of important
notes by the President on intra-Council dialogue, on
consultations between the Council, the Secretariat and
troop- and police-contributing countries, on dialogue
with non-Council members and on penholders, among
others. Rwanda believes that those notes will greatly
contribute to a more transparent, democratic and
effective Security Council, provided that they are
implemented in good faith.
Rwanda also appreciates that Argentina will
organize at the end of its presidency a wrap-up session
under the format of a public briefing. We note with
satisfaction that this public format, introduced by

14/31

23/10/2014

Rwanda in its presidency in July this year, was since
adopted by all countries that have decided to organize
wrap-up sessions, namely, the United Kingdom
in August, Argentina in October and Australia in
November. We hope that all Council members will
continue on that path so that we can all contribute to
the transparency and effectiveness of our work.
Nevertheless, despite the current positive trends
in the working methods of the Security Council, we
have yet to live up to the expectations of the 2005
World Summit, mainly with respect to representativity
and legitimacy, to efficiency and effectiveness,
to transparency and accountability, and to the
implementation of Council decisions. In that regard,
we hope that in the months to come, the Council will
make tangible progress on the issue of penholders on
the basis of the note by the President S/2014/268, of
14 April 2014, which recognized the right of any Council
member to be a penholder. That reform would allow
Council members representing the regions affected by
conflicts on the Council’s agenda to at least share the
pen with the current penholders. But, most importantly,
Rwanda believes that there is a need to reform the use
of the right to veto, on the basis of the French proposal.
Indeed, given the recent history of the Council and its
failure in the past, permanent members should discuss
and agree on how to refrain from using the veto in cases
of mass atrocities.
Rwanda recognizes the tremendous job done by
Madame Kimberly Prost as Ombudsperson of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities. The appointment of the Ombudsperson
to that Committee was a positive step towards the
implementation of paragraph 109 of the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1).
In that respect, we would like to express our support
to the extension of the Ombudsperson’s mandate to all
sanctions lists without exception. That is just common
sense. And I urge Council members that are still
reluctant on that issue to reconsider their positions and
put the interests of the countries for which the sanctions’
regimes were established above their national and
strategic interests. Indeed, we are of the view that such
enhancement of due process in a sanctions regimes will
result in more fairness, effectiveness and credibility of
sanctions regimes.
As recalled in the concept note, the Rome Statute
of the ICC grants the Council the power to refer to the

14-58547

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

ICC situations in which crimes within its jurisdiction
were committed, article 13 (b), as well as the power
to defer an investigation or prosecution for a period of
12 months for reasons relating to the maintenance of
international peace and security, article 16. We agree
that the Security Council should ensure that both
provisions on the referral and deferral are implemented,
when the conditions set out by the Rome Statute are
met. We join the Council President in regretting that no
response was provided to any of the seven letters from
the President of the ICC in relation to the cooperation
of States with the Court. We believe that the Council
should take time to thoroughly discuss the issue and
provide an appropriate response to those letters.
In the same vein, as much as we respect the
function of the President and the Prosecutor of the ICC,
we believe that African Members of the United Nations
also deserve respect and consideration. While the
concept note deplores the Council’s failure to respond
to the seven letters of the President of the ICC, I will
take the opportunity to remind this body that decisions
of African Heads of State and Government adopted
during at least seven different summits of the African
Union (AU) since February 2009 requesting the
deferral of the case against the President of the Sudan,
in accordance with article 16 of the Rome Statute,
remained unanswered. Indeed, as the AU Heads of State
and Government put it, “The search for justice should
pursued in a way that does not impede or jeopardize
efforts aimed at promoting lasting peace”.
In addition, I would also wish to recall the AU
summit, held on 12 October 2013, in Addis Ababa,
which had requested the deferral of cases against
the President and Deputy President of Kenya, in
accordance with the same article 16 of the Rome
Statute. Despite the interactive dialogue between an
African ministerial contact group and members of the
Council, and despite a draft resolution introduced by
the three African members of the Council, the call of
representatives of our whole continent was not heeded.
Therefore, Rwanda, while regretting that letters of the
ICC President were unanswered, would advise Council
members to avoid double standards, particularly when
African leaders are involved.
What can we do? First, Rwanda recalls that the
Informal Working Group was created for the two
international criminal tribunals created by the Council.
Therefore, its work cannot be extended to the ICC,
which is a treaty-based jurisdiction. In that regard, I

S/PV.7285

wish to recall that Rwanda, as well as other United
Nations Member States, is not a party to the Rome
Statute.
Secondly, for the situations in the Sudan and Libya
and any other situation that could be referred by the
Council, we are of the opinion that the regular Council
meetings, where the ICC Prosecutor presents her
report, are the appropriate avenues to consider those
situations in all their aspects, including the cooperation
of Member States with the Court.
Thirdly, Rwanda believes that relationships
between the Council and the ICC should be enhanced,
including through regular interactive dialogues with
the Prosecutor to discuss all pending issues in relation
to Council referrals and requested deferrals or through
area formula meetings with various organizations,
including civil society, which would highlight particular
cases that require the attention of the Council. And the
Permanent Representative of Australia mentioned that
his country has co-organized some of those meetings.
Rwanda, although not a patry to the Rome Statute, is
open to that permanent dialogue with the ICC or on the
work of the ICC, as our shared goal is to fight impunity
and ensure accountability for the most serious crimes.
I will conclude by reiterating Rwanda’s commitment
to working for continued improvement of the working
methods of the Security Council by supporting
fairness and due process in sanctions regimes and by
enhancing interaction between the Council and the ICC
with a view to making sure that justice and peace are
equally achieved, while upholding the Charter’s equal
sovereignty of States.
Mr. Bante (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Madam President, for taking the initiative to organize
this debate. I would also like to thank Ms. Prost, the
Ombudsperson, and Ms. Bensouda, the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for their
briefings.
Like every organization, the Security Council has
its own procedures and methods of work, which are
frequently reviewed with a view to adapting them and
also to take into account sanctions and the demands
of transparency and fairness. Thus, the principle of
targeted sanctions established in resolution 917 (1994),
on Haiti, has enabled their impact to be limited to those
targets and therefore made them more acceptable to
the international community. The criteria for listing
and delisting, which were criticized for their lack

14-5854715/31

S/PV.7285

Security Council working methods

of precision and fairness, have also been improved
as a result of recommendations made to the Council
at the 2005 World Summit of Heads and State and
Government.
The Council’s creation of the Office of the
Ombudsperson of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida
and associated individuals and entities, charged with
delisting issues, has promoted communication and
transparency as well as the adoption of new procedures
for introducing the necessary corrections. Since 2013,
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions, which is currently chaired
by Argentina, has also initiated several efforts aimed
at improving the Council’s work that required the
consensus of the members as a whole. I should take
this opportunity to congratulate you and the members
of the Working Group, Madam President, for those
achievements.
However, they have not solved every problem,
for we continue to hear the voices of those who
condemn the lack of transparency and respect for due
process in the application of sanctions on persons and
organizations suspected of committing international
crimes, including acts of terrorism. Those reproaches,
largely well founded, speak to the need for a review
of the procedures, while taking into account the basic
rights of those targeted by the sanctions.
In that regard, the Office of the Ombudsperson,
which has been acknowledged today as representing a
step forward in this area, deserves to be strengthened
and would benefit from more support and resources.
We believe it should have greater independence if
that would enable it to bring more justice, fairness
and transparency to the job. We also believe that the
procedure instituted through resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida should be
expanded to the other Sanctions Committees and that
supplementary steps should be taken to enable States
and their tribunals whose citizens are targeted by the
sanctions to be adequately informed about the various
processes.
We have previously explained our country’s
position on the issue of the Security Council’s
referrals to institutions and the situation regarding its
cooperation with the ICC. Chad, which is a party to
the Rome Statute, believes that combating impunity
helps to protect innocent civilian populations during
armed conflicts, most of which, and many of them very
16/31

23/10/2014

violent, take place today in Africa. The work of the ICC
can unquestionably help to limit the loss of human lives
and environmentcourage the parties to such conflicts
to abide by the principles and rules of human rights
and international humanitarian law. That is why States’
cooperation with the ICC remains essential.
However, as we have said, we must not lose sight
of security considerations when it comes to deferring
the investigation of certain high political officials
by the Court. In that regard, we have urged that the
views of regional organizations be taken into account
and a dialogue be initiated with them on the issue.
This question should normally be discussed within
the framework of the Conference of States Parties and
exclusively among States parties. We hope that in the
long run the States Parties will consider amending
articles 13 (b) and 16 of the Statute in order to enable
the Court to carry out its judicial mandate in complete
independence and free of any political influence.
Chad associates itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the Group of 77.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this debate and for your
commitment in guiding the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Matters. As
we know, this year has been one of the most productive
in terms of the President’s notes, and we greatly
appreciate that. I would also like to warmly thank
today’s briefers, Ms. Kimberly Prost and Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, for their contributions. Issues of due process
in sanctions regimes and, in particular, of the Council’s
follow-up of its referrals to the International Criminal
Court (ICC) have long been discussed in the context
of the larger debate on the Council’s role in ensuring
accountability and justice.
Before making a few specific points, I would like
to briefly refer to the recent progress made in the work
of the Council. This year saw the number of public
meetings increase by 25 per cent compared to those in
2013. Of the 10 Council presidencies to date this year,
seven opted for open wrap-up meetings. This year,
briefings to the United Nations general membership
on the monthly programme of work, as well as endof-month briefings, have been common. The Council’s
website has been further improved and a new website
dedicated to sanctions launched, while the use of
e-rooms has been helpful in managing information
flows.

14-58547

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

While progress has been made, there is still ample
room for further improving the Council’s working
methods, first in regard to how we translate our
statements on justice and accountability into tangible
efforts to end impunity. In that context, the link between
the Council and the ICC demands a fresh look and new
ideas. Executing arrest warrants is one of the Court’s
most difficult challenges. While the Council has made
referrals to the ICC, it has so far failed to take any action
with regard to repeated ICC notifications, which does
not speak well of its ability to enforce its decisions and
therefore affects its credibility. Whether we can task
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
with tackling those issues, or whether we should develop
a different format for it, we need to effectively address
the relationship between the Council and the Court as
well as the issue of follow-up mechanisms.
Secondly, the Security Council increasingly
relies on sanctions regimes as an indispensable tool
for maintaining international peace and security.
Sanctions, whether intended to coerce, constrain
or deter, can serve their underlying purpose only
when they are properly targeted. The Office of the
Ombudsperson has proved to be an effective mechanism
for improving the credibility of measures taken within
the Al-Qaida sanctions regime. A core aspect of such a
mechanism — its independence — must be continually
upheld, including by removing any remaining channels
of interference, ranging from various administrative
constraints to procedural filters.
Ensuring the systematic and consistent application
of due process is fundamental. We fully agree with
Ms. Prost that those targeted under other sanctions
regimes should have the same access to mechanisms
of redress. We should reconcile any existing
inconsistencies between various sanctions regimes,
either by extending or replicating the Ombudsperson’s
mandate under the Al-Qaida sanctions regime or
by applying other mechanisms to the same effect.
Transparency and outreach in the work of the Sanctions
Committees remain paramount, and I fully agree with
our Australian colleague’s remarks today to the effect
that public briefings to the Council should be standard
rather than an exception. The Sanctions Committees
should also ensure that they are better heard by sending
their messages through press releases and making sure
that those concerned can read them in other relevant
languages besides English and French, such as Arabic
in the case of Yemen, for instance.

S/PV.7285

In our view, Sanctions Committee briefings by the
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, and by the Special Adviser on the Prevention
of Genocide, as well as exchanges between Sanctions
Committees, panels of experts and the Prosecutor of the
ICC, can be very useful and should become common
practice.
Thirdly, we believe that the structure of the
annual report of the Council to the General Assembly
should be updated in view of the vastly improved
Security Council website and the detailed monthly
assessments prepared by all the Council presidencies.
The $2,500 per page spent on the annual report raises
the question of whether that is the best way to spend
our permanently scarce resources when most of the
aggregated information is already available on the
Web. My delegation has submitted proposals to the
Working Group on the matter. At the same time, we
should further encourage increasing the analytical and
thought-provoking aspects of the annual report.
Fourthly, while dialogue between the Council and
the troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs
and PCCs) has improved, in our view one formal
annual meeting with the force commanders may
no longer be enough. The Council needs to engage
with them more regularly and improve the quality of
exchanges, especially as we are moving from numbersbased peacekeeping operation processes to capacitybased planning and a shift in the expectations and
role of peacekeepers. It must also ensure that there is
a meaningful follow-up to such discussions. TCCs/
PCCs should be engaged earlier in the force generation
process. Regular interim briefings by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of
Field Support on planning and force generation would
enable Council members and TCCs to better address
existing gaps.
Lastly, my delegation strongly supports the French
initiative on limiting the use of the veto, especially
in cases of mass atrocities, genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity. The Council’s failure to take
action in preventing the worst atrocities and crimes
against humanity is erosive to its credibility. The use of
the veto should therefore be part and parcel of our future
deliberations and, as our Australian colleague said,
deserves ambitious follow-up. Furthermore, meetings
under the Arria Formula format and horizon-scanning
briefings by the Department of Political Affairs should

14-5854717/31

S/PV.7285

Security Council working methods

be used more vigorously to signal emerging crises and
provide sharper focus on situations where populations
are at risk of mass atrocities and crimes against
humanity.
Before concluding, let me also thank our colleagues
from the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group and non-governmental organizations such as
Security Council Report and others, whose efforts
at encouraging transparency and improving the
institutional memory regarding the work of the
Council serve as a constant reminder to Council
members to advance efforts aimed at improving its
working methods. A more effective, transparent and
open Security Council is in the interests of the entire
membership of the United Nations.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to thank you, Madam President, for
holding this important meeting and express to you our
sincere appreciation for the important role played by
Argentina in chairing the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions. I would
also like to extend my thanks to the Ombudsperson,
Ms. Kimberly Prost, and the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for
their comprehensive briefings.
We welcome the adoption of the sixth note by
the President (S/2010/507) on improving the working
methods of the Council and increasing cooperation and
coordination with the General Assembly in a manner
that serves transparency and accountability. However,
in spite of the progress achieved, the international
community continues to look to the Security Council,
in view of the successive challenges the world is facing,
and expects a more competent Council that is able to
take immediate measures to face those challenges in a
manner that is commensurate with its Charter mandate
to preserve international peace and security.
I do not intend to delve into the details of the items
before us, but I will speak briefly on issues related to
our region.
A look at the Middle East reveals that the Security
Council has thus far not been able to find a just and
lasting solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict or to settle
the Syrian crisis. Those are examples of situations in
which people and countries have suffered for a very
long time and the Security Council has not been able
to deal with the situation on an equal footing, leading

18/31

23/10/2014

to the application of double standards that threaten the
credibility of the Council.
We believe that the promotion of the central role
of the Council in preserving international peace and
security must reflect reality and meet the expectations
of the States Members of the Organization. The issues
it tackles in its discussions on its methods of work are
not confined to internal issues concerning Council
members alone, but have an impact on the entire
Organization.
We therefore believe there is a need to increase
transparency and coordination between the Security
Council and the General Assembly. This should be carried
out in the following ways. First, the Council should take
into consideration the Assembly’s recommendations
on issues that have to do with international peace and
security, including peacekeeping operations. Regular
meetings should be organized between the Presidents
of the Council and the Assembly on the work of both
organs. Certain working methods of the Council, in
particular open briefings by the Chairs of Sanctions
Committees, should become the norm, instead of closed
consultations.
The importance of sanctions lies in their application,
including in cases of travel bans, assets freezes and
arms embargoes. That requires further cooperation
at the national level and additional efforts to update
sanctions lists with a view to implementing United
Nations sanctions. The Council should also show more
firmness and continue to exert pressure on the different
parties to comply with the sanctions with a view to
avoiding any further exacerbation of a given situation.
Proceeding from that, our delegation has worked
on raising awareness among all Member States of the
importance of providing assistance to countries affected
by sanctions and the need for countries’ commitment in
fulfilling their duties in accordance with the sanctions
regime.
The Office of the Ombudsperson has also
contributed to enhancing transparency and justice in
the implementation of sanctions regimes, in particular
those against Al-Qaida, and that has enhanced
credibility. My delegation believes that expanding the
mandate of the Office of the Ombudsperson to include
other Sanctions Committees is a worthwhile proposal
that should be seriously considered. However, in
tackling the expansion of that mandate, we should first
remove all obstacles that face the work of the Office

14-58547

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

and review the contractual status of the Ombudsperson
and administrative measures that have to do with the
work and autonomy of her Office.
In that regard, we believe that the Security Council’s
efforts and those of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) are aimed at preserving international peace and
security — hence the importance of continuing close
cooperation between the two entities. The ICC can
contribute to efforts to prevent the exacerbation of
conflicts through the prosecution of perpetrators of mass
atrocities, war crimes, crimes against humanity and
the most serious crimes that threaten the international
community as a whole as well as international peace
and security. We believe the proposals to establish a
follow-up mechanism on the referrals by the Security
Council to the ICC also merits consideration and should
be taken into account with a view to ending impunity
and ensuring that all parties concerned are prepared to
cooperate with the ICC. The termination of the mandate
of the International Criminal Tribunals for the Former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda leaves the ICC as the only legal
entity for prosecuting international crimes. We believe
that it is in the interests of the Council to enhance its
cooperation with the ICC to preserve international
peace and security and achieve the goal of ending
impunity for crimes committed during conflicts.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Madam President, for convening this open
debate. Under the leadership of Argentina and your
dynamic leadership, the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions has
produced significant results, contributing to greater
transparency and efficiency in the Council’s work.
The four notes by the President issued since the
beginning of 2014, in addition to the two notes issued
in 2013, are ample testimony of that dynamism. The
notes provide an undeniable contribution to the proper
functioning of the Security Council. I will mention
only note S/2014/393, of 5 June 2014, which proposes
concrete measures to facilitate the transition between
the successive Chairs of the Council’s subsidiary
bodies, and therefore ensures the continuity of those
bodies’ work.
Improving the Council’s working methods is
not an end in itself. It must allow the Council to best
carry out its duties under its primary responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security. The
Council must provide itself with the means to better

S/PV.7285

anticipate and prevent crises, in particular through
better information on potential crisis areas, whether by
means of presentations such as horizon-scanning, or
briefings by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on the Prevention of Genocide or the Special
Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect. The Council
must also provide itself with the means to overcome
blockages when it comes to preventing mass atrocities.
We therefore support the initiative of France proposing
a voluntary restriction on the use of the veto power in
situations where the most serious crimes are committed
or may be committed.
In the excellent concept paper (S/2014/725, annex)
that you, Madam President, distributed for this debate,
you have focused on two aspects: enhancing due process
in sanctions regimes, and the follow-up of Security
Council referrals to the International Criminal Court
(ICC). I thank Ombudsman Kimberly Prost and ICC
Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for the ideas and proposals
that they have been good enough to share with us in
that area.
Targeted sanctions are an important tool of the
Security Council. They seek to implement individual
restrictive measures against persons or entities that
threaten international peace and security. However,
for sanctions regimes to be effective, the process for
listing and delisting must be guided by the principles
of fairness, respect for the rule of law, credibility and
transparency.
The establishment and the strengthening of the
mechanism of the Ombudsman in the context of the
Al-Qaida sanctions regime made it possible to affirm
those principles. As an independent and effective
sanctions review mechanism, the Office of the
Ombudsman plays an essential role in ensuring the
accuracy and legitimacy of the sanctions list. We pay
tribute to Ms. Kimberly Prost for the independence,
professionalism and courage with which she fulfils her
mandate. We welcome her obsession with fair process,
which she demonstrated once again this morning.
While it is true that the work of the Ombudsman
has meant fairer proceedings, in our view, progress
can nevertheless still be made on three points. In
order to decide whether keeping a person or an entity
on the list is justified, the Ombudsman must have
access to the relevant information. The cooperation
of the Ombudsman with Member States in that regard

14-5854719/31

S/PV.7285

Security Council working methods

23/10/2014

is essential. To that end, in June Luxembourg and the
Ombudsman concluded an arrangement for access to
confidential or classified information.

efforts will succeed so that the Security Council can
respond to the formal communications that the Court
has addressed to it.

Once the review of a request for delisting has been
completed, petitioners must be informed of the reasons
for the decision to delist them or to keep them on the
list. Otherwise, the Council would be deprived of an
essential tool for informing petitioners how to modify
or continue to modify their behaviour in the direction
that we wish. Under resolution 2161 (2014), progress has
been made with regard to transmitting the reasons for
granting or refusing a delisting request. The provisions
of resolution 2161 (2014) must now be implemented.

We also support the idea of ​​setting up a mechanism
that reflects the Council’s commitment to effectively
follow up the situations that it refers to the Court. The
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
could be entrusted with addressing that issue. If not, a
subsidiary body could be established for that purpose.
Whichever option is chosen, we must act. As I have just
said, the Council’s credibility is at stake.

Finally, at present, only individuals and entities
on the Al-Qaida Sanctions List have access to the
Ombudsman. However, similar issues concerning
respect for the principle of a fair trial also arise in other
sanctions committees. In our view, the Council should
therefore extend the mandate of the Ombudsman to
other sanctions regimes.
The Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court confers on the Security Council a unique role.
Under the Statute, the Council has the power to refer
to the Court situations where crimes within the Court’s
jurisdiction appear to have been committed. Since
the Security Council decided to refer the situations
in Darfur and Libya to the ICC, the Prosecutor has
informed the Council of its work in a transparent
manner, and we warmly thank her for that. The reports
of the Prosecutor allow the Council to closely follow the
work of the ICC and to acknowledge the many obstacles
facing the Court.
I can assure Ms. Fatou Bensouda of the full support
of Luxembourg in the resolute action that her Office
continues to carry out in order to put an end to impunity
for the most serious crimes. The Council must ensure
strict follow-up of cases referred to the ICC. That is a
matter of credibility and effectiveness. We can better in
that regard to assist the Court in its indispensable work.
To date, the Council has received seven letters from
the President of the Court addressed to it concerning
the obligation of States to cooperate with the ICC. The
Council has not answered any of them. It has taken no
action to follow up a refusal to cooperate with the Court.
Such inaction is all the more incomprehensible given
that the Council itself “expresses its commitment to an
effective follow up of Council decisions in this regard”
(see S/PRST/2013/2). We strongly hope that the current

20/31

In conclusion, allow me to underscore the
importance of today’s open debate. The now yearly
practice allows all Council members and delegations
not members of the Council to make specific proposals
to improve the Council’s working methods. We hope
that the ideas expressed here today will be favourably
reflected in the work of the Council, in the interest of
international peace and security for the benefit of all.
Ms. Jones (United States of America): We offer our
praise to you, Madam President, and to your delegation
for your leadership of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions over
the past two years. You have shown a steady hand in
guiding us to agreement on a number of improvements
that my delegation believes will advance the Security
Council’s efficiency and transparency. Among other
innovations, we appreciate the Chair’s work on the note
(S/2010/507, annex) that set forth practical measures
to improve the handover of chairmanships of Security
Council subsidiary bodies. We predict that your own
successes at the helm of the Working Group, Madam
President, will benefit from that. We hope that they
show the same energy and skill as Argentina.
I turn to the two specific topics on our agenda this
morning. Regarding sanctions, we welcome today’s
discussion on how to impose and to implement such
measures in a better way. We thank the Ombudsperson
for her presentation. The Council now uses targeted
sanctions to respond to diverse threats, such as
terrorism, nuclear proliferation, the use and recruitment
of children in conflict and trafficking in conflict
minerals. Because those measures are targeted against
those most responsible for those threats, they minimize
unintended humanitarian consequences. We see today’s
discussion as one part of a broader conversation on how
to improve the global implementation and effectiveness
of United Nations sanctions.

14-58547

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

The United States has supported the past several
years of improvements in the way that the Council
imposes targeted sanctions, including enhancements
to the fairness and clarity of listing and delisting
procedures. For example, we have seen the establishment
of the Focal Point, new steps to notify listed individuals
of their status, new requirements for information
justifying designations and enhanced transparency at
all steps in the sanctions process.
With regard to the sanctions regime under the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities, the United States has been a
leader in proposing and supporting a broad range of
elements to strengthen the sanctions regime over the
past decade, from the development of the standard
cover sheet for listings in 2006 to the dynamic sanctions
regime that we have today. In 2009, the United States
sponsored resolution 1904 (2009) to create the Office
of the Ombudsperson of the 1267 Al-Qaida sanctions
regime. That mandate has been further refined and was
carefully tailored to the special circumstances of that
regime. In recognition of the unique nature and the
unique value of those sanctions, the United States has
devoted significant time and resources to supporting
the Ombudsperson’s work. We will continue to do so.
Nevertheless, the Al-Qaida sanctions regime is
sui generis. Unlike the Security Council’s 14 other
sanctions programmes, the Al-Qaida sanctions target
individuals and entities associated with the non-State
group who pose a global threat. The Security Council’s
other sanctions programmes, such as those imposed in
response to threats in Iran, Yemen and North Korea,
occur in distinctly different and State-focused political
contexts. We therefore oppose exporting the 1267
Ombudsperson model to those other sanctions regimes.
We do, however, support a serious discussion about
how to improve procedures used in the other sanctions
contexts. We encourage the Council to identify best
practices, including for fair and clear listing, exemptions
and delisting procedures that could be standardized
across the other sanctions regimes.
Turning to the International Criminal Court (ICC),
we appreciate and welcome the participation of the
International Criminal Court Prosecutor in today’s
open debate. As the Security Council has stressed, the
fight to end impunity and to ensure accountability for
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes
has been strengthened through the work on, and

S/PV.7285

the prosecution of, those crimes in national courts,
hybrid and ad hoc tribunals and international criminal
justice mechanisms, including the International
Criminal Court. The Security Council has expressed
its commitment to an effective follow-up of Council
decisions, including decisions referring situations to the
International Criminal Court. For example, with respect
to the Darfur situation, we welcome the willingness of
States to consider creative approaches and new tools to
facilitate and enable the ICC’s work in Darfur, execute
outstanding arrest warrants and ensure compliance by
States with relevant international obligations.
We welcome future discussions focused on ensuring
full implementation of those Council resolutions that
include ICC referrals. We are also open to considering
an appropriate mechanism for following up on referrals
by the Security Council to the ICC, including the
existing Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Madam President, for convening this debate, for
chairing the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions so effectively and for
providing the useful concept paper (S/2014/725, annex)
to help frame our discussions today. This annual debate
generates great interest among Council members and
the wider membership. We can see this again today
from the 40 non-Council members that have asked to
speak in the debate.
The Council has proved itself the most adaptable of
United Nations bodies. In recent years it has interacted
with a greater number of outside actors — civil
society, non-governmental organizations, academics
and others — through different types of innovative
meetings, including Arria Formula and other informal
interactive dialogues. It has become more transparent
with more open debates, public briefings, wrap-up
sessions and more honest briefings and reports to the
General Assembly. It has increasingly used technology
to facilitate its discussions — for example, the large
increase in the use of video teleconferencing for briefers
overseas. It has developed a pattern of overseas visits to
help inform its work, and it has made more flexible use
of the range of Council products, particularly press and
presidential statements, to react to unfolding events.
But the Council needs to adopt a continuousimprovement approach to working methods. In
particular, we need to get better at taking early

14-5854721/31

S/PV.7285

Security Council working methods

preventive action. That requires timely briefings from
early-warning actors across the United Nations. We can
develop more interactivity in informal consultations.
Despite recent efforts, those too often resemble a
formulaic exchange of positions. There is scope to cut
back the Council’s formal agenda to create space to
address new challenges and to ensure that we remain
up to date. Some items on the formal agenda of the
Security Council have not been discussed for 60 years.
However, such improvements are only part of
helping the Security Council to take timely and effective
decisions. Effective follow-up action is just as important
as timely decisions. That brings me to the first of the
topics covered in the concept paper, and I want to thank
the International Criminal Court (ICC) Prosecutor of
her brief and clear recommendations today. I strongly
agree with her that the Council needs to do much more
to follow up its referrals to the International Criminal
Court.
The United Kingdom is a strong supporter of the
ICC’s work to hold perpetrators of atrocities to account
and to achieve justice for victims. But the Court cannot
act alone. All United Nations Member States and the
Security Council have to play their part in full. The
Council must follow up substantively on its referrals,
especially where the ICC is not receiving the cooperation
from States that it needs to operate effectively. We must
all remember that the decision by the Council to refer
a situation to the ICC does not in itself bring justice
to victims or accountability for perpetrators. It is an
important step in that process, but international justice
requires sustained and concerted international efforts,
including through this Council.
The United Kingdom regrets that the Council has
so far failed to agree on responses to letters from the
President of the ICC relating to the Court’s findings
of non-cooperation because those responses are being
blocked by a small number of Council members who
are not themselves States parties to the ICC. We call
once again on all Council members to live up to their
responsibilities to agree on timely and effective followup action, starting with responses to the letters that the
Council has received.
Let me turn to the second topic in the concept paper.
I want to thank the Ombudsperson for her forceful and
compelling briefing this morning.
The United Kingdom continues to be a strong
supporter of fair and clear procedures for United

22/31

23/10/2014

Nations sanctions regimes. In particular, we have
supported the strengthening of due-process provisions
under the sanctions regime of the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, which
include the creation of the Ombudsperson position and
the important subsequent steps to develop her role. The
Ombudsperson has strengthened the regime by keeping
listings relevant to the current threat posed by Al-Qaida.
She has conducted her role independently and fairly, and
I salute her obsession with fair process. We note that the
Ombudsperson’s most recent report (S/2014/553) shows
both delistings and retentions, thereby demonstrating
the impartial nature of that process.
The creation of the Ombudsperson role for the
1267 regime shows that the Security Council can create
innovative and effective solutions to specific problems.
However, each regime has its own set of challenges
that may require specific solutions tailored for those
circumstances, rather than replicating an identical
approach for all. We stand ready to consider practical
recommendations for improving due process, including
in the context of the high-level review of United Nations
sanctions. For instance, we see scope for developing the
role of the focal point and for improving the provision
of reasons both for retaining individuals on sanctions
list and for decisions to delist.
We will continue to be staunch advocates of
efficient and transparent working methods of the
Security Council, and of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency agenda more broadly. As you,
Madam President, and Council colleagues will recall, we
practiced those principles during the United Kingdom’s
presidency of the Security Council in August. Simply
by observing the guidelines set out in note S/2010/507,
starting meetings on time and encouraging speakers to
limit their remarks, allowed us to get through a lot of
important Council business more effectively.
We are also strong supporters of Security Council
reform, and as such we are active proponents of
improving the working methods of this Council. Apart
from anything else, an expanded Council will certainly
require more efficient working methods if it is to get
through the business it will need to do.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to warmly thank Argentina for organizing
this debate on an amibitious set of topics, and the
two speakers — Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor

14-58547

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

of the International Criminal Court (ICC), and
Ms. Kimberly Prost, Ombudsperson of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities — whose mandates and interaction with
the Council are among those that best reflect recent
developments within the Security Council in the
direction of greater transparency, accountability and
consideration of issues related to human rights.
We are of the view, in 2014, that the Prosecutor
and the Ombudsperson have become integral parts
of the institutional landscape of the Council, yet we
must recall that this is a very recent development. I
wish to touch on three points: the results of our work
within the framework of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions;
the need for the Council to drag itself into the twentyfirst century, an era of accountability, by setting up a
follow-up mechanism for its relations with the ICC; and
updating the sanctions regimes.
First, concerning methods of work, I would like
to begin by commending the assessment made by
the Argentine chairmanship of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions regarding methods and substance. Those
are not mere words. The Security Council is master of
its procedures, yet it must not cease to work towards
greater effectiveness in its tasks. From that point of
view, the Working Group under the chairmanship of
Argentina has fulfilled its role over the past two years.
In 2013, we welcomed the adoption of two
presidential notes regarding dialogue with troopcontributing countries (S/2013/630), on the one hand,
and interaction with Council non-member States
(S/2013/515), on the other. This year, presidential notes
S/2014/268, on the penholders of resolutions and other
documents of the Council, and S/2014/393, on the
chairmanship of subsidiary bodies, are steps in the
right direction. I recall that all members of the Council
are called upon to shoulder their responsibilities. We
support opening up the Council to speakers who can
inform us of mass crimes, such as Mr. Adama Dieng,
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide.
We support the efforts of the Argentine presidency
regarding multilingualism. Among the members
of the Security Council, if I am counting correctly,
there are at least eight of us expressing ourselves in a

S/PV.7285

language other than English. That is a strong symbol
of the diversity of the Council, which reflects the very
diversity of the States Members of the United Nations.
We count on the ongoing, sustained, strengthened
and stepped-up commitment and the support of the
Secretariat to take all the necessary measures to ensure
that multilingualism, which is our common wealth,
remains a reality. I recall that there are two working
languages for the Secretariat and six official languages
at the United Nations.
The importance we attach to the issue of working
methods does not mean that we can sidestep bold
reforms of the Council so as to ensure that it better
reflects, in a fairer way, the realities of today’s
world, while strengthening its ability to fully assume
its responsibilities in terms of the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Secondly, on issues of international criminal
justice, I endorse all the observations made by
Prosecutor Bensouda. We commend Argentina and
the members of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group, who introduced this topic as one
of method. They were right to do so. We have entered
into what the Secretary-General has referred to as an
era of accountability, in which the Council, with its
role of maintaining peace, coexists alongside a system
of international criminal justice, centred around the
International Criminal Court — a permanent, universal
body complementing national courts.
We interact on a daily basis. The Council, with
its role in preventing crises, ensures the fight against
impunity, which is one of the basic missions of the
Court. At the level of conflict settlement, the Court
must not wait for armed conflicts to end before opening
investigations. At the post-conflict level, the Council
seeks to strengthen national jurisdictions to enable
them to take over from the ICC in prosecuting the
most serious crimes, in keeping with the principle of
complementarity enshrined in the Rome Statue. That
interaction between the Council and the ICC must of
course lead us to revise our working methods and to
strengthen the Council’s follow-up of decisions related
to the ICC, including on essential issues, such as arrests.
We support an effective follow-up mechanism, which
could be a subsidiary body of the Council.
Thirdly, we must consider the timeliness and
effectiveness of the sanctions regime. Sanctions, as
we all know, are an essential tool for the Security

14-5854723/31

S/PV.7285

Security Council working methods

Council in carrying out its responsibilities in terms
of maintaining international peace and security, and
we should welcome the improvements made in recent
years with this tool. Sanctions are now targeted and
procedural safeguards have been put in place. We attach
great importance, in particular, to the use of sanctions
within the framework of combating terrorism. We have
seen that recently with the imposition of sanctions
under Al-Qaida regime against two entities and more
than a dozen individuals involved in supplying foreign
fighters. If the fight against Al-Qaida, and now Daesh,
is to progress, we must clearly remain vigilant in regard
to the implementation of those sanctions.
It is also crucial to respect the fundamental
freedoms of individuals inscribed on the sanctions list
and to ensure that sanctions regimes include appropriate
procedural safeguards. It behooves us to note that just as
each crisis is unique, each sanctions regime is different,
and the needs in terms of procedural safeguards are
also different. In 2006, France launched the initiative of
creating a focal point that would enable individuals and
entities inscribed on the Committees’ lists to request
delisting. The adoption of resolution 1904 (2009)
allowed us to go further with the creation of the post of
Ombudsperon to clarify all information provided by the
petitioners, which is an essential aid to the Committee in
the framework of its decision-making. The subsequent
resolutions have improved procedural safeguards by
strengthening the role of the Ombudsperson. I take
this opportunity to commend the outstanding quality
of work carried out by the Ombudsperson within the
framework of the Al-Qaida Committee. She enjoys
France’s full confidence.
In conclusion, I wish to return to a priority issue
for French authorities. Three times, the Syrian crisis
has highlighted an impasse in which the Security
Council has found itself when faced with the excessive
use of the right of veto. Two years ago, the President of
Republic, Mr. François Hollande, spoke to the General
Assembly (see A/67/PV.4) of the need to establish a
code of conduct for permanent members of the Council
to limit the right of veto. During the ministerial week
of the General Assembly, the French Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Laurent Fabius, and his Mexican
counterpart convened their peers to discuss our project
to persuade the five permanent members of the Security
Council to collectively and voluntarily suspend their
use of the veto when a situation of mass crimes was
under consideration. We need to reflect together on

24/31

23/10/2014

the nature and content of that project, but we will not
abandon it. The other permanent members need to
commit themselves.
The Security Council must seize the opportunity
to make an in-depth review of the way it functions to
meet the challenges of the twenty-first century. The
world is changing. Threats are evolving. We must be
the willing actors of that change. We must demonstrate
upon the occasion of the seventieth anniversary of our
Organization that we are capable of innovation to be
both more effective and more fair.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Argentina.
Undoubtedly, today in this debate what we are
talking about are the whys and hows of the working
methods that, on a daily basis, guide the work of
the Council — how it considers and and agrees on
mechanisms for action and its decision-making
processes. These are the answers we seek so as to ensure
greater consistency and coherence and to develop more
effective and transparent tools, modes and practices
that allow us to fulfil our duties.
What should we do? We know, for it is clearly
established in the Charter of the United Nations — it is
imperative. How can we and how must we work within
this body to ensure that our daily action does not
contradict our momentous duty? That is the challenge
before us. As we turn to answering those questions,
we envision a tool box. While we might believe that it
contains all of the tools, one day we may realize that
new tools are needed. Some are useful and others must
be discarded. But we must keep the necessary ones. It
is not for nothing that we say that, as non-permanent
member of the Security Council. It is not about
remaining a slave to rigidity, which ties our hands; but
it also not about destroying everything accomplished in
the past, or becoming victims of feverish innovations
with hands folded in order to work prudently and to act
lucidly.
In the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions the discussion is
focused on dialogue, as it is here. It is a matter of keeping
what is effective and efficient and creating what is
lacking. It involves harmonizing and reducing unclear
elements and arbitrariness. It is akin to mathematics,
in that it involves acknowledging the validity of the
working methods as confirmed by results. It involves

14-58547

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

sowing capabilities between sand and rock. It involves
basing our practices and procedures on legitimate
norms, including practical validity, ethical legitimacy
and political necessity.
I would like to thank colleagues for their kind
words directed to the Argentine delegation. In fact,
what I would like to do in this time, at the end of our
mandate, as a member I would like to express my
gratitude and that of the Argentine delegation, because
during the past two years we have enjoyed the support
and participation of all of the members of the Council
in adopting, to date, the six presidential notes that many
colleagues have mentioned.
The dialogues with troop- and police-contributing
countries were in fact introduced by Argentina, as
was the practice of handing over the chairmanship
of the subsidiary bodies. However the dialogue with
non-member States and other bodies was — and still
is — an initiative of Australia. The intra-Council
dialogue is a Pakistani initiative.
We also turned to addressing issues that had
been dealt with over a long period of time without
achieving consensus. For example, the recently adopted
presidential note S/2014/739, concerning the list of
speakers, was an initiative of the Russian Federation.
There was also the presidential note on penholders
(S/2014/268), which is, as mentioned earlier, the
Council’s first pronouncement on that item. I believe
that all of the notes have been important and necessary.
Of course, they are not the only ones we need or deserve,
or even ones we can consider sufficient.
I wish to again thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, and
Ms. Kimberly Prost, Ombudsperson of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities. For, while it is good
to speak about our achievements, it is also honest to state
that which Argentina was unable to achieve as Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions — perhaps because it was
not yet time, or maybe because there was a need to
consider and reconsider those initiatives.
The two items we proposed involved the Council’s
institutional responsibility. On the one hand, we have
maintained that the relationship between the Council
and the International Criminal Court cannot be limited
to receiving the Prosecutor’s reports in a public meeting,

S/PV.7285

without providing any follow-up on the issues raised. It
is true that the Court is independent; the Council firmly
maintains that principle. But that does not mean it is an
isolated body or that we must disregard the situations
we refer. I support the words of the Prosecutor on due
process and the sanctions list.
When we began to Chair the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, we introduced a proposal to consider
extending — not in the same format, but with more
flexibility — a principle through the Ombudsperson.
The principle is due process. It is unfortunate that
the proposal has not thus far garnered the necessary
support. However, in whatever body, we will continue to
support due process in all of the Sanctions Committees.
I also support the words of the Ombudsperson.
Lastly, I would like to thank all of the members
of the Council, including those whose mandates ended
at the end of 2013, for their support in the Informal
Working Group. I thank all the States Members of the
United Nations that are taking part today in this open
debate. I also thank the non-governmental organizations
and universities that have supported us through their
requests and initiatives during our tenure.
We remain convinced that fostering genuine
openness in the methods to build information and
knowledge and an understanding of various situations
and all of the dimensions of potential and actual conflict,
implementing inclusive decision-making processes,
developing realistic and strategic programmes of action,
establishing consistent accountability mechanisms
that are accessible and transparent for the broader
membership and the international community as a
whole — all of those elements are substantive aspects
of the Informal Working Group.
We also acknowledge with equal fervour that
greater participation and more debate are needed.
Presidential note 507 suggests setting a five-minute
limit for statements and trying to respect it. In my case,
I have rarely been able to comply with that. In fact, I
understand that the use of time must be democratic
and efficient; however, I also understand that there is
much to be discussed among us. We need a great deal
of sincerity among each other. We need a policy that
I would call “making a place for victims” — a place
of dignity to ensure that there will be fewer victims.
Knowing that it is as inevitable as water being wet, we
also know that the working methods can also be and
must be improved.

14-5854725/31

S/PV.7285

Security Council working methods

Having expressed that conviction, I should like
to acknowledge that not all things are bad in the
Security Council. Those States that are going to join
as non-permanent members will be able do things,
change things, have an impact. As long as we can steel
ourselves with courage, we will have our debate in
the General Assembly on the necessary reform of the
Security Council.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Switzerland.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in Spanish):
Honouring the request of my French colleague for
more linguistic diversity, I offer my greetings to you in
Spanish, Madam President.
(spoke in English)
I am pleased to take the floor in my capacity as
the Coordinator of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency (ACT) group, a cross-regional
group of 23 States. Respecting your call for brevity,
Madam President, I will read out an abridged version
of my statement, while a copy of the full statement will
be circulated in the Chamber.
Like all the speakers before me, ACT would like to
acknowledge the efforts of your delegation, Argentina,
Madam President, for capably steering the work of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions and for organizing today’s debate,
which, I have to say, has been very rich and substantive
so far. Moreover, ACT commends the Working Group
for its work leading to the adoption during the past year
of five presidential notes, all of which build on previous
Council decisions. In particular, ACT welcomes the
commitment to continuing the practice of using wrapup meetings and informal briefing sessions.
ACT encourages the Council to monitor and
report consistently on the implementation of measures
on working methods. In particular, ACT calls for the
implementation without delay of the presidential notes

26/31

23/10/2014

contained in documents S/2014/268 and S/2014/393, on
enhancing the wider participation and inclusiveness
of Council members in the work of the Council and
on ensuring continuity in the work of the subsidiary
bodies, respectively.
ACT therefore welcomes the efforts of the Council
to hold meetings out in the open, especially open debates
allowing the participation of the wider membership.
However, the response of the Council remains in most
cases very limited, and outcomes are adopted before the
views of the wider membership are even heard. In that
regard, ACT encourages the Council to take note of the
recommendations made by all the States participating
in today’s debate and to provide the wider membership
with a summary of those recommendations by the end
of the year. That document could serve as guidance for
the work of the Informal Working Group in the coming
year. Similarly, ACT would encourage the Working
Group to hold a meeting in the open debate format in
2015.
One of the priorities of ACT concerns the use of the
veto in the case of mass atrocities. ACT has advocated
a use of the veto consistent with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter. Our group is
therefore pleased that France has taken up an idea that
many of us have advocated for years, namely, that the
permanent members of the Council should voluntarily
commit to refraining from using the veto to block
Council action aimed at preventing or ending atrocity
crimes. While we believe that a commitment from all
members of the Council to that end is appropriate, a
special responsibility naturally falls to the permanent
members of the Security Council.
Even such events as the high-level ministerial event
on 25 September have been important milestones. It is
now time to make progress towards concrete measures,
including the early finalization of a code of conduct
that contains a commitment to refraining from the use
of the veto in situations of mass atrocities.
In recent years, the Security Council has made
some progress in improving its interaction with the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and in addressing
other related issues. However, the lack of follow-up to
referrals by the Security Council remains a matter of
concern, as has been mentioned by several speakers
before me today. ACT will continue to call for more
consistent follow-up, including through the creation of
a subsidiary body to address issues related to the ICC.

14-58547

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

ACT has also advocated a perspective that is
more oriented to conflict prevention in the work of
the Security Council and therefore welcomes the
adoption of resolution 2171 (2014). In that regard, the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), as an advisory body
to the Council, has a strong role to play in preventing the
recurrence of conflicts. Roughly half of all countries
coming out of conflict suffer a relapse into violence.
Therefore, a coordinated and committed approach to
post-conflict peacebuilding is key to preventing such
relapses.
Our group is convinced that the PBC can assume
the role of a forum where critical situations are
discussed early, in an inclusive manner and with all
relevant stakeholders. The upcoming 2015 review of the
peacebuilding architecture is a valuable opportunity to
implement necessary adaptations to further improve
that role of the PBC. Finally, we encourage the Council
to invite the chairs of the various country-specific
configurations of the Peacebuilding Commission to
participate in Council meetings.
In closing, I would like to mention one topic that
will be crucial for all of us, namely, the appointment
of the next Secretary-General in 2016. Repeated calls
for more transparency and increased involvement of
the General Assembly in the appointment process have
been made in the past and are legitimate, since the
Secretary-General represents the whole United Nations
membership. ACT is therefore of the opinion that the
transparency of the overall process, in accordance
with relevant General Assembly resolutions, should
be enhanced. That will mean listening to the views of
Member States and widening the scope of consultations
beyond the permanent members. ACT intends to embark
in a constructive dialogue with both the Security
Council and the General Assembly in that regard.
The Council acts on our behalf. That is why
accountability, coherence and transparency in its work
and in the implementation of its decisions are so crucial.
To that end, I assure you, Madam President, that the
ACT group will remain committed to continuing to
work constructively with the Security Council and with
the wider membership to increase the involvement of
non-members and the accountability of the Council.
(spoke in French)
To finish in due form, I would add in my national
capacity that Switzerland associates itself with the
statement to be made by the representative of Norway

S/PV.7285

on behalf of the informal Group of Like-Minded States
on Targeted Sanctions, as well as with the statement to
be made by the representative of Liechtenstein.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saint Lucia.
Ms. Rambally (Saint Lucia): I have the honour today
to take the floor on behalf of the group of supporters of
General Assembly draft resolution A/61/L.69, a diverse
group of 42 developing countries from Africa, Latin
America and the Caribbean, and Asia and the Pacific
that are united by a common cause — to achieve lasting
and comprehensive reform of the Security Council,
including of its working methods.
At the outset, on behalf of the L.69 group, let me
thank you, Madam President, for convening today’s
open debate on the working methods of the Security
Council and for outlining the broad parameters of the
subject through your letter and concept note of 8 October
2014 (S/2014/725, annex). With you at the helm of the
Council this month, we are confident that on matters as
important as the Council’s working methods there will
not just be discussion, but that concrete steps will also
be taken to ensure that our agreement on the subject
today translates into visible action in the Security
Council.
I would like to make the following assertions on
behalf of the L.69 group for the Council’s consideration.
First, it would be unfortunate on our part if we were to
treat the issue of improvement in working methods as
a stand-alone issue distinct from the subject of overall
reforms of the Security Council. General Assembly
decision 62/557, adopted by consensus, mandated that
the question of working methods be one of the five
pillars of Security Council reform and be discussed as
part of the overall question of Security Council reforms,
not in isolation.
Secondly, we should not assume that working
methods are divorced from the members that use them.
If the membership of the Security Council continues to
reflect the post-Second World War architecture of 1945
even in 2014, obviously not much can be expected in
terms of improvement in the working methods except
to acknowledge with disappointment that the rules of
procedure continue to be provisional even 70 years
after the Council’s creation. This is further exemplified
by the fact that the Council has demonstrated little
interest in consulting with those affected most by its

14-5854727/31

S/PV.7285

Security Council working methods

23/10/2014

decisions, or even in adopting transparent and inclusive
rules of procedure.

process and approach, which as a first step require
reform in the composition of the Council.

Thirdly, it is apparent by now that the Council has
not acted to harness fully the capabilities of the wider
United Nations membership. That is particularly evident
in the manner in which it applies coercive measures
under Chapter VII, to the neglect of provisions under
Chapters VI and VIII, which have proved to be counterproductive in resolving international crises, even as
it has sought to expand the definition of peace and
security with a view to encroaching upon the Chartermandated roles of other United Nations organs.

In conclusion, let me reiterate our considered
view that genuine reform in the working methods of
the Security Council requires a comprehensive reform
in the membership of the Council, with expansion in
both the permanent and non-permanent categories,
not only improvements in its working procedures.
That is essential both for the credibility and continued
confidence of the international community in this
institution.

Fourthly, with regard to working methods, we have
often been told in the context of the intergovernmental
negotiations that permanent members, being permanent,
are masters of the Council’s working methods and have
the sole right to determine them. We humbly beg to
differ.
The Council is mandated by the United Nations
Charter with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. What
the Council does to discharge its responsibility and how
it does it is thus of interest to the entire international
community, not only to Council members, let alone
only the permanent members. Article 24(1) of the
Charter clearly prescribes that in carrying out its duties
under its responsibility, the Security Council acts on
behalf of the wider membership of the United Nations.
We therefore all have an equal stake in its effective
functioning and working methods.
Fifthly, the Council must also improve its
cooperation with regional organizations, particularly
with the African Union, since a large portion of the
Council’s work concerns the African continent. Such
cooperation must be serious and include providing
assistance to the African region, as per their
requirements, not only when some permanent members
deem it in their interest.
Sixthly, some very useful suggestions on overall
improvements in the working methods were made at
the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly in
section 4 of the non-paper circulated on 10 December
2013 by the President of the Assembly at that session.
We believe that the Council may find its contents useful
throughout this process. It is our considered belief that
cosmetic changes to the working methods alone will
not help. Real improvements require change in both

28/31

The seventieth anniversary of the United Nations
provides us a historic opportunity to address this
long-standing historical anomaly. Now is the time for
collective stock-taking of this institution in which all
Member States have reposed their collective trust.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.
Ms. Chan (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Costa
Rica expresses its sincere appreciation to Argentina
for organizing this open debate and for the substantive
participation of Ms. Kimberly Prost and Ms. Fatou
Bensouda on this occasion.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the 23 States members of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency Group, and we also align
ourselves with the statement to be made later by the
representative of Liechtenstein on the International
Criminal Court and the use of the veto.
Costa Rica, in its national capacity, wishes to make
the following observations and recommendations.
There is an undeniable connection between
conflict prevention and the working methods of the
Security Council. Acting constantly only in crisis
mode, responding and reacting rather than preventing,
the Security Council will never be able to anticipate
events and intervene early enough to have a preventive
effect and to save lives.
Costa Rica’s call for improving the working methods
of the Security Council is not done in a vacuum. The
working methods of the Council play a fundamental role
in the Council’s ability to fully discharge its mandate
of maintaining international peace and security, as we
have recently seen in the crises in Gaza, Iraq, Ukraine,
Syria, Libya and South Sudan.

14-58547

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

In that respect, Costa Rica wishes to acknowledge
the work of Argentina and its outstanding team as Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions, and applauds its efforts to
leave a substantial legacy in the Working Group.
Presidential note 507 encompassed many of
the concerns expressed by the membership of the
Organization and resolved several of them, at least
conceptually. Thanks to its adoption, we have made
significant progress in the areas of transparency and
accountability. Nonetheless, a review of the Council’s
practices reveals that the challenge of consistently
implementing adopted agreements still remains.
Costa Rica has called, for example, for the formal
adoption of the rules of procedure of the Security
Council, and we have called for the adoption of an
action plan to fully and systematically implement
presidential note 507 and subsequent notes. We will
continue to reiterate this call until our voice is heard.
In making these reflections, allow me to make the
following recommendations.
Costa Rica welcomes the adoption of resolution
2171 (2014), which set out a whole range of instruments
aimed at promoting conflict prevention. We must now
make use of them. My delegation expects that the
Secretary-General and his Special Advisers on the
Prevention of Genocide and on the Responsibility to
Protect, inter alia, will inform us as soon as warning
signs of potential conflict situations appear. Such
warnings must be clear, depoliticized and heeded at the
earliest possible moment.
In that regard, we also express our support for the
Department of Political Affairs in its horizon-scanning
briefings and for its Arria Formula meetings, including
the participation of civil society.
We cannot overlook the relationship between
a serious worsening of the human rights situation
and conflicts. Such situations must be brought to
the attention of all relevant United Nations bodies,
including the Security Council. In this regard, Costa
Rica fully supports the Secretary-General’s Rights Up
Front initiative.
As part of the small five group and now the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency Group,
Costa Rica has objected to the use of the veto for
obstructing measures seeking to avoid or to resolve
conflicts. Costa Ricans are amazed at how, by invoking

S/PV.7285

the principle of sovereignty, some permanent members
have prevented the Security Council from intervening
when it should have acted to save lives. We reiterate
our call on the permanent members to refrain from
using the veto, especially in situations of genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes. We support
the French proposal for the development of a code of
conduct regarding the use of the veto and encourage
permanent members to adopt a declaration of principles
to mark the seventieth anniversary of the United
Nations next year.
As the time for appointing the new SecretaryGeneral approaches, Costa Rica calls for a more
inclusive, transparent and democratic process. My
delegation will pay close attention to that process.
Costa Rica believes that the Security Council
should move from a mindset of reaction to one of
preventive action. It must be vigilant, strategic and
proactive, and more democratic, inclusive, transparent
and accountable. Also, the Council must ally itself
more closely with, and acknowledge more directly,
the work of other United Nations agencies responsible
for issues related to international peace and security,
which frequently spill over onto the Council’s already
overstretched agenda.
Many improvements could be achieved by
improving the working methods of the Security Council
itself. What is missing is political will. We hope that
this debate will be able to strengthen that will.
Costa Rica congratulates the President, once again,
on convening this important meeting, which represents
a big step in the right direction and a reconfirmation
of our commitment, and that of all Member States,
to improving the working methods of the Security
Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this debate, for the concept
paper (S/2014/725, annex) and for your able stewardship
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions.
Liechtenstein aligns itself with the statement
delivered by Switzerland on behalf of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group and also with
the statement to be delivered by the representative of
Norway on behalf of the Group of Like-Minded States

14-5854729/31

S/PV.7285

Security Council working methods

on Targeted Sanctions. I have the honour to deliver the
following remarks on behalf of Costa Rica, Hungary, the
Netherlands, Slovenia and Switzerland, as well as my
own country. These remarks will focus on the followup to Security Council referrals to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and the use of the veto. I hope
the Ombudsperson and other members of the Council
will not misunderstand this as a lack of interest in the
issue of sanctions, which is also important, but it is also
in the interest of having an efficient debate.
When the Security Council created the ad hoc
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
the ad hoc International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
it took care to ensure an effective follow-up. It invited
the Presidents and Prosecutors of those Tribunals to
conduct regular briefings, and created the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals to address
the day-to-day issues arising from the Tribunals’
work. All of us know the tremendous value of such an
established mechanism for interaction. We also know
that no such mechanism exists to address issues arising
from Security Council referrals to the ICC, despite
almost a decade having passed since the first such
referral by the Council of the situation in Darfur to
the ICC.
While individual delegations have made
commendable attempts to improve the interaction,
for example through informal, interactive dialogue
between the Council and the ICC Prosecutor, such
innovations have been ad hoc and were left unfinished.
In February 2013, the Council formally committed itself
to effectively following up on issues of cooperation
with international tribunals, including the ICC, but
that promise remains unfulfilled. As a consequence,
real issues arising from that relationship continue
to go unaddressed. In the case of Security Council
referrals, the Council can and should act as a powerful
enforcement mechanism. We believe it is high time for
the Council to start fulfilling its part of the bargain.
The failure of the Sudan, for example, to cooperate
with the ICC reflects badly on the Court, through no
fault on its own. The repeated failure of the Council,
however, to enforce its own resolution 1593 (2005),
which imposes an unambiguous obligation on the Sudan
to cooperate with the ICC, undermines the credibility
of the Council and empties of meaning its public
commitment to ensuring accountability for the worst
crimes under international law. Creating a follow-up

30/31

23/10/2014

mechanism to deal with cooperation problems would
be a first step in the right direction.
Two “no” votes prevented the Council from
referring the situation in Syria to the ICC — two “no”
votes against 13 votes in favour, with 65 sponsors. We
certainly accept the veto as part of the United Nations
Charter, which we all ratified, but we do not accept
that it be used in a way contrary to the very purposes
and principles contained in the Charter. We have
repeatedly called on the permanent members to commit
to refraining from the use of the veto in situations
involving genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes.
The meeting convened last month by the French and
Mexican Foreign Ministers on that subject demonstrated
that many Member States share that view. We applaud
the French initiative and hope to see more concrete
results soon. In our view, a code of conduct should also
have a preventive function. It should allow the Council
to stop these horrendous crimes from happening in the
first place. We also believe that elected members of the
Council should sign on to such a code of conduct. They
have an equally important obligation not to vote against
Council action in situations involving atrocity crimes.
For our part, as non-members, we will continue to work
through the ACT Group to contribute to the success of
that initiative.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to express my gratitude to you, Madam President, for
your initiative in holding this debate on the working
methods of the Security Council. I would also like to
express my appreciation for your excellent work in
your capacity as Chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
The Working Group has recently produced the note
by the President of the Security Council, document
S/2014/739, concerning the speaking order for meetings
of the Council. I believe that that concrete outcome
will, coupled with previous notes by the President,
enhance the efficiency and transparency of the work of
the Council.
We, the Member States, confer on the Security
Council primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. All Member States,
including non-Council members, are bound by its
decisions. The way the Council conducts its work

14-58547

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

is a matter of critical importance, which has a direct
impact on the interests of all Member States. That is the
reason Japan attaches great importance to the efforts to
improve its working methods.
Some progress has been made so far, and I am
proud that Japan is one of the leading contributors
to the discussion of its working methods. I have two
books with me. Japan, in its capacity as the Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions, took the initiative
of compiling presidential note S/2006/507, which is
known as the Blue Book. Japan also took the lead, as
Chair of the Working Group, to update it, and issued
presidential note S/2010/507, which is known as the
Green Book. I reiterate Japan’s commitment to playing
an active role with other Member States in order to
improve the Security Council’s working methods. We
must recognize that more efficient and transparent
procedures are required of the Council when it makes
its decisions in order that the Council in particular,
and the United Nations as a whole, can meet Member
States’ expectations, and I urge for greater cooperation
on the part of Council members, including the
permanent members.
I would now like to briefly touch on the two topics
the President has suggested. I believe United Nations
sanctions are an effective tool for establishing and
maintaining peace and security, and Japan is firmly
committed to full and effective implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions. We Member
States must continue to ensure the legitimacy and
credibility of the sanctions if we are to gain wider
support in the international community. Sanctions are
directly linked to human rights issues, and it is essential
that listing and delisting be conducted according to the
principle of due process. In that context, Japan considers
the activities of the Ombudsperson very important. We
must be flexible and take the specifics of each case into
consideration if our sanctions are to work effectively
and properly.

S/PV.7285

Regarding the Security Council’s referrals to the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
I would like to stress that Japan values the work of the
Court, where cases involving the most serious crimes
of concern to the international community in general
are investigated, prosecuted and decided, thus helping
to achieve justice for victims and to uphold the rule of
law. Japan contributes to the Court not only financially
but also by sending qualified judges. We are resolved to
continue to cooperate with the Court to the maximum
extent possible. Since the Security Council does not
have a specific mechanism for following up cases it
refers to the Prosecutor of the ICC, it should determine
what measures should be taken through dialogues with
the interested countries.
Last but not least, while improving working
methods is important, it is not enough on its own to
genuinely strengthen the legitimacy of the Security
Council, which should reflect the geopolitical realities
of the twenty-first century. Next year we will celebrate
the seventieth anniversary of the founding of the United
Nations. I would like to express my heartfelt wish to see
reform of the Security Council that will make it more
broadly representative, efficient and transparent and
thereby further enhance its effectiveness, legitimacy
and implementation of its decisions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are still
some 38 speakers remaining on my list for this meeting.
Given the lateness of the hour, I intend, with the
concurrence of the members of the Council, to suspend
the meeting until 3 p.m.
I would like to once again thank all the speakers
for their constructive contributions to this open
debate, as well as the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court and Ms. Prost, the Ombudsperson of
the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities, which is chaired by the
next President of the Security Council for the month
of November.
The meeting was suspended at 1 p.m.

14-5854731/31
