United Nations

A/RES/59/241

General Assembly

Distr.: General
28 February 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 87 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2004
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/59/485/Add.2)]

59/241. International migration and development
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population
and Development adopted at Cairo, 1 in particular chapter X on international migration,
and the key actions for the further implementation of the Programme of Action, set
out in the annex to General Assembly resolution S-21/2 of 2 July 1999, in particular
section II.C on international migration, as well as the relevant provisions contained
in the Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development, 2 the Programme of Action
of the World Summit for Social Development, 3 the Platform for Action adopted by
the Fourth World Conference on Women 4 and the outcome documents of the twentyfourth 5 and twenty-fifth 6 special sessions of the General Assembly,
Recalling also its relevant resolutions, in particular resolutions 57/270 B of
23 June 2003, 58/190 of 22 December 2003 and 58/208 of 23 December 2003, in
which it decided to devote a high-level dialogue to international migration and
development during its sixty-first session, bearing in mind that the purpose of the
high-level dialogue is to discuss the multidimensional aspects of international
migration and development in order to identify appropriate ways and means to
maximize its development benefits and minimize its negative impacts,
Reaffirming the obligations of all States to promote and protect all human
rights and fundamental freedoms, reaffirming also the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 7 and recalling the International Convention on the Elimination of All

_______________
1
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
2
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
3
Ibid., annex II.
4
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
5
Resolution S-24/2, annex.
6
Resolution S-25/2, annex.
7
Resolution 217 A (III).

04-49072

A/RES/59/241

Forms of Racial Discrimination, 8 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women 9 and the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 10
Noting the work undertaken under the International Migration Policy
Programme by the United Nations Institute for Training and Research, the
International Organization for Migration and the United Nations Population Fund, in
partnership with the International Labour Office, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and other relevant international and regional
institutions, with a view to strengthening the capacity of Governments to manage
migration flows at the national and regional levels and thus foster greater
cooperation among States towards orderly migration,
Noting also the ongoing efforts and recent activities within the United Nations
system and the other intergovernmental activities and multilateral initiatives on
international migration and development being undertaken, as well as the exchanges
of information on the subject,
Recalling the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, 11 which entered into force in July
2003,
Welcoming the adoption of the special theme of the thirty-ninth session of the
Commission on Population and Development in 2006, which will be “International
migration and development”, 12
Taking note of the views of the Member States on the question of convening a
United Nations conference on international migration, its scope, form and agenda,
noting the low number of respondents to the survey of the Secretariat, and in this
context inviting the Secretary-General to continue considering the issue,
Acknowledging the important contribution provided by migrants and migration
to development as well as the complex interrelationship between migration and
development,
Aware of the fact that all countries are impacted by international migration,
and hence stressing the crucial importance of dialogue and cooperation so as to
better understand the international migration phenomenon, including its gender
perspective, and to identify appropriate ways and means to maximize its
development benefits and minimize its negative impacts,
Realizing the benefits that international migration can bring to migrants, their
families, the receiving societies and their communities of origin and the need for
countries of origin, transit and destination to ensure that migrants, including migrant
workers, are not subject to exploitation of any kind and the need to ensure that the
human rights and dignity of all migrants and their families, in particular of women
migrant workers, are respected and protected,

_______________
8

Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol.1249, No.20378.
10
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
11
Resolution 45/158, annex.
12
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2004, Supplement No. 5 (E/2004/25), chap. I.B,
decision 2004/1.
9

2

A/RES/59/241

Noting that an overall commitment to multiculturalism helps to provide a
context for the effective integration of migrants, preventing and combating
discrimination and promoting solidarity and tolerance in receiving societies,
Aware that, among other important factors, both domestic and international,
the widening economic and social gap between and among many countries and the
marginalization of some countries in the global economy, due in part to the uneven
impact of the benefits of globalization and liberalization, have contributed to large
flows of people between and among countries and to the intensification of the
complex phenomenon of international migration,
Recognizing that countries can be concurrently any combination of origin,
transit and/or destination,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 13

2.
Reconfirms that the Secretary-General will report to the General
Assembly at its sixtieth session on the organizational details of the 2006 high-level
dialogue;
Recognizes the important contributions that international and regional
3.
efforts, including by the regional commissions, can provide to the high-level
dialogue on international migration and development;
Invites appropriate regional consultative processes and other major
4.
initiatives undertaken by Member States in the field of international migration to
contribute to the high-level dialogue;
Takes note of the establishment of the Global Commission on
5.
International Migration;
6.
Calls upon all relevant bodies, agencies, funds and programmes of the
United Nations system and other relevant intergovernmental, regional and
subregional organizations, within their continuing mandated activities, to continue
to address the issue of international migration and development, with a view to
integrating migration issues, including a gender perspective and cultural diversity, in
a more coherent way within the broader context of the implementation of agreed
economic and social development goals and respect for all human rights;
Encourages Governments of countries of origin, countries of transit and
7.
countries of destination to increase cooperation on issues related to migration, and
notes with appreciation the numerous meetings and conferences convened relating
to migration and development, in particular in the context of regional cooperation;
Invites Governments, with the assistance of the international community,
8.
where appropriate, to seek to make the option of remaining in one’s own country
viable for all people, in particular through efforts to achieve sustainable
development, leading to a better economic balance between developed and
developing countries;
Reaffirms the need to adopt policies and undertake measures to reduce
9.
the cost of the transfer of migrant remittances to developing countries, and
welcomes the efforts of Governments and stakeholders in this regard;

_______________
13

A/59/325.

3

A/RES/59/241

10. Requests the Secretary-General, within existing resources, to prepare a
comprehensive overview of studies and analyses on the multidimensional aspects of
migration and development, including the effects of migration on economic and
social development in developed and developing countries, and on the effects of the
movements of highly skilled migrant workers and those with advanced education;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General
Assembly at its sixty-first session on the implementation of the present resolution.
75th plenary meeting
22 December 2004

4
