General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

IX. RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SIXTH COMMITTEE 1

CONTENTS
RrMMlion
No.

Item

Titlt>

37/10

Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of International Disputes
(A/371590) .................... .

37/1 I

Datt' of
adoption

261

122

15 November 1982

United Nations Conference on Succession of States in respect of State Property.
Archives and Debts (A/37/593) ...............

124

15 November 1982

263

37/102

Draft Code of Offences against the Peace and Security of Mankind (A/371714)

115

16 December 1982

264

37/103

Progressive development of the principles and norms of international law
relating to the new international economic order (A/37/720)

116

16 December 1982

265

37/104

Observer status of national liberation movements recognized by the Organi­
zation of African Unity and/or by the League of Arab States (A/37/750)

117 (a)

16 December 1982

265

37/105

Report of the Special Committee on Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Prin­
ciple of Non-Use of Force in International Relations (A/371721) ..

118

16 December 1982

266

37/106

Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (A/37/
620) ........................... .

119

16 December 1982

266

37/107

Provisions for a unit of account and adjustment of limitations of liability
adopted by the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
(A/37/620) ........ . ................... .

119

16 December 1982

268

37/108

Consideration of effective measures to enhance the protection. security and
safety of diplomatic and consular missions and representatives (A/37/699)

120

16 December 1982

268

37/109

Drafting of an international convention against the recruitment. use, financing
and training of mercenaries (A/37/648) ......

16 December 1982

269

3711 IO

Review of the multilateral treaty-making process (A/37/751)

16 December 1982

269

37/111

Report of the International Law Commission (A/37/700) ...

16 December 1982

270

371112

Convention on the Law of Treaties between States and International Organi­
zations or between International Organizations (A/37/700) .

125

16 December 1982

271

37/113

Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country (A/37/752) ..

126

16 December 1982

271

37/114

Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on
the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization (A/37/722)

127

16 December I 982

272

37/115

Draft Declaration on Social and Legal Principles relating to the Protection and
Welfare of Children, with Special Reference to Foster Placement and Adop­
tion Nationally and Internationally (A/37/710) ..

128

16 December 1982

273

37/116

State of signatures and ratifications of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and relating to the protection of victims of international
armed conflicts (Protocol I) and the protection of victims of non-international
armed conflicts (Protocol II) (A/37/641) ....

132

16 December 1982

273

37/10.

by peaceful means and to avoid any military action and
hostilities, which can only make more difficult the solution
of those conflicts and disputes,
Considering that the question of the peaceful settlement
of disputes should represent one of the central concerns for
States and for the United Nations and that the efforts to
strengthen the process of the peaceful settlement of disputes
should be continued,
Convinced that the adoption of the Manila Declaration
on the Peaceful Settlement of International Disputes should
enhance the observance of the principle of peaceful settle­
ment of disputes in relations between States and contribute
to the elimination of the danger of recourse to force or to
the threat of force, to the relaxation of international tensions,
to the promotion of a policy of co-operation and peace and

Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement
of International Disputes 2

The General Assembly,
Having examined the item entitled • 'Peaceful settlement
of disputes between States'' ,
Recalling its resolutions 34/102 of 14 December 1979,
351160 of 15 December 1980 and 36/110 of 10 December
1981,
Reaffirming the need to exert utmost efforts in order to
settle any conflicts and disputes between States exclusively
1 For the decisions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee, see
sect. X.8.8.
2 See also sect. X.B.8, decision 37/407.
261

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

262

of respect for the independence and sovereignty of all States,
to the enhancing of the role of the United Nations in pre­
venting conflicts and settling them peacefully and, conse­
quently, to the strengthening of international peace and
security,
Considering the need to ensure a wide dissemination of
the text of the Declaration,
1. Approves the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful
Settlement of International Disputes, the text of which is
annexed to the present resolution;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Special Committee
on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strength­
ening of the Role of the Organization for its important con­
tribution to the elaboration of the text of the Declaration;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to inform the Gov­
ernments of the States Members of the United Nations or
members of specialized agencies, the Security Council and
the International Court of Justice of the adoption of the
Declaration;
4. Urges that all efforts be made so that the Declaration
becomes generally known and fully observed and
implemented.
68th plenary meeting
15 November 1982
ANNEX
Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement
of International Disputes
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the principle of the Charter of the United Nations that all
States shall settle their international disputes by peaceful means in such a
manner that international peace and security, and justice, are not endangered,
Conscious that the Charter of the United Nations embodies the means
and an essential framework for the peaceful settlement of international
disputes, the continuance of which is likely to endanger the maintenance
of international peace and security,
Recognizing the important role of the United Nations and the need to
enhance its effectiveness in the peaceful settlement of international disputes
and the maintenance of international peace and security, in accordance
with the principles of justice and international law, in conformity with the
Charter of the United Nations,
Reajjirming the principle of the Charter of the United Nations that all
States shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of
force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State,
or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations,
Reiterating that no State or group of States has the right to intervene,
directly or indirectly, for any reason whatsoever, in the internal or external
affairs of any other State,
Reaffirming the Declaration on Principles of International Law con­
cerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations,'
Bearing in mind the importance of maintaining and strengthening in­
ternational peace and security and the development of friendly relations
among States, irrespective of their political, economic and social systems
or levels of economic development,
Reaffirming the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peo­
ples as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and referred to in
the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations and in other relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly,
Stressing the need for all States to desist from any forcible action which
deprives peoples, particularly peoples under colonial and racist regimes or
other forms of alien domination, of their inalienable right to self-deter­
mination, freedom and independence, as referred to in the Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co­
operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
3 Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

Mindful of existing international instruments as well as respective prin­
ciples and rules concerning the peaceful settlement of international dis­
putes, including the exhaustion of local remedies whenever applicable,
Determined to promote international co-operation in the political field
and to encourage the progressive development of international law and its
codification, particularly in relation to the peaceful settlement of interna­
tional disputes,
Solemnly declares that:
l . All States shall act in good faith and in conformity with the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations
with a view to avoiding disputes among themselves likely to affect
friendly relations among States, thus contributing to the maintenance of
international peace and security. They shall live together in peace with
one another as good neighbours and strive for the adoption of meaningful
measures for strengthening international peace and security.
2. Every State shall settle its international disputes exclusively by
peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security.
and justice, are not endangered.
3. International disputes shall be settled on the basis of the sovereign
equality of States and in accordance with the principle of free choice of
means in conformity with obligations under the Charter of the United
Nations and with the principles of justice and international law. Recourse
to, or acceptance of, a settlement procedure freely agreed to by States
with regard to existing or future disputes to which they are parties shall
not be regarded as incompatible with the sovereign equality of States.
4. States parties to a dispute shall continue to observe in their mutual
relations their obligations under the fundamental principles of interna­
tional law concerning the sovereignty, independence and territorial in­
tegrity of States, as well as other generally recognized principles and
rules of contemporary international law.
5. States shall seek in good faith and in a spirit of co-operation an
early and equitable settlement of their international disputes by any of
the following means: negotiation, inquiry, mediation, conciliation, ar­
bitration, judicial settlement, resort to regional arrangements or agencies
or other peaceful means of their own choice, including good offices. In
seeking such a settlement, the parties shall agree on such peaceful means
as may be appropriate to the circumstances and the nature of their dispute.
6. States parties to regional arrangements or agencies shall make
every effort to achieve pacific settlement of their local disputes through
such regional arrangements or agencies before referring them to the
Security Council. This does not preclude States from bringing any dis­
pute to the attention of the Security Council or of the General Assembly
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
7. In the event of failure of the parties to a dispute to reach an early
solution by any of the above means of settlement, they shall continue
to seek a peaceful solution and shall consult forthwith on mutually agreed
means to settle the dispute peacefully. Should the parties fail to settle
by any of the above means a dispute the continuance of which is likely
to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security, they
shall refer it to the Security Council in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations and without prejudice to the functions and powers
of the Council set forth in the relevant provisions of Chapter VI of the
Charter.
8. States parties to an international dispute, as well as other States,
shall refrain from any action whatsoever which may aggravate the sit­
uation so as to endanger the maintenance of international peace and
security and make more difficult or impede the peaceful settlement of
the dispute, and shall act in this respect in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the United Nations.
9. States should consider concluding agreements for the peaceful
settlement of disputes among them. They should also include in bilateral
agreements and multilateral conventions to be concluded, as appropriate,
effective provisions for the peaceful settlement of disputes arising from
the interpretation or application thereof.
IO. States should, without prejudice to the right of free choice of
means, bear in mind that direct negotiations are a flexible and effective
means of peaceful settlement of their disputes. When they choose to
resort to direct negotiations, States should negotiate meaningfully, in
order to arrive at an early settlement acceptable to the parties. States
should be equally prepared to seek the settlement of their disputes by
the other means mentioned in the present Declaration.
11. States shall in accordance with international law implement in
good faith all the provisions of agreements concluded by them for the
settlement of their disputes.

IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

12. In order to facilitate the exercise by the peoples concerned of
the right to self-determination as referred to in the Declaration on Prin­
ciples of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-op­
eration among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
the panics to a dispute may have the possibility, if they agree to do so
and as appropriate, to have recourse to the relevant procedures mentioned
in the present Declaration. for the peaceful settlement of the dispute.
13. Neither the existence of a dispute nor the failure of a procedure
of peaceful settlement of disputes shall permit the use of force or threat
of force by any of the States parties to the dispute.

II
I . Member States should make full use of the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, including the procedures and means
provided for therein, particularly Chapter VI, concerning the peaceful
settlement of disputes.
2. Member States shall fulfil in good faith the obligations assumed
by them in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. They
should, in accordance with the Charter, as appropriate, duly take into
account the recommendations of the Security Council relating to the
peaceful settlement of disputes. They should also, in accordance with
the Charter, as appropriate, duly take into account the recommendations
adopted by the General Assembly, subject to Articles 11 and 12 of the
Charter, in the field of peaceful settlement of disputes.
3. Member States reaffirm the important role conferred on the Gen­
eral Assembly by the Charter of the United Nations in the field of
peaceful settlement of disputes and stress the need for it to discharge
effectively its responsibilities. Accordingly, they should:
(a) Bear in mind that the General Assembly may discuss any situ­
ation, regardless of origin, which it deems likely to impair the general
welfare or friendly relations among nations and, subject to Article 12
of the Charter, recommend measures for its peaceful adjustment;
(b) Consider making use, when they deem it appropriate, of the
possibility of bringing to the attention of the General Assembly any
dispute or any situation which might lead to international friction or give
rise to a dispute;
(c) Consider utilizing, for the peaceful settlement of their disputes,
the subsidiary organs established by the General Assembly in the per­
formance of its functions under the Charter;
(d) Consider, when they are parties to a dispute brought to the
attention of the General Assembly, making use of consultations within
the framework of the Assembly, with a view to facilitating an early
settlement of their dispute.
4. Member States should strengthen the primary role of the Security
Council so that it may fully and effectively discharge its responsibilities,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, in the area of the
settlement of disputes or of any situation the continuance of which is
likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security.
To this end they should:
(a) Be fully aware of their obligation to refer to the Security Council
such a dispute to which they are parties if they fail to settle it by the
means indicated in Article 33 of the Charter;
(b) Make greater use of the possibility of bringing to the attention
of the Security Council any dispute or any situation which might lead
to international friction or give rise to a dispute;
(c) Encourage the Security Council to make wider use of the op­
portunities provided for by the Charter in order to review disputes or
situations the continuance of which is likely to endanger the maintenance
of international peace and security;
(d) Consider making greater use of the fact-finding capacity of the
Security Council in accordance with the Charter:
(e) Encourage the Security Council to make wider use, as a means
to promote peaceful settlement of disputes, of the subsidiary organs
established by it in the performance of its functions under the Charter;
(f) Bear in mind that the Security Council may, at any stage of a
dispute of the nature referred to in Article 33 of the Charter or of a
situation of like nature, recommmend appropriate procedures or methods
of adjustment;
(g) Encourage the Security Council to act without delay. in accord­
ance with its functions and powers, particularly in cases where inter­
national disputes develop into armed conflicts.

5. States should be fully aware of the role of the International Coun
of Justice, which is the principal judicial organ of the United Nations.
Their attention is drawn to the facilities offered by the International

263

Court of Justice for the settlement of legal disputes, especially since the
revision of the Rules of the Court.
States may entrust the solution of their differences to other tribunals
by virtue of agreements already in existence or which may be concluded
in the future.
States should bear in mind:
(a) That legal disputes should as a general rule be referred by the
parties to the International Court of Justice. in accordance with the
provisions of the Statute of the Court;
(b)

That it is desirable that they:

(i)

Consider the possibility of inserting in treaties, whenever ap­
propriate, clauses providing for the submission to the Interna­
tional Court of Justice of disputes which may arise from the
interpretation or application of such treaties;

(ii)

Study the possibility of choosing, in the free exercise of their
sovereignty. to recognize as compulsory the jurisdiction of the
International Court of Justice in accordance with Anicle 36 of
its Statute;
Review the possibility of identifying cases in which use may
be made of the International Court of Justice.

(iii)

The organs of the United Nations and the specialized agencies should
study the advisability of making use of the possibility of requesting
advisory opinions of the International Court of Justice on legal questions
arising within the scope of their activities, provided that they are duly
authorized to do so.
Recourse to judicial settlement of legal disputes, panicularly referral
to the International Court of Justice. should not be considered an un­
friendly act between States.
6. The Secretary-General should make full use of the provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations concerning the responsibilities en­
trusted to him. The Secretary -General may bring to the attention of the
Security Council any matter which in his opinion may threaten the
maintenance of international peace and security. He shall perform such
other functions as are entrusted to him by the Security Council or by
the General Assembly. Reports in this connection shall be made when­
ever requested to the Security Council or the General Assembly.

Urges all States to observe and promote in good faith the provisions of
the present Declaration in the peaceful settlement of their international
disputes;
Declares that nothing in the present Declaration shall be construed as
prejudicing in any manner the relevant provisions of the Charter or the
rights and duties of States, or the scope of the functions and powers of
the United Nations organs under the Charter, in particular those relating
to the peaceful settlement of disputes;
Declares that nothing in the present Declaration could in any way prej­
udice the right to self-determination, freedom and independence, as derived
from the Charter, of peoples forcibly deprived of that right and referred
to in the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, particularly peoples under colonial and racist
gimes or other forms of alien domination; nor the right of these peoples
to struggle to that end and to seek and receive suppon, in accordance with
the principles of the Charter and in conformity with the above-mentioned
Declaration;
Stresses the need, in accordance with the Charter, to continue effons
to strengthen the process of the peaceful settlement of disputes through
progressive development and codification of international law, as appro­
priate, and through enhancing the effectiveness of the United Nations in
this field.

re­

37/11.

United Nations Conference on Succession of
States in respect of State Property, Archives and
Debts

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, by its resolution 36/113 of 10 December

1981, it decided to convene a conference of plenipotentiaries
in 1983 to consider the draft articles on succession of States
in respect of State property, archives and debts, adopted by
