General Assembly - Thirty-eighth Session

38/105.

Participation of women in promoting international peace and co-operation

The General lssemhlL
Rcaffmning its resolution 37 "63 of 3 December 1982, by
which it proclaimed the Declaration on the Participation
of Women in Promoting lnternational Peacc and Cooperation,
Bclieving that further cfforts are requircd to eliminatc
discrimination against womcn in ali its forms and in every
field of human cndeavour.
Wishing to encourage the active participation of women
in promoting international peace and security and cooperation,
Conscious of thc need to implement the provisions of
the Declaration,
Desiring that publicity he given to the Declaration,
1. Ca/Is upon the Sccretary-Gcneral to disseminatc
widely the Declaration on the Participation of Women in
Promoting lnternational Peace and Co-operation in the six
official languages of the United Nations:
2. Invites ali Governments to take the necessary measures to ensure wide publicity for the Declaration:
3. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the Declaration to the attention of the appropriate specialized agencies. including the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization. the International Labour
Organisation. the World Health Organization and other
appropriate bodies within the United Nations system. for
the consideration of mcasures to implement the Dcclaration:
4. Requcsts the Commission on thc Status of Women
to consider what measures may be neccssary in order to
implcment the Declaratíon and to report. through the Economic and Social Council. to the General Assembly at its
thirty-ninth session:
5. Decides to consider at its thirty-ninth session the
report of the Commission on the Status of Women under
the item entitlcd "United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality. Development and Peacc". together with the
preparations for the World Conference to Review and
Appraise the Achievemcnts ofthe United Nations Decade
for Women. to be hcld in 1985.
100th plenary meeting
/6 December /983

38/106.

Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade for Wornen

The General Asscmbly.
Reca//ing its resolution 31/133 of 16 December 1976.
containing the criteria and arrangements for the management of the Vol untary Fund for the lJ nited Nations Decade for Women.
Recal/ing a/so its resolution 36/ 129 of 14 December
1981, in which it decided that the Fund should continue
its activities heyond the United Nations Decade for
Women: Equality, Development and Peace,
Recal/ing fúrther its resolution 3 7/62 of 3 December
1982 and. in particular. its view that thc appointment of
senior women's programme officers at the regional commissions represents a valuablc contribution to the implcmentation of the goals of the Decade.
Rea_tfirming that question,· ..:oncerning women should be
approached and dealt with as an integral part of overall
131 A/381 530.

policics and programmes in the tield of social and econnmic development.
Noting with apwecia//on the effectivc management and
continuing expansion of the activities of thc Fund and thc
co-operation extended by rclcvant bodies of the Unitcd
Nations. including the Unitcd Nations Children's Fund.
the United Nations Devclopmcnt Programmc and the
regional commissions. and by non-governmcntal organizations.
We/coming thc contributions madc by Memhcr States
and non-governmental organizations towards the impkmentation of the goals of thc Decadc.
Taking note 1r11h appreciation of the rcport of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Fund. u 1
1. Takcs no/e wilh satisfaction of thc recommendations
of thc Consultativc Comm.ittee on the Voluntary Fund for
the United Nations Dccadc for Women at ib thirteenth
and fourteenth scssions. rcfcrrcd to in thc report of thc
Secretary-Cieneral: 114
2. 1~·xpresses 1/s concem that the qucstion of senior
women's programme officers posts at the regional commissions is still unrcsolvcd and that lack of progrcss in this
regard is seriously impeding work on thc women ·s
programmes in severa( regions:
3. Urges thc Secrctary-Gcncral, in consultation with
the executive sccretaries of the regional commissions, to
give priority to solving the question of senior women·s
programme officers and to take urgently appropriatc measures to cnsure that ali temporary and permancnt senior
womcn's programme officers posts at the regional commissions should be continued within thc regular hudgel
rcsources availablc to them:
4. Notes with satisfaclion the continuing incrcase in the
number of projects submitted to and financcd by thc
rcsources of the Fund and thcir contribution to promoting
the involvcment of women in devclopment:
5. ( 'onsiders that the Fund has a unique contribution
to makc in the technical assistance ti.cid to the implcmcntation of thc goals of the Unitcd Nations Decade for
Women: Equalit}. Development and Peace:
6. Stresses that the Fund also has a unique contribution to make to the achievcment of the goals of the Third
l lnited Nations Dcvelopment Decade. and evcn bcyond it:
7. Expresses lls appreciation for the voluntary support
given to the Fund by Member States, national committces
for the Fund. national United Nations associations and
other non-governmcntal organizations:
8. Notes with conccrn that contributions to thc Fund
have not been suflicient to cnable it to take on ali the
worthwhilc projccts submittcd to it:
9. Notes that contributions bv Governments have a
vital role to play in maintaining a'nd increasing the financia( viability and effectiveness of thc work of the Fund:
10. Urges Govemmcnts. accordingly, to continue and
increase. where possible, their contributions to thc Fund
and calls upon thosc Governments that have not yct done
so to consider contributing to the Fund:
11. Decides that. when considering the reports of the
Secretary-General to be submitted to thc General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session pursuant to Assembly resolution 36/129. ali possiblc options for continuing the Fund's
activities heyond the end of the Dccade will be revicwed in
depth:
12. Requests that the results of the forward-looking
assessment that is being undertaken on the activities
assisted by the F\md be reflected in thc reports of the Scc114 / /,u/ .. SLTI. \

VI.

retary-General on the Fund to be submitted to the General
Assembly at its thirty-ninth session:
13. Takes note with appreciation ofthc measures taken
by the Secretary-General, in response to resolution 37 /62,
to improve and streamline thc administration ofthe Fund;
14. Commends the United Nations Development Programme on its continuing tf'('hnical and rcsource assistance to the Fund:
15. Requests the Sccretary-General:
(a) To continue to report annually on the managcment
of the Fund and on the progrcss of its activitics and to
include in bis report to the General Assembly at its thirtyninth session information on thc implementation of measures taken in response to paragraph 3 above:
(b) To continue, on an annual basis. to include the
Fund among the programmes for which funds are plcdged
at the United Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities.
JO/Jth plcnar¡, meeting
16 Dccemhcr 198]

38/107.

209

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third C'ommittee

Prevention of prostitution

The General Assemhly,
Reaffirming the objectives of the United Nations Dccade for Women: Equality. Devclopment and Peacc,
Taking into account the resolutions, declarations, conventions and recommendations of the U nited Nations, the
specialized agencies and international confcrences
designed to eliminate ali forms of discrimination against
women, as well as those relating to thc suppression of traffic in persons and thc exploitation of thc prostitution of
others, including Economic and Social Council resolution
1983/30 of 26 May 1983.
Convinced of the importancc of thc full integration of
women in the social. political and economic activities of
their community,
Bearing in mind the esscntial role of women in the welfare of the family and the development of society,
Considering that prostitution and the accompanying evil
of the traffic in persons for the purpose of prostitution are
incompatible with the dignity and worth of the human
person and endanger the welfare of the individual. the
family and the community,
Further considering that women and children are still ali
too often victims of physical abuse and sexual cxploitation,
Mindful that the prevailing economic and social conditions are largely responsible for the continued existence of
the social problems of prostitution and traffic in pcrsons,
1. Urges Member States to take ali appropriate
humane measures, including legislation, to combat prostitution, exploitation of the prostitution of others and ali
forms of traffic in persons;
2. Appeals to Member States to provide special protection to victims of prostitution through measures including
education, social guarantees and employment opportunities for those victims with a view to their rehabilitation:
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council. the
Commission on Human Rights, the Commission on the
Status of Women, the regional commissions and other
l35 Report ,,t the World ( ·on/áencc o/ thc illtern11twnal Wo111e11 ·s Year.
Mexico City, 19 June-2 .luir 197.< (llnitcd Nations publiration. Sales No.
E.76.IV.l). chap. 11, sect. A.
136 Resolution 2626 (XXV).
13 7 Report of thc World Con/áence o( tlw ( 'nite<Í N1111om /Jccade jor
Women: Equality, Developmmt allll /'rnn·. (·o¡wnhagen. 14-30 ./11/1· /08//

concerned bodies of the United Nations system to devote
greater attention to the problem of prostitution and the
means for its prevention;
4. Rcquests the Economic and Social Council to consider this question at its first regular session of 1985,
together with the reports requested by the Council in its
rcsolution 1983/30, and to transmit its comments to the
General Asscmbly at its fortieth session.
100th plenary meeting
/6 Decemher 1983

38/108.

Preparations for the World Conference to
Review and Appraise the Achievements of
the United '.\lations Decade for Women

Thc <iencral Assemhlr,
Recalling its resolution 3520 (XXX) of 15 December
1975, in which it endorsed, inter afia, the action proposals
contained in the World Plan of Aetion for the lmplcmentation of the Objectives of the International Women's
Year. 1'·'
Recalling its resolution 3490 (XXX) of 12 December
1975. in which it expressed its conviction that a comprehcnsive and thorough review and appraisal of progress
made in meeting the goals ofthe World Plan of Action was
of crucial importance for the success ofthe Plan and recognized that the results of the implementation of the Plan
would contribute to the consideration of the review and
appraisal of the International Development Strategy for
the Second United Nations Development Dccade 13 " and
would consequently promotc the role of women in the
development process,
Recalling its resolution 351136 of 11 December 1980, in
which it endorsed the Programmc of Action for the Second
Half of thc United Nations Decade for Womcn i- 7 as
adoptcd at the World Conferencc of the United Nations
Decade for Women, and decided to convene in 1985, at
the conclusion of thc Decade, a World Confcrencc to
Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United
Nations Decade for Women,
Recalling a/so that the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade 138
stressed that the important set of measures to improve the
status of women contained in the World Plan of Action
adopted at Mexico City in 1975, 135 and the important
agreed measures relating to the Intemational Development
Strategy in the Programme of Action for the Second Half
of the United Nations Decade for Women, adopted at
Copenhagen in 1980, should be implemented,
Rccalling further its resolution 37/60 of 3 December
1982, in which it welcomed the decision of the Economic
and Social Council that the Commission on the Status of
Women should actas the preparatory body for the Conference and noted that the Commission would hold its first
session in that eapacity at Vienna from 23 February to 4
March 1983,
Taking into consideration Economic and Social Council
decision 1983/132 of 26 May 1983 on the recommendations of the Commission on the Status of Women as the
preparatory body for the Conference as set forth in its
report, 139 and Council resolution 1983/28 of 26 May
(l lnited Nations publication. Sales No. E.80.IY.3 and corrigendum). chap. l.
SL'Cl. A.
1rn Rcsolution 35156. anne,.
11 " \ ( ONF. I I61PC9 and Corr. l. chap. 1, sect. A.
