36

General Assembly-Sixth Session
542 (VI). Communications concerning
human rights

The General Assembly,
Noting that the Economic and Social Council has
taken no action with respect to the resolution of the
Commission on Human Rights 8 on communications concerning human rights,
DecidC's to invite the Economic and Social Council to
give the Commission on Human Rights instructions
for its ninth session with regar<l to such communications and to request the Commission to formulate its
recommendations on them.
37-tth plenary meeting,
4 February 1952.

543 (VI). Preparation of two Draft International
Covenants on Human Rights
ff' hi:rcas the Economic and Social Council, by resolution 303 I (XI) of 9 August 1950, requested the
General Assembly to make a policy decision concerning
the inclusion of economic, social and cultural rights in
the Covenant on Human Rights,
Whereas the General Assembly affirmed, in its resolution 421 E (V) of 4 December 1950, that "the enjoyment of civic and political freedoms and of economic,
social and cultural rights are interconnected and interdependent" and that "when deprived of economic, social and cultural rights, man does not represent the
human person whom the Universal Declaration regards
as the ideal of the free man",
Whereas the General Assembly, after a thorough and
all-round discussion, confirmed in the aforementioned
resolution the principle that economic, social and cultural rights should be included in the Covenant on
Human Rights,
U,'hereas the General Assembly, at the request of the
Economic and Social Council in resolution 384 (XIII)
of 29 August 1951, reconsidered this matter at its
sixth session,
The General Assembly
l. Requests the Economic and S.ocial Council to ask
the Commission on Human Rights to draft two Covenants on Human Rights, to be submitted simultaneously
for the consideration of the General Assembly at its
seventh session, one to contain civil and political rights
and the other to contain economic, social and cultural
rights, in order that the General Assembly may approve the two Covenants simultaneously and open them
at the same time for signature, the two Covenants to
contain, in order to emphasize the unity of the aim in
view and to ensure respect for and observance of
human rights, as many similar provisions as possible,
particularly in so far as the reports to be submitted by
States on the implementation of those rights are concerned;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to ask Member
States and appropriate specialized agencies to submit
drafts or memoranda containing their views on the
form and contents of the proIXJsed Covenant on economic, social and cultural rights, together with their ob• See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Tlrirtccnth Session, Supplement No. 9, chapter IV.

~ervations thereon, to reach the Secretary l ~eneml before 1 March 1952, for the information and !-,"1.U<lance
of the Commission on Human Rights at it., forthcoming session.
375th f'lenary m<'cting,
5 Fcbrum·y 195:!.

544 (VI). Preparation of artides on economic,
social and cultural rights
The General Assembly,
Considering that the Cmnmissio11 on I I mmn Rights
has, by virtue oi General Assembly resol11t1n11 .Q_l l·,
( V) of 4 December 1950. preparv1l varirn1s articles
on economic, social and cultural rights,!➔
Considering that the wording of those artic_les, \\:hich
have been examined during the present session ot the
General Assembly, should be improved in order to protect more effectively the rights to which they refer,
Calls upon the Economic and Social Council to request the Commission on Human Rights to take into
consideration, when revising the relevant articles of the
draft Covenant, the views expressed during the discussion of the draft Covenant, and abu sud1 v it·ws a~ the
governments of Member States, the specialized agencies and non-governmental organizations may think fit
to advance.
3i5th plenary muting,
.'i Fel,nwry 1952.

545 (VI). Inclusion in the International Covenant or Covenants on Human Rights of an
article relating to the right of peoples to selfdetermination
Whereas the General Assembly at its fifth session
recognized the right of peoples and nations to St!lfdetermination as a fundamental human right ( resolution 421 D (V) of 4 December 1950),
Whereas the Economic and Social Council and the
Commission on Human Rights, owing to lack of time,
were unable to carry out the request of the General
Assembly to study ways and means ,vhich would ensure the above-mentioned right to peoples and nations,
Whereas the violation of this right has resulted in
bloodshed and war in the past and is considered a continuous threat to peace,
The General Assembly
(i) To save the present and succeeding generations
from the scourge of war,
(ii) To reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights,
and
(iii) To take due account of the political aspirations of all peoples and thus to further international peace and security, and to develop
friendly relations among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights and selfdetermination of peoples,
l. Decides to include in the International Covenant
or Covenants on Human Rights an article on the right
of all peoples and nations to self-determination in reaffirmation of the principle enunciated in the Charter of the United Nations. This article shall be drafted
in the following terms: "All peoples shall have the
0

Ibid., Supplement ,Vo. 9.
