S/PV.8156

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8156th meeting

Thursday, 11 January 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Umarov. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kazakhstan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Almunayekh
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Allen
Ms. Tachco

Agenda
Peace consolidation in West Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (S/2017/1104)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-00851 (E)
*1800851*

S/PV.8156

Peace consolidation in West Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace consolidation in West Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (S/2017/1104)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/1104, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel.
I now give the floor to Mr. Chambas.
Mr. Chambas: It is my honour to be here in the
Council today to introduce the Secretary-General’s
report on the activities of the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel (S/2017/1104).
Despite continuous progress in West Africa and
the Sahel, notably regarding democratic and peaceful
political transitions, the security situation in the region
remains a matter of grave concern. In Mali, terrorists
launched a complex attack on bases of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) in Kidal, resulting in the
death of one peacekeeper. Three more Malian soldiers
were killed recently by a landmine in Mopti region,
and another Malian soldier was killed by terrorists in
Niono. Two separate attacks on security posts were
also registered in Burkina Faso near the Malian border.
The attacks in Mali as well as within the Mali-NigerBurkina Faso tri-border area are mainly attributed to
Al-Qaida-affiliated groups and the Islamic State in
Greater Sahara.
In the Niger, the increasing number of security
incidents has compelled the Government to dedicate
17 per cent of public expenditure in 2018 to the security
sector, compared with 15 per cent in 2017. This has,
2/12

11/01/2018

however, triggered demonstrations in the capital of the
Niger given the expected detrimental effects on the
delivery of social services.
Following a notable decline in the number of Boko
Haram attacks in the first half of the year, there has been
an uptick in the number of incidents since September
last year, with a peak of 143 civilian casualties alone in
November 2017. The use of children as suicide bombers
by Boko Haram increased five-fold compared with 2016,
to reach 135 cases in 2017. While 700 people abducted
by Boko Haram have recently escaped captivity, the
group continues to kidnap innocent persons, as shown
by the recent disappearance of 31 loggers in Gamboru
near the Cameroon border. Overall, more than 2 million
displaced persons are still desperately waiting for an
end to the crisis in the Lake Chad Basin.
The comprehensive response of the region to
address the Boko Haram threat must be supported by
the international community. I commend the successful
efforts of the Multinational Joint Task Force and
welcome the conference on the resuscitation of Lake
Chad to be hosted by Nigeria next month.
In the Sahel, the Group of Five (G-5 Sahel) has
made significant progress in the operationalization of
its Joint Force, including by establishing its military
command structure and a Force headquarters in Sevaré,
and conducting its first military operation with French
troops in late October 2017. In line with resolution 2391
(2017), consultations are currently ongoing regarding
the conclusion of a technical agreement among the
United Nations, the European Union and the G-5 Sahel
States on the provision of operational and logistical
support to the Joint Force through MINUSMA.
On 8 December, at a meeting of the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of the European Union and
representatives of the G-5 Sahel in Brussels, I
underscored that the security response needs to be
complemented by measures to tackle governance
challenges as well as to boost economic development
and the resilience of the Sahelian population, as
articulated in the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel.
The past six months have seen substantive
progress in the efforts to reinvigorate the strategy,
notably through an extensive mapping of strategyrelated activities and the presentation of a proposal in
that context to strengthen the resilience of the Sahel
population during the third annual Climate Finance
18-00851

11/01/2018

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Day, to be held on 11 December in Paris. A support
plan for the United Nations integrated strategy for the
Sahel will now be shared with national, regional and
international partners so as to harmonize approaches
and to canvass for effective support for the Sahel in line
with national and regional priorities, the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the African Union’s
Agenda 2063.
Meanwhile, the exponential spread of intercommunal
and farmer-herder conflicts, which have claimed
hundreds of lives in the recent past, must also be cause
for worry. It is a ticking time-bomb that unattended
could escalate beyond the community level.
Last December, during the Policy Committee of
the West Africa Coast Initiative, member countries
committed to reinforcing the fight against organized
crime in line with the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) regional action plan to
address illicit drug trafficking, transnational organized
crime and drug abuse. Also, migration has become one
of the most lucrative activities for criminal networks
across West Africa and the Sahel. In this regard,
stemming human trafficking must continue to be a top
priority in 2018, as recently underscored by SecretaryGeneral Guterres.
In line with resolution 2282 (2016), the United
Nations continues to pioneer the sustaining peace
approach in the Gambia and Burkina Faso to ensure
lasting peace and the consolidation of these young
democracies. Strong support by the international
community for Burkina Faso’s emergency plan will
enable it to withstand threats to its peace and security.
The Gambia has just concluded the first phase of its
security-sector reform, and democratic consolidation
is progressing with generous financial support on the
part of international partners. However, more attention
still needs to be paid to the challenges facing the two
countries in the areas of security-sector reform, national
reconciliation and the justice sector. The United Nations
continues to coordinate closely with the African Union,
ECOWAS, the European Union and other partners in
this regard.
Respect for human rights and the rule of law is a
fundamental basis for advancing peace, security and
development. Thus I particularly welcome Burkina
Faso’s new law on human rights defenders and the law
recently passed by the Gambia’s National Assembly
to establish a national human rights commission. The

S/PV. 8156

establishment of a judicial commission in Nigeria to
review the armed forces’ compliance with international
human rights standards and the start of judicial
proceedings against Boko Haram suspects in Nigeria
also need to be commended.
Regarding the demarcation of the Cameroon-Nigeria
border, the good-neighbourly relationship between
the two countries continues to increase prospects for
its completion.
The trajectory of successful democratic elections
in West Africa continues. Notably, on 10 October
and 26 December the people of Liberia came out in
large numbers to peacefully elect a new President.
I applaud the Liberian people and their leaders for
their recourse to exclusively legal means to settle all
electorally related disputes; this has served to further
strengthen its existing democratic institutions. The
deployment of former President Obasanjo of Nigeria,
whom I accompanied in his capacity as a member of
the Secretary-General’s High-Level Advisory Board on
Mediation, following the 26 December presidential runoff, contributed to the gracious concession statement by
Vice-President Boakai and the magnanimous gesture of
President-elect George Weah, and demonstrated once
more the efficacy of preventive diplomacy.
Further attention now needs to be paid to the
forthcoming elections in Sierra Leone and Guinea. In
Togo, opposition parties continue with their protests.
The lack of consensus on the implementation of
constitutional reforms in the country could threaten the
holding of the legislative and local elections scheduled
to be held this year. I continue my close collaboration
with President Nana Akufo-Addo of Ghana and
President Alpha Condé of Guinea, Chairperson of
the African Union, to facilitate a resolution of the
impasse between the Government and the opposition,
in consonance with the Togolese Constitution, regional
democratic best practices and the ECOWAS Protocol
on Democracy and Good Governance.
As we pay tribute to the outgoing President of
Liberia, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, who is leaving office
after 12 years of leadership and service to her country
and the wider region, in particular during her term
as the Chair of the Economic Community of West
African States, we must increase our efforts to promote
the participation of women in decision-making and
leadership and ensure that the region’s youth are solidly
placed at the centre of development policies.

18-008513/12

S/PV.8156

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Let me finally underscore that UNOWAS remains
strongly committed to continuing to support efforts for
the consolidation of peace and stability in West Africa
and the Sahel in line with its mandate and very much
appreciates the constant support it enjoys from the
Security Council.
The President: I thank Mr. Chambas for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): Côte d’Ivoire notes with great interest the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1104), His
Excellency Mr. António Guterres, and reiterates its
support for his tireless efforts to promote sustainable
peace and security throughout the world in general, and
in West Africa and the Sahel in particular.
My country commends his Special Representative
and Head of the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel, Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, on his
outstanding briefing, which apprised the Security
Council of the progress made since the report of the
Secretary-General was published in June 2017. He also
cited the many ongoing humanitarian and security
challenges that continue to weaken the building blocks
of peace and security in a region already sorely tested
by several socioeconomic issues. The gains made in the
area of political governance spark hope, because they
are part and parcel of an irreversible process of deepseated change under way in our society. The Council
must continue to support efforts at dialogue and
peaceful dispute resolution in some States of the region.
In spite of the overall progress made in West
Africa, my country remains concerned about the
ongoing threats to terrorism and violent extremism in
the region, which are linked to transnational organized
crime and trafficking of all kinds, in particular
trafficking in migrants, illegal drugs, weapons and
persons. The phenomenon is exacerbated by poverty
and unemployment, in particular among young people
in areas where it is difficult for the State to exercise
its authority. The quest for sustainable solutions to
such challenges leaves us no other option but to work
together to adopt a holistic, coordinated approach that
would enable is to reduce threats to peace and security.
To that end, the delegation of Côte d’Ivoire believes that
action must be taken at three levels.
4/12

11/01/2018

First, action must be taken at the political and
strategic level to ensure greater consistency among
mechanisms in order to strengthen security, political
governance and democracy in the West Africa and the
Sahel. In that regard, we think it essential to fully exploit
the comparative advantages of regional organizations,
in particular the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), whose
successive interventions in Guinea-Bissau, Mali,
Burkina Faso and The Gambia have demonstrated the
full extent of their capabilities in the areas of conflict
prevention and conflict management in the countries
concerned. Following the recent holding of peaceful
presidential elections and the subsequent democratic
transfer of power in Liberia, one of Côte d’Ivoire’s
neighbours, we are hopeful that the country has
turned away from political and military crises, turned
over a new leaf and is now writing a new story that
is full of hope. It would enable this brotherly country
to continue to build peace and remain on the path of
socioeconomic development.
In that regard, we would like to congratulate
Liberia’s political actors and its people on setting
a good example in Africa in general and in West
Africa in particular. Now more than ever, it is up
to the international community, in the light of the
withdrawal of the United Nations Mission in Liberia,
which is scheduled for March, to continue to support
the efforts of the Liberian Government and the
country’s civil society organizations with a view
to building on the gains of the State’s transition to
democracy and bringing about sustainable peace and
reconciliation that is indispensable to the country’s
socioeconomic development.
The implementation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel through an innovative
multisectoral approach, and greater consistency among
regional initiatives is also vital and should do more
to strengthen security and enhance the resilience of
States and people of the region to crises. However, it
must be underscored that if the Strategy is to succeed,
all partners, including countries of the region and
international donors, must honour their commitments.
Secondly, at the operational level, it is important
to continue efforts aimed at forging synergies between
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) Joint Force
in their efforts to combat organized terrorist groups
18-00851

11/01/2018

Peace consolidation in West Africa

that are now equipped with increasingly powerful
and sophisticated tools. In that regard, I welcome the
adoption on 8 December 2017 of resolution 2391 (2017),
which outlines MINUSMA’s logistical and operational
support for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force in an effort to
enhance its logistical and operational capabilities, as an
essential factor in achieving that objective.
By the same token, and in line with the
recommendations of the fifty-second ordinary session
of the Authority of Heads of State and Government of
the ECOWAS, held in Abuja on 15 December 2017, Côte
d’Ivoire calls for the implementation of predictable and
sustainable funding mechanisms for the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force. It hopes that the commitments made during the
donor conferences in Berlin and Paris are honoured so
as to raise the funding required to ensure that the force
becomes operational in March.
My country also welcomes efforts made by countries
participating in the Multinational Joint Task Force,
which have curbed the operations and geographical
spread of Boko Haram. However, the information we
have regarding the withdrawal of a major country’s
contingent is a source of concern.
Thirdly, we need to envision a more inclusive
socioeconomic development of the countries in
West Africa and the Sahel, especially in rural areas
where poverty-stricken and unemployed youth are
easy recruitment prey for combatants. Côte d’Ivoire
welcomes the launch of the Alliance for the Sahel, which
aims to bring together all the initiatives promoting
development in the Sahel region.
To conclude, I recall that there must be synergy
in the actions taken by the countries and regional
institutions of West Africa and the Sahel and the
United Nations with a view to ensuring lasting peace
and inclusive development. Such synergy will help us
to address the root causes of conflict in the region. In
any case, my delegation remains convinced that despite
the regional context, which seems to be particularly
difficult, UNOWAS continues to be an important tool
for conflict prevention in West Africa and the Sahel.
In that regard and in full cooperation with the other
members of the Security Council, Côte d’Ivoire will
lend its full support to UNOWAS for the achievement
of the common goals shared by the Council, namely,
the maintenance of peace and security and promoting
development in West Africa and the Sahel.

S/PV. 8156

Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Chambas, for his briefing today and recognize and
acknowledge the very important work he does, of which
today he listed the very important positive developments
in the region. I know and I would like to pay tribute to
the fact that his discreet, delicate hand has played a part
in supporting many of those developments. So, I thank
him again for that.
The United Nations regional offices have an
important role to play in delivering on the ambition of
the Secretary-General, and supported by the Council,
to put prevention at the heart of our work. As we have
heard, the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel (UNOWAS) continues to carry out a number
of important preventive functions, in particular though
the use of its good offices. UNOWAS plays a critical
role by contributing to the strategic and integrated
analysis of the opportunities, risks and challenges
faced by national and local authorities in their efforts
to sustain peace. I think Mr. Chambas has presented
many of those today. I would like to say that we strongly
support that work and would like to see it replicated in
other regions.
A conflict prevented rarely makes the front pages,
and success stories often go unnoticed. However,
while political tensions continue in some countries
of West Africa and the Sahel, it is important that we
acknowledge positive developments and reforms in the
region, such as in Liberia, The Gambia and Burkina
Faso, as we have heard today. The Council and the
United Nations should seize opportunities to support
the region in consolidating democratic practices
and sustaining inclusive economic development and
growth. UNOWAS also has an important role to play
in that regard.
I would like to take just one minute to mention
Liberia again, as my colleague from Côte d’Ivoire did. I
think it is very important that we commend the country
for the peaceful, transparent, free and fair election
process that has just been concluded. We acknowledge
the important supportive role played by the region
and the United Nations, including by former President
Obasanjo of Nigeria and again Special Representative
Chambas. We look forward to continuing our support to
Liberia as it moves to a new chapter of its development,
including through the Peacebuilding Commission.

18-008515/12

S/PV.8156

Peace consolidation in West Africa

As we ask UNOWAS to do more — including in
support of the transitions from peacekeeping missions
to non-mission settings in Liberia and Cote d’Ivoire and
in support of regional efforts to combat terrorism, and
so on — we must also ensure that adequate resources
are available to it to carry out those tasks.
Many of the challenges facing the countries of the
region — terrorism, transnational crime, humanitarian
crises, increasing competition for scarce resources,
including as a result of climate change — show no
respect for national borders. Only sustained and
holistic approaches that take into account the root
causes of conflict and instability in the region, and the
linkages between them can lead to long-term solutions.
The ongoing cooperation between UNOWAS and other
regional organizations provides the potential for the
development of such approaches. The decision taken
at the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Summit in December that ECOWAS and
UNOWAS would work together on the role of changing
transhumance patterns as they relate to a potential
conflict between herders and farmers and conflict
dynamics across the region is a good example of
such cooperation.
In conclusion, I once again want to thank the Special
Representative for his briefing today and assure him of
our continued very strong support.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, my delegation appreciates the convening of
this meeting and the briefing delivered by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Chambas,
on the situation in West Africa and the Sahel. Peru
especially welcomes the work of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) as
a sui generis tool for effective action, especially in
relation to prevention. Its regional and holistic vision
gives it a special ability to take action, together with its
flexibility and adaptability to the various challenges of
the current subregional scene.
At the same time, the Office is the appropriate
platform for coordinating regional and subregional
efforts and alliances that address the existing complex
cross-border threats to peace and security in the area,
while promoting both the full exercise of human
rights and a gender perspective in the prevention and
peace consolidation processes. Given the Office’s
fundamental role recognized by various international
6/12

11/01/2018

actors, we would like to underscore three successful
areas for action that reveal its important potential.
First, in the area of preventive diplomacy, Peru
believes that UNOWAS stands out particularly in its
capacity to be an active agent of conflict prevention.
Its monitoring and early warning functions have helped
to ease tensions and offer peaceful political solutions
in various States. Of special note is the development of
mediation and good offices, which have prevented the
emergence and aggravation of political crises. Those
capacities must be strengthened and enhanced.
Secondly, in the area of promoting development
and institutional strengthening, it is precisely the
ability of UNOWAS to see the big picture that has
allowed it to do outstanding work in coordinating with
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and various regional organizations in
the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel, for example.
Peru believes that such a multidimensional
approach can contribute to the achievement of the
common objectives of creating inclusive governance
in the region and establishing programmes aimed
at promoting development. One commitment of
UNOWAS that we deem relevant is the strengthening
of political institutions to make them more efficient and
transparent. Similarly, the recent agreement between
UNOWAS and the United Nations Office for Central
Africa to work together and increase cooperation and
assistance in the Lake Chad basin is noteworthy. It is
a shared vision that is vital and of the utmost urgency
that seeks to respond to the difficult living conditions
in the region.
Thirdly, in the area of fighting against terrorism and
violent extremism, in the aforementioned articulating
framework with various African organizations,
UNOWAS has demonstrated efficiency in contributing
to a cross-cutting approach to address the serious
threat posed by the actions of Boko Haram. Peru
would like to highlight the reintegration programmes
that have been developed with people associated
with that terrorist group, as well as actions aimed at
supporting the fight against impunity by strengthening
the judicial institutions responsible for prosecuting the
group’s members. The contribution that UNOWAS is
able to make to addressing transnational organized
crime, which in many cases provides financial support
18-00851

11/01/2018

Peace consolidation in West Africa

for such terrorist activities, will also be important to
those efforts.
In conclusion, we recognize the advantages
of having this Office in the subregion, but we also
emphasize the importance of ensuring that it can rely
on resources that are adequate to ensuring its ability
to continue its important work. We also welcome
complementary initiatives, such as the Alliance for the
Sahel, launched in July 2017 and led by the European
Union, with the participation of the World Bank, the
African Development Bank and the United Nations
Development Programme.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel (UNOWAS), Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, for
his briefing. We appreciate his performance and the
efforts he makes on a daily basis.
The work of special political missions is an
important tool for developing strategies for building
and sustaining peace. In the case of UNOWAS, the
work it is doing pursuant to its mandate and, of course,
in the areas of preventive diplomacy, good governance,
the protection of human rights, good offices, political
mediation and facilitation of dialogue is vital, and we
want to highlight and support its efforts to promote the
active participation of women in political processes
related to peace and security.
We would also like to highlight the mission’s
excellent coordination with regional and subregional
organizations such as the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States, which
enables it to encourage the leadership of the countries
of West Africa and the Sahel to work for political,
institutional and security-sector reform. In that regard,
we would like to single out the extraordinary electoral
process held in Liberia towards the end of last year
in a peaceful, credible and stable environment, and
to congratulate the Liberian people on demonstrating
their commitment to democracy through such a
significant event. We stress this case because it shows
how fundamental it is to have reconciliation processes
based on inclusive political dialogue, consensus and
rapprochement among the parties, which promote the
strengthening of lasting and sustainable peace.
We welcome the progress made in the
implementation of the United Nations Integrated

S/PV. 8156

Strategy for the Sahel. We believe firmly that the
contribution and commitment of the countries of
the Sahel, regional and subregional organizations
and the cooperating countries will be critical to that
implementation, with a view to achieving long-term
results that will enable us to meet security challenges,
strengthen political and socioeconomic stability and
promote comprehensive development. The Strategy
should assist countries like Mali, which remains in
serious crisis thanks to the policies of regime change
in Libya, and identify the root causes of instability
and conflict there. In that context, we reiterate our
firm rejection of interventionist, interfering policies
that destabilize and undermine international peace
and security.
We also encourage the States members of the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
to continue working for the definitive deployment and
operationalization of their forces. The cooperation
of the United Nations, through the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali, and the African Union will be key, and we
therefore encourage the conclusion of the technical
agreement between the United Nations, the European
Union and the G-5 Sahel in the framework of resolution
2391 (2017).
Despite those significant efforts, we are concerned
about the continuing complex situation in some
countries of the region, whose peoples are facing
enormous challenges, mainly in the area of security,
which bring with them problems such as cross-border
crime, human trafficking, the smuggling of migrants
and trafficking in drugs and arms — just some of the
consequences of conflict that have a negative impact
on the civilian population and development in the
region — and to which we must add the scourge of
terrorism. Bolivia emphatically condemns all forms
of violent and criminal activity that harm civilian
populations, particularly terrorism, a completely
unjustifiable type of aggression and one of the most
serious threats to international peace and security in
all of its forms and manifestations. We demand the
full implementation of resolution 2349 (2017) in the
fight against terrorist groups, particularly Boko Haram
and Da’esh.
The presence of Boko Haram persists in the
subregion, with severe consequences. According to
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1104),
between June and September 2017, there were 156

18-008517/12

S/PV.8156

Peace consolidation in West Africa

attacks attributed to that terrorist group, of which
100 were perpetrated in Nigeria and five in the Niger,
claiming almost 300 fatalities, most of them women,
not to mention the shocking kidnapping of girls and
children for evil purposes. In that regard, we commend
the coordinated efforts of UNOWAS, the Lake Chad
Basin Commission and the Multinational Joint Task
Force to develop a strategy for combating Boko Haram.
The members of the Security Council and of the United
Nations as a whole should give every support possible
in order to help them eliminate terrorism and work to
bring the perpetrators of these crimes to justice so that
they can be duly investigated, prosecuted and punished.
We should not fail to mention the worrying
humanitarian situation facing the population of the
subregion, in which 5 million people have been
displaced — 2 million of them in the Lake Chad
basin region — in addition to the enormous figure of
30 million who are at risk of food insecurity, 4 million
of whom are children suffering from malnutrition. We
encourage the international community in general to
continue to contribute technical support and economic
and humanitarian cooperation and to make its best
efforts to help the most vulnerable populations.
Lastly, Bolivia reaffirms its full support for the
regional and subregional architecture for resolving
conflict in Africa. We consider it essential to ensure
that an African vision is reflected in the implementation
of every initiative aimed at bringing genuine peace
to the continent. We encourage the Governments of
West Africa and the Sahel to continue the process of
stabilizing the region while strictly respecting States’
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): Like
others before me, I would like to warmly thank Special
Representative Chambas for making a difference in
West Africa. His good offices, whether in the Gambia,
Liberia or Togo, have helped to ease tensions and
stabilize countries and the region. Today he noted several
positive developments, but considerable challenges
remain. Sustained international support in promoting
stability is needed, and we see the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) as an
essential enabler of such support. Today I would like to
to focus on three important aspects of the added value
that UNOWAS brings to security and stability in the
region — the three Cs of conflict prevention, crossborder cooperation and coordination.
8/12

11/01/2018

The first C is that of conflict prevention. The
Security Council has set it as a priority for UNOWAS,
and rightly. A year after a turbulent change of power,
the Gambia is on the right track. In Togo, the Special
Representative has collaborated with the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States
to encourage national stakeholders to engage in a muchneeded dialogue on constitutional reform. In Liberia,
UNOWAS played an important role in ensuring that the
elections were peaceful. Sierra Leone will be the next
test case for West Africa’s encouraging track record
on democracy.
The multi-pronged approach of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) constitutes the ultimate
prevention tool. In the Lake Chad region, for example,
the effects of water scarcity and climate change are some
of the root causes of conflict. Achieving the SDGs, and
particularly SDG 6, would secure access to safe water
and sanitation. Providing creative solutions to assist the
farmers on the Niger border with the water they need to
farm and provide for their livelihood will go a long way
in addressing the fragility of the region. But as long
as we are not there yet, early warning, rapid reaction,
the use of good offices and peacebuilding — such as
what is offered by UNOWAS — will remain of critical
importance in these and other country situations. We
therefore encourage the Special Representative to
continue his important early warning activities and
would support, for instance, the organization of joint
early warning missions with the Economic Community
of West African States.
Secondly, I would like to emphasize the importance
of the C of cross-border security cooperation, whether
it is about countering terrorism, organized crime or
trafficking and illegal migration flows. Also there,
the Lake Chad region is a case in point. The countries
of the region have established the Multinational Joint
Task Force to tackle the challenges of Boko Haram.
However, the threat continues to loom large and the
resource challenge is difficult to overcome. I commend
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General’s
efforts to support diplomatic, security and humanitarian
responses to the violence perpetrated against civilians
by Boko Haram. The affected countries must be in the
driving seat, however.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes the
reaffirmation by the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union of the need for a comprehensive
approach and calls for a regionally coordinated strategy
18-00851

11/01/2018

Peace consolidation in West Africa

for the promotion of peace, security and development.
Initiatives by the region that promote such a holistic
approach deserve the Council’s support. We would
welcome special attention and separate reporting,
including early warning analyses, on the situation
of the Lake Chad basin in the next report of the
Secretary-General.
That brings me to the third C of coordination. In
West Africa and the Sahel, we will not achieve much if
we do not effectively coordinate, both with our partners
and within the United Nations system. UNOWAS
embodies this very idea. I would note, for example,
its role in advancing the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. It reduces
duplications, it links the field with Headquarters and
it brings stakeholders together. That is exactly what
needs to be done as actors and initiatives multiply.
Another example is the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). It can be a success
only if the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali provides indispensable
operational and logistical support; if key financial
contributions are provided through a well-coordinated
international mechanism; if the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights can properly support
the human rights compliance framework of the Force;
and if the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
enables strengthened cooperation between the Force,
police and the criminal justice sector. Those are just a
few of the necessary conditions.
In conclusion, conflict prevention, regional
cooperation and enhanced coordination are critical
conditions to addressing the root causes of instability
and bringing about peaceful and inclusive development.
Through its scope and its mission, UNOWAS is a key
enabler in West Africa and one that can early on direct
the Council’s attention to emerging challenges for the
region’s stability. Let us make the best possible use of it
and make sure it has the financial means to do so.
Let me reiterate our gratitude to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Chambas,
personally, and UNOWAS, generally, for their sustained
efforts and leadership.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): It is a source of great satisfaction to the
delegation of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea to have
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations

S/PV. 8156

Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), with
us today.
In congratulating and thanking Mr. Chambas for
the comprehensive and detailed semi-annual report of
the Secretary-General (S/2017/1104), which he has just
introduced to us, I should like in particular to express
our appreciation for and recognition of the excellent
work being carried out by the Special Representative
in the region of West Africa and the Sahel, in spite of
the numerous challenges and threats that continue to
be posed in that region by terrorists groups and violent
extremists, as well as by transnational organized
crime, especially human and drug trafficking, and
the persistence of asymmetrical attacks perpetrated
by armed groups in the northern and central parts of
Mali. The report of the Secretary-General also points
to the humanitarian crisis caused by the resurgence of
Boko Haram attacks as of last June, causing more than
2.5 million people to be displaced in the Lake Chad
basin area, as well as the severe food crisis suffered by
some 500,000 people in that region.
Given these situations, as the briefing we have
just heard has illustrated, it is very urgent that the
international community decisively support the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, established
by Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali Mauritania and the Niger.
This support must also be extended to the Multinational
Joint Task Force, made up of Cameroon, Chad, the Niger
and Nigeria. They should be provided with the means
necessary to effectively combat these terrorist groups.
The negative and destabilizing impact of the
phenomenon of climate change in several parts of
the region, especially for animal husbandry and
agricultural production, is also worth mentioning. It is
raising serious tensions in some countries of the region
as a consequence of the desertification that leads to the
emigration and migration of ranchers, which is a source
of tension and insecurity within these countries.
Despite the alarming picture we have just painted,
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea greatly values ​​the
quality work that UNOWAS has been doing in the
midst of these challenges. Its stellar work has led to
successive renewals of its mandate, trust in its capacity
for analysis, early warning, and the mobilization of
State and non-State agents in the region in an effort
to consolidate democratic processes and ward off
threats to national peace and stability. In that regard,
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea welcomes and

18-008519/12

S/PV.8156

Peace consolidation in West Africa

encourages the spirit of the Praia Declaration on
Elections and Stability in West Africa, which is the
cornerstone of the UNOWAS mandate.
We express our satisfaction with the positive
developments taking place in the region, despite the
ongoing threats and challenges, such as economic
growth throughout the region; progress in the reform
processes under way, especially in the security sectors
in The Gambia and Burkina Faso; and the fortunate
development and unfolding of presidential elections
that we have just seen in Liberia. In line with these
positive developments, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea calls on the international community in general
and on UNOWAS in particular to take an interest in and
support Guinea Bissau so that the current prevailing
political situation in that beautiful country, which has
considerable resources, can be successfully overcome
and a definitive resolution can be reached through
inclusive dialogue with the country’s political actors.
I conclude by once again pointing out the terrorist
threats being faced not only by countries of West
Africa and the Sahel, but also in Central Africa, other
regions of Africa and the rest of the world. Such is the
case of mercenary terrorist groups made up of people
and uncontrolled elements from several countries of the
subregion who infiltrated the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea during the last week of December with the aim
of carrying out terrorist attacks and destabilizing the
sitting Government. This situation demands vigilance
and control of groups that sow insecurity and instability
in several countries, on the part of the international
community and the United Nations.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We are very pleased to
see Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Chambas and we want to thank him for his comprehensive
briefing on the situation on the situation in West Africa,
the Sahel region and the Lake Chad basin, as well as the
activities of the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel (UNOWAS) over the past six months.
We very much appreciate the great contribution that
Mr. Chambas has been making in discharging his very
heavy responsibility with regard to these key regions
of Africa. Sweden, the Netherlands and others have
recognized the contribution of Mr. Chambas, and we
share their view.
We take note of the overall developments and trends
in these regions, as well as the implementation of the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. We
10/12

11/01/2018

support the continued role of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and his good offices in efforts
aimed at sustaining peace in the region, in collaboration
with regional and international partners, through the
promotion of inclusive national political dialogue,
constitutional and democratic reforms, and transparent
and peaceful electoral processes. In such efforts, we
must always keep in mind that the collaboration among
the United Nations, the African Union and subregional
organizations like the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) is critical, as was amply
demonstrated when it ensured a peaceful and safe
transition in Gambia, in which Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Chambas played a key role.
As I have concluded my introductory remarks, I
would now like to make a few observations focusing
on some of the most important political, security and
humanitarian issues highlighted in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2017/1104). With regard to political
and governance trends, we welcome the holding
of peaceful presidential and legislative elections
in Liberia, marking an important milestone in the
country’s effort to build sustainable democracy. As
we celebrate that event and achievement, however,
we cannot — as was stressed by the representative of
Côte d’Ivoire a while ago — be oblivious of the great
need the country has for the effective cooperation and
support of the international community to ensure the
sustainability of its democratic institutions. Not only
are these institutions not built in a day, but they also
need to be underpinned by progress in the economic and
social sectors in order to address the needs of society.
In contrast to this, the political tension in Togo in
relation to the amendment of the country’s Constitution
is a cause for concern. We support the efforts of regional
leaders in trying to assist national stakeholders in
arriving at a peaceful resolution to the political crisis.
Here it is critical that care is taken so that the relative
peace the country has had is not taken for granted. That
is why all sectors of society have the responsibility to
contribute to ensure that change is achieved peacefully
and without allowing a slide to the unknown.
Turning to the security dynamics of the wider
region, it is clear that it continues to face multiple and
complex security challenges, including the threats of
terrorism and violent extremism, drug trafficking
and other transnational organized crime. All of these
have been elucidated by Mr. Chambas. The visit by the
African Union Peace and Security Council to the Lake
18-00851

11/01/2018

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Chad basin in July and the holding of the first regional
stabilization conference for the Lake Chad basin
region in November last year were indeed important
developments. However, we express our concern over
the withdrawal of Chadian troops from the Multinational
Joint Task Force in the Niger and its impact on the
Force’s response effort, as mentioned in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. The circumstances surrounding those
events will have to be looked at seriously with a view to
addressing factors that might have given rise to them.
The contribution of Chad cannot be taken lightly. There
is no doubt that its absence will have implications.
On the other hand, the Security Council’s visit to
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) region in
October; the adoption of resolution 2359 (2017) and
resolution 2391 (2017) on the G-5 Sahel Joint Force;
and the high-level meeting held in Paris to mobilize
support for the Force are encouraging developments.
We could not agree more with the Secretary-General
on the need to complement the security and military
response — whether in the Sahel or the Lake Chad
basin regions — with development interventions and
on the need to address the root causes of conflict to
prevent tensions and violence, to tackle poverty and
exclusion, to strengthen the resilience of institutions
and communities and to build peaceful and inclusive
societies. There is no doubt that widespread food
insecurity, forced displacement, climate change,
chronic vulnerability and susceptibility to epidemics
continue to affect people across the wider region, as we
witnessed first hand during our visit to both the Sahel
and the Lake Chad basin region last year.
In this context, we believe that accelerating the
implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel is key to addressing that
challenge. Although the humanitarian response was
further scaled up in 2017, the humanitarian challenge
remains enormous; hence the need for enhanced and
sustained engagement and support on the part of the
international community. The continued cooperation
and partnership of the Governments of the region,
the United Nations, the African Union, ECOWAS, the
G-5 Sahel, the Mano River Union, the Gulf of Guinea
Commission and the Lake Chad Basin Commission,
as well as others, remain indispensable in tackling the
multiple and complex challenges faced by countries
of the region and promoting peace and stability. We
commend the role of UNOWAS and its continued

S/PV. 8156

efforts, in cooperation and partnership with all of those
important stakeholders, in fulfilling its mandate.
Finally, we look forward to constructively engaging
in the discussion on the draft presidential statement to
be proposed by Côte d’Ivoire, which has assumrf the
penholdership of this dossier from Senegal.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Chambas for his insightful briefing on the
semi-annual report of the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and the recent
developments in West Africa and the Sahel. I would like
to sum up by saying that we appreciate the important
role that Mr. Chambas and UNOWAS are playing in
conflict prevention throughout the vast region, and
that cooperation with regional and subregional actors
is extremely vital if we are to have an effective impact.
Such collaborative efforts have yielded the latest
positive political and economic developments that we
have witnessed in West Africa.
In that vein, we call on UNOWAS to continue
its work on strengthening post-electoral stability
and paying close attention to the upcoming elections
across the region. The work of UNOWAS will now
become even more challenging with the closure of
both the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
and the United Nations Mission in Liberia, especially
in the light of the increasing threat of terrorism and
violent extremism in West Africa and the Sahel, with
linkages to transnational organized crime. We are
deeply concerned by the food insecurity and forced
displacement among civilians caused by violence
related to terrorist activities.
Kazakhstan fully supports regional initiatives
to address these threats through the Group of Five
for the Sahel Joint Force and the Multinational Joint
Task Force, and commends international partners for
mobilizing financial support for these initiatives, as
well as for the provision of humanitarian aid for the
affected population. We believe that the military
approach and humanitarian assistance should also be
implemented with development efforts in an integrated,
complex and well-coordinated manner, reinforced with
long-term sustainable funding. We, therefore, stress
the importance of recalibrating the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and developing an
integrated approach for the Lake Chad basin region.

18-0085111/12

S/PV.8156

Peace consolidation in West Africa

To that end, we recommend a coordinated modus
operandi on the part of all United Nations agencies
and programmes concerned in order to increase the
effectiveness of assistance provided by the United
Nations on the ground, ensuring greater transparency in
its adminstration, including anti-corruption measures
and a more effective use of shrinking development and
humanitarian aid towards a harmonized United Nations
approach in Africa and its subregions.

12/12

11/01/2018

Kazakhstan will continue to work together with the
other Council members and key actors to find a solution
in order to achieve lasting peace in West Africa and the
Sahel region.
I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

18-00851
