A /75/PV.58

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

58th plenary meeting

Thursday, 25 March 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Commemorative meeting on the occasion of the
International Day of Remembrance of the Victims
of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade
Agenda item 124
Commemoration of the abolition of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade
The President: In accordance with paragraph 4 of
resolution 73/345 of 16 September 2019, the General
Assembly will hold a commemorative meeting on the
occasion of the International Day of Remembrance
of the Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave
Trade. I will now make an opening statement from
the rostrum.
Statement by the President
Last week, I convened a commemorative meeting on
the occasion of the International Day for the Elimination
of Racial Discrimination (see A/75/PV.57). However,
one day a year is not enough to reconcile the legacy of
four centuries of brutality. Slavery firmly established
the stark inequality that exists around the world today,
because the wealthiest took everything from those who
had the least. The transatlantic slave trade defined our
world, and the sense of supremacy that justified it is
not gone from our world. Families were divided by an
ocean that their loved ones never consented to cross, an
ocean that took the lives of 20 per cent of all captives on
the transatlantic voyage. Africa, robbed of its peoples,
continues to grieve. Enslaved people were reduced

to the status of chattel and stripped of their freedom,
dignity and identity. Violence replaced autonomy.
That trauma is hereditary. Not only do the
descendants of the 15 million victims of the transatlantic
slave trade have to grapple with the pain and grief of
their ancestors, but every day they navigate a world
built by them but not for them. The enslaved worked
stolen lands and raised the children of their abusers, all
the while suffering, and those in the middle — free men
and women who benefited from an industrial revolution
that was made possible through slave labour — did not
stand up for the oppressed but were passive, complicit.
Today, modern forms of slavery continue to exist.
As of 2016, more than 4.3 million people were estimated
to be in modern slavery, 71 per cent of them women
and girls. Shockingly, children account for one in
four of those enslaved today. The coronavirus disease
pandemic risks creating a setback to our common
efforts to end modern slavery as widespread job
losses, rising poverty, the closure of regular migration
pathways and a reduced scrutiny of labour standards
increase vulnerability and push more people towards
exploitive employment. When society does not tackle
the inhumane treatment of our fellow human beings,
every individual is complicit.
If we are to defend the Charter of the United
Nations and uphold the rights of the people we have
pledged to serve, we have to be vigilant. Today I want
to remind the Assembly that when those around us look
away and turn their backs on injustice, each of us has a
responsibility to step in. We cannot stand by while the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-07451 (E)

*2107451*

A/75/PV.58

people we serve suffer. We cannot permit gaslighting.
We cannot shy away from honest discussions about
reparatory justice. Here in the General Assembly, we
are working on the modalities of the high-level meeting
of the twentieth commemoration of the adoption of the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action and the
political declaration, as well as on a permanent forum
on people of African descent. We will also meet again
in May on the occasion of the midterm review of the
International Decade for People of African Descent.
I hope that those efforts are conducive to healing for
people of African descent and for the world as a whole.
We must stand up for what is right and learn the
lessons of the past. This global injustice has not just
ended neatly, after exactly 400 years. Laws have not
changed attitudes, and the weight of shackles endures.
Let us continue working to end discrimination and
slavery in all its forms, and to achieve equality and
justice for all. I repeat what I expressed last week,
and let us keep repeating it until it is understood and
internalized by all. Black lives matter.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: Today we honour the
memory of the millions of people of African descent
who suffered immeasurably under the evils of slavery
and the transatlantic slave trade. We remember the
humility and resilience of those who endured, and we
acknowledge the immense contribution that slaves and
their descendants have made to the economies and
culture of the countries to which they were forcibly
transported. We must never forget the daily terror
experienced by enslaved peoples, the unthinkable acts
of cruelty they endured, the daily reminder that they
could lay claim to nothing, not even their own children.
But the slave traders and owners failed to rob the
enslaved peoples of dignity and agency.
We remember enslaved peoples’ acts of resistance
and demands for justice. We recall the courage of
leaders such as Queen Ana Nzynga of the Kingdom
of Ndongo, now Angola, and Toussaint Louverture
of Saint-Domingue, now Haiti, and the peoples they
led. As we honour those whose names we know, we
acknowledge the daily courage of the millions whom
we will never know except as names on inventory
lists drawn up by slave owners, traders and insurance
agencies. We support the initiatives to reclaim, recover
and reconstitute the history of those were enslaved.
2/19

25/03/2021

We also acknowledge that racism is both a cause and
a legacy of slavery and recognize that the impact of
the slave trade remains visible in racial injustices and
inequalities today. Ending slavery’s legacy of racism is
a global imperative for justice.
The transatlantic slave trade is a global history
that continues to resonate. It created and sustained a
system of exploitation that existed for more than 400
years. It devastated the economies of those it enslaved
and strengthened the colonial project, enriching its
multitude of beneficiaries at the expense of the lives
of the enslaved. The racism at the core of the system
built on slavery condemned Africans to a secondclass status. To justify the slave trade, Africans were
consistently portrayed as less than human. Racist
tropes circulated widely, incorporated into sermons,
pamphlets and cultural expressions and given legitimacy
by pseudoscience and legislation.
While the transatlantic slave trade ended more than
two centuries ago, the ideas that propelled it remain
alive today. In Europe, the United States and elsewhere,
white supremacists are organizing and recruiting across
borders. According to the Anti-Defamation League,
white supremacist propaganda reached an all-time high
in 2020. We must counter all lies of racial supremacy.
The irrefutable fact is that we are all equally part of one
race — humankind. When we forget that basic fact, we
imperil ourselves. Repeated acts of racism by people
and institutions expose the impact of slavery’s legacy.
Last year, they helped to galvanize a worldwide
movement for justice and an end to racism. We must
build on that momentum. Our Organization is built
on the demand for global justice and an end to racism
and inequality. That must include action to redress the
wrongs of history. We need to acknowledge and correct
the long-lasting effects of slavery and the transatlantic
slave trade. By tackling inequities and inequalities,
building inclusive communities and economies and
educating people about history, we truly honour the
memory of the victims of slavery. On this Day of
Remembrance, let us commit anew to a world where
justice prevails and where all can live with dignity, in
peace and freedom.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
Before proceeding further, and as indicated in my
letter dated 3 March, I would like to consult members
with a view to inviting Ms. Lisa Coleman, Senior
21-07451

25/03/2021

Vice-President for Global Inclusion, Diversity and
Strategic Innovation and Chief Diversity Officer at
New York University, to make a keynote statement on
this occasion.
If there is no objection, may I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly, and without setting
a precedent, to invite Ms. Lisa Coleman to make a
keynote statement at this commemorative meeting?
It was so decided (decision 75/560).
The President: In accordance with the decision
just taken, I now give the floor to Ms. Coleman.
Ms. Coleman: It is an honour to be here today for
the General Assembly’s observance of the International
Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the
Transatlantic Slave Trade.
First, I hope that everyone is taking good care and
I thank all the people who made it possible for me to be
here today.
Secondly, I would like to thank all the front-line
and behind-the-scenes workers whose labour is often
uncounted and who continue to make sacrifices for our
well-being. I would also like to recognize that many of
our international institutions are located on the unceded
lands of indigenous peoples.
Lastly, as we all know, we are here to honour,
remember and recognize lives taken through violence
and the pernicious legacies of racialized slavery. We
are also here to honour our ancestors and those who
have fought for human dignity and to end slavery
and its lasting effects, and to honour the strength and
continuing contributions, cultures, joy and resilience
of black people globally. Let us take five seconds of
silence to honour, recognize and reflect.
Some keep saying that this is a new normal or hope
that we return to normal. I hope that we do not. I hope
that we strive to do better and be better so that when
the next disruption — the next pandemic — happens,
we are more ready, more committed and more aware
in order to address big issues such as the Sustainable
Development Goals and ongoing inequities. To do
that, I believe we must embrace a new “different”, as
opposed to a new normal, through new transformational
strategies of innovation and engagement and by doing
race differently and globally.
Race became a scientifically validated social
construct that justified unfree labour systems

A/75/PV.58

and benefited those defined by white racial
supremacy — landowners and elite power holders,
knowledge producers and sociopolitical engineers. The
extraction of human life and labour was honed through
distinct, pervasive forms of colonialism, expansion
and imperialism throughout the Americas and, of
course, the entire Atlantic world, and racism built on
deeply entrenched stereotypes, fears and sometimes
deep-seated hatred of targeted groups is one of the
pervasive results. Whether in the context of the 1918
flu pandemic, the Depression of the 1930s, the ongoing
AIDS or coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemics,
racial and ethnic disparities, among others, persist and
mythologies about the black body still surface, dating
back to the birth of theories of eugenics, and the results
continue to be tragic and often deadly.
We need think only about the various effects, such
as wealth differentials; incarceration rates; notions of
who counts as a citizen that date back to the three-fifths
rule in the original United States Constitution; who
gets labelled a terrorist and who does not; racialized
ideas of patriotism; whose lives matter; digital divides;
environmental injustice and images of Africa and black
people as backward or criminal. Those are legacies
that continue to affect our institutions and day-today engagements. And as we have seen with the daily
assaults on black people in grocery stores, parks and
restaurants, the impact is multilayered. Patterns of
inequity and racism are maintained. They are not
inevitable. They are not innate or natural. They are not
fixed, but they are deeply entrenched. Scholars such
as Nell Irvin Painter, Audrey Smedley, Matthew Frye
Jacobson, Karen Brodkin and many others have traced
the circuitous history of race, from early Roman times
and through histories of enslavement legitimized by
ethnocentrism. The impact remains. Race became what
Smedley refers to as a fulcrum, around which North
American and globalized forms of racial groupings
were scaffolded, maintained and normalized as natural.
Knowledge production, that is, science in the
colonial context, with its connection to arts, education
and so on, served and continues to serve as a powerful
tool in creating the illusion of race as a legitimate
biological category and of some races as superior and
virtuous. Through science and what we have discovered,
we also know that race is not a biological or genetically
valid way to understand humankind. We also know that
race and racism are no less real in the lives of those
whom they affect. The real and deadly impact and

21-074513/19

A/75/PV.58

25/03/2021

consequences of deeply rooted racism are exemplified
in the murders of Breonna Taylor, Ahmaud Arbery,
Tony McDade and Dion Johnson. Far too often, we still
blame the victim, from Emmett Till to George Floyd.

Africa is doing everything perfectly. Rather, I draw
on the approach in order to focus on power-related
inequities and racism, which are deeply woven and
embedded into systems.

Many ask why protests have occurred all over the
world in the past year. It is because anti-blackness is
transmutable. It is everywhere. Think of Brazil and
affirmative action and the legacies of slavery there
that efforts are being made to address; or of the way
in which Africa is still often referred to as if it were
a country, even though it is almost four times the size
of the United States, and how it is often thought of
as Third World, although places in countries such as
Nigeria are outpacing some European areas in terms of
technological achievements.

Efforts to dismantle legacies of slavery such as
apartheid and its aftermath, and to transform our
societies, must reckon with the truth about historical
power relations, oppression and dispossession. Across
the globe, in protests in the United States, Europe,
the East and the West, individuals are calling for that
reckoning, and for transformation. Transformational
actions will dismantle the intersectional inequities and
global legacies so that we can create and learn from the
losses in order to do more and do differently, so that
black peoples globally can thrive.

In many cases blackness is still seen as a deficit in
and of itself, with no attempt to adjust that lens to see
how the deficits are the result of centuries of extraction
of resources, historical erasures and stereotyping
and nationally and socially sanctioned practices of
exclusion and racism. For example, African-American
women and men were the first to die of COVID-19
in Chicago, Illinois, and 70 of the first 100 recorded
deaths in the United States were of African-Americans.
The woefully inadequate response to the loss of black
lives set a devastating course that could have been
mitigated. Early in the pandemic, the press accused
black people of not wearing masks enough and not
following the rules, when what it should have been
doing was comprehensively investigating exposure
rates because of labour differentials, which are a direct
result of the legacy of slavery — the concentration of
people of colour in lower socioeconomic areas.

In conclusion, we must demystify and dismantle
global forms of oppression and inequity and build on
many of the things that we already do, as was mentioned
earlier. We must continue to create spaces and undo the
vulnerabilities that fuel and legitimize violence and
stifle the ability to thrive. We must undo the things
that support modern-day slavery. We must keep rights
consistent for all. And when laws suggest that rights
are not consistent, we must reconcile, tell the truth and
co-create. We must learn our histories, so we do not
repeat them again. And we must remember that with
sorrow, there is also black joy.

I would be remiss if I did not also mention the
anti-Asian violence and the recent tragic loss and
murders in Atlanta. The fact is that anti-Asian violence
is also deeply rooted in our legal and social systems.
Understanding legacies, histories and intersections of
systemic inequality is foundational to creating global
transformation. I am the Senior Vice-President for
Global Inclusion, Diversity and Strategic Innovation
at New York University. In South Africa, that role is
normally called Chief Transformation Officer, and that
is how I think of myself. I am drawn to that concept
because of the emphasis and insistence on reckoning
with deeply rooted power differentials and tough
contestation, which leads to innovation and the quest
for different ways of doing and being — that is, the
transformational. That is not to suggest that South
4/19

We must remember that black people are not deficits
but rather assets who can help create transformative
possibilities, because the African diaspora is a global
constellation of communities representing a vast
array of rich and diverse histories, cultures, heritage
and identities that live and innovate and create new
possibilities, even in direct contrast to the oppressive
structures and practices that have been laid bare. We
must remember that it will take investments in black
peoples and cultures globally to be ready for the future
of work to address our Sustainable Development Goals
and climate disruptions and deal with the changing
world and all that comes with it. I end with a quote
by one of my favourite authors, James Baldwin. “The
world is before you and you need not take it or leave it
as it was when you came in”.
The President:
her statement.

I

thank

Ms.

Coleman

for

I now give the floor to the representative of
Kazakhstan, who will speak on behalf of the Group of
Asia-Pacific States.
21-07451

25/03/2021

Mr. Ilyassov (Kazakhstan): On behalf of the
Group of Asia-Pacific States, it is my great honour to
affirm that we join the Assembly today in solemnly
remembering all who came enslaved across the Atlantic
for generations and perished tragically as victims of
ownership and control.
For more than 400 years, more than 15 million
men, women and children were the victims of the tragic
transatlantic slave trade, one of the darkest chapters in
human history. The slave trade and slavery are among
the worst violations of human rights in the history
of humankind and are at the heart of the situations
of profound social and economic inequality, hatred,
bigotry, racism and prejudice that continue to affect
people of African descent today.
We must also not forget the millions caught in
modern-day slavery. It is regrettable that despite all
the progress that has been made, this evil scourge
persists 75 years after the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights prohibited it in 1948. The global
community must redouble its efforts to bring an end
to this injustice. Not to do so is to be complicit. We
should ask why poverty and deep social stratification
leading to human bondage persist. No adult or child
should be subject to the barbaric practices of human
trafficking for cheap labour, sexual purposes, organ
transplants, ancestral debt bondage, bonded or forced
labour, domestic servitude or the unlawful recruitment
of child soldiers.
We are also concerned about the challenges posed
by large-scale migration, crisis and conflict. We
condemn violence against women as a weapon of war
and societal destabilization that degenerates into hate
crimes and speech. In that regard, the Asia-Pacific
Group expresses its profound concern about the rise in
violence against Asians and people of Asian descent,
especially following the horrific shooting death of
six women of Asian descent in and around Atlanta
in March. The Asia-Pacific Group expresses its full
support for the victims and their families and stands in
solidarity with all who face racism and other attacks on
their human rights. It is high time to take real measures
to address systemic racism and racial discrimination.
The Asia-Pacific Group stands resolutely with
others who are striving to at least mitigate, if not
abolish, modern slavery — Sustainable Development
Goal 8 — by 2030. We will do so through a collaborative
effort to implement all of the 16 other interconnected

A/75/PV.58

Sustainable Development Goals, because only a
comprehensive strategy will guarantee the common
future of present and coming generations.
Historically
unprecedented
levels
of
underemployment or unemployment, the loss of
livelihoods and uncertain economic prospects have hit
the most vulnerable the hardest. We must ensure that the
poorest are not pushed into bonded or forced labour or
lured into slavery for survival. The situation demands
the continued assessment and review of the legal
frameworks for criminal law and the strict enforcement
of labour rights and security regulations. Disseminating
awareness at the source areas of trafficking is also
necessary. Given that a large share of modern slavery
can be traced to migration, it is vitally important to
have improved national, regional and global migration
governance and stricter border controls, and to train
border police, airline and shipping crews, as well as
workers in the hospitality industry, to detect victims
of trafficking and prevent forced labour. Gender and
age must be taken into account in developing policy
responses, as 71 per cent of all victims are women and
one in every four is a child. Similarly, it will be critical
to improve victim identification in order to extend
protection to more victims of modern slavery, the
vast majority of whom who are currently unidentified
or unattended.
Equally important are measures to ensure both
witness and victim protection for women and girls, as
well as men and boys, especially those recruited as child
soldiers. We should make greater efforts to work with
communities, local elders and religious leaders in order
to tackle deeply entrenched traditions, stereotypes and
biases against victims.
Finally, we call on donor countries to support the
United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary
Forms of Slavery, launch local projects to empower
victims to become change agents, build coalitions and
have their voices heard. The Asia-Pacific Group stands
ready to join hands with all other regional groups to
address the tragic and persistent consequences of
slavery and the transatlantic slave trade and to ensure
dignity, liberty and prosperity for all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia, who
will speak on behalf of the Group of Latin American
and Caribbean States.

21-074515/19

A/75/PV.58

Mr. Pary Rodríguez (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States (GRULAC).
First, I would like to express our gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s commemorative
plenary meeting on the occasion of the International
Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and
the Transatlantic Slave Trade, observed annually since
2008, on 25 March, in accordance with resolution
62/122. I would also like to thank Ms. Lisa Coleman,
Senior Vice President for Global Inclusion, Diversity
and Strategic Innovation, and Chief Diversity Officer
at New York University, for her participation in
today’s meeting.
We deplore the fact that as a result of the
coronavirus disease pandemic, the commemorative
meeting in 2020 on the occasion of the International
Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and
the Transatlantic Slave Trade was postponed. Today
we remember the 15 million Africans forcibly removed
from their homelands. The transatlantic slave trade
sowed deep inequalities within societies. Economies
prospered at great human cost. Entire industries were
built on the suffering of fellow human beings. A
minority amassed great riches and power, while those
who toiled were denied their most basic human rights.
Today we honour and remember those men, women and
children who were brutalized under a system of slavery
that endured for more than 400 years. The legacy of the
inhumane slave trade is the large population of people
of African descent in the Americas. Nearly 96 per cent
of those who were enslaved arrived in South America
and the islands of the Caribbean.
Descendants of Africans have made an enormous
contribution to the social, economic and cultural
development of the Americas. However, the descendants
of those who were enslaved continue to face social
and economic inequalities, intolerance, prejudice,
racism, discrimination and are ignored in public policy
at the national level. In that context, the members of
GRULAC deeply deplore the massive human suffering
created by slavery and the slave trade and consider
this forum appropriate for remembering the victims of
such tragedies.
However, despite its abolition, slavery continues
in modern forms to this day, such as violations of the
right to self-determination, human rights and dignity.
6/19

25/03/2021

Racism and prejudice are also legacies of a barbaric
system in which human beings are regarded as different
or less than. We therefore welcome this year’s theme,
which reflects the global movement to put an end to
injustices rooted in the slave trade and to teach history
in a way that acknowledges the impact of slavery on
today’s world and spurs action to address its lasting
effects. In that regard, we must take collective action
to reduce inequalities, eliminate racial discrimination
and end modern slavery. According to the International
Labour Organization, 40 million people are trapped in
modern forms of slavery today. Children account for a
quarter of victims, while 71 per cent of those enslaved
are women.
We cannot be indifferent to injustice. It is incumbent
on each and every one of us to uphold the human rights
of everyone, everywhere. Throughout the International
Decade for People of African Descent, GRULAC
has urged member States to adopt, implement and
strengthen policies and programmes that combat hate
speech, xenophobia, racism and racial discrimination.
We must take collective action to reaffirm our
commitment to implementing the Durban Declaration,
agreed at the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance.
Inequalities emerge from the shadows of ignorance
and complacency, and when discrimination and hate
speech are a scourge in themselves, we cannot let down
our guard in rooting out racism and prejudices that
sow division.
The member States of GRULAC join the wider
international community in observing this important
day to highlight the struggle and recognize the
achievements of people who were emancipated
from slavery. It is a day to reflect on the past and take
stock of and cement our determination to confront
today’s challenges of inequality, intolerance, racism,
xenophobia, discrimination, poverty, colonialism and
modern slavery. It will undoubtedly be a challenge to
educate present and future generations about the causes,
consequences and lessons of slavery to ensure that this
period in the history of humankind is never repeated.
The International Day of Remembrance of the Victims
of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade provides
us with an opportunity to honour and remember those
who suffered and died, but it is also a chance for us
to raise awareness about the dangers of racism and
prejudice today.
21-07451

25/03/2021

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand, who will speak on behalf
of the Group of Western European and other States.
Mr. Hawke (New Zealand): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Group of Western European
and other States on the occasion of the International
Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the
Transatlantic Slave Trade.
Today we honour the memories of the women, men
and children, especially those of African descent, who
were enslaved over four centuries of the transatlantic
slave trade. They suffered under the most horrific
and inhumane circumstances imaginable for the
economic and political gain of those who enslaved
them. The perpetrators took away everything from the
enslaved — their freedom, their voices and their dignity.
That terrible legacy in our shared history continues to
haunt us to this day. Today, we also honour the heroic
actions of the enslaved and the abolitionists who acted
in the face of grave danger and adversity, determined to
ensure human rights and fundamental freedoms for all.
Nowadays, millions worldwide still fall victim
to slavery and human trafficking and too many must
continue to fight against hatred and discrimination.
Slavery, human trafficking, forced labour and
forced marriage entrap more than 40 million people,
according to the International Labour Organization
data, while systemic racism and racial discrimination
continue to prevent many from living in safety, dignity
and prosperity.
This year’s theme, “Ending Slavery’s Legacy of
Racism: A Global Imperative for Justice”, brings the
enduring, pervasive and devastating impact of slavery
into focus. It reminds us that racism has deep roots,
built on centuries of systemic oppression and suffering.
We must promote greater knowledge of the ties between
our present and our past through ongoing learning and
discussion. We must be vigilant in both recognizing and
standing up against racism, prejudice and all forms of
slavery. We must honour the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and its article 4, which states that no one
shall be held in slavery or servitude, and that slavery
and the slave trade shall be prohibited in all their forms.
We would like to recall our remarks at last week’s
event to mark the International Day of the Elimination
of Racial Discrimination (see A/75/PV.57). Respect for
diversity and mutual understanding are key building
blocks for peace, justice, inclusion and prosperity.

A/75/PV.58

Ignorance breeds intolerance. We must jointly
commit to building a global culture, based on mutual
understanding and dialogue, inclusive of the full range
of different perspectives, celebrating diversity of
thought, history and belief and making special efforts
to give centre stage to the voices of those with lived
experiences of racism. Our commitment to respecting
and promoting human rights must be the foundation on
which we act. We urge States that have not yet done so
to consider ratifying or acceding to the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination, as well as the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and in particular its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, and to fully implement them. We further
encourage all States to continue to strengthen their
national policies and their cooperation with the United
Nations system to combat racial discrimination and
human trafficking. We honour the victims and survivors
of slavery by vigilantly fighting injustices, racial
inequalities and human rights violations and abuses
today, so that we may progress to a better tomorrow.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States of America, who
will speak on behalf of the host country.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening us today to commemorate
this important International Day of Remembrance of the
Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his participation
and Ms. Coleman for her powerful words.
A little over 400 years ago, enslaved people were
forced onto the shores of the colony of Virginia. As
Ambassador Thomas-Greenfield said last week (see
A/75/PV.57), that was the origin of our original sin. The
statistics are horrifying — an estimated 12.5 million
Africans were put on slave ships in the transatlantic
trade and more than one in 12 died during the Middle
Passage. After they arrived on our shores, they were
auctioned off like chattel, forced into hard labour,
beaten, raped, killed and deprived of all forms of
freedom. On those scarred backs, they helped build
America, my country. Even the White House was
constructed by enslaved people.
Throughout the history of the United States, many
have seen the inherent indignity and the inhumanity of
slavery, the utter moral wrongness of one human being

21-074517/19

A/75/PV.58

enslaving another. Former slaves such as Sojourner
Truth and Frederick Douglass shared their stories,
working with abolitionists to convince my country to
abolish this monstrosity. Americans of all stripes risked
their lives and opened up their barns, shops, cellars
and attics to serve as way stations on the Underground
Railroad. Those courageous enslaved Americans who
were able to escape to the North told their own children
that they deserved freedom, justice and dignity.
Somehow, they remained hopeful that chattel slavery
would not endure. Eventually that hope burned so bright
and the calls for abolition rang so loudly that they could
not be ignored. Yet those who defended slavery chose
instead to tear the United States apart with a civil war.
After the Emancipation Proclamation, the Thirteenth
Amendment to our Constitution made permanent
the illegality and immorality of chattel slavery, but
as Ms. Coleman so eloquently said, the fight against
white supremacy was still far from over. Newly freed
slaves were barred from most jobs or from voting in
my country. They faced regular terror and violence. But
they kept fighting for their rights, through lynchings,
segregation and the legal regime of Jim Crow.
On this day of solemn remembrance, as we face
the effects of the coronavirus disease pandemic,
we remind ourselves that we are still working to
disentangle ourselves from slavery’s wicked web. Too
often, black Americans are funnelled into overcrowded
schools, receive poor treatment in hospitals or are
unfairly denied jobs, housing and access to capital.
And of course slavery’s legacy rears its ugly head most
clearly in my country’s policing and criminal justice
system. The tragic, senseless killings of George Floyd,
Breonna Taylor and so many other black Americans
have catalysed a new reckoning with racial justice. The
Black Lives Matter movement has spread across our
country and around the world. Today, we proudly say
that black lives matter.
And now the White House, the same one that was
built by enslaved peoples, is doing everything in its
power to right those wrongs and make an equal and
just America for all. In his very first week in office,
President Biden put forward a strategy to embed
racial justice and equity across the entire federal
Government. He took immediate action on issues such
as redressing housing discrimination and eliminating
privately run prisons, in order to directly oppose what
have become institutions of white supremacy. The new
United States Administration is also deeply committed
8/19

25/03/2021

to addressing the scourge of modern-day slavery, both
domestically and overseas. Internationally, we have
renewed our commitment to working with global and
multilateral partners in order to address the vast scale
and complexity of human trafficking and the systematic
disparities that marginalize certain communities and
embolden traffickers.
The Biden-Harris Administration is also putting
racial equity at the centre of United States foreign
policy. Last week at the Human Rights Council, the
United States delivered a joint statement signed by
more than 155 countries condemning racism and
racial discrimination. As we resolve to do more to
address the legacy of past transgressions, manifested
today in systemic racism, we continue to struggle. As
Ambassador Thomas-Greenfield said last week, racism
is the problem of the society that produces the racist,
and in today’s world, that is every society. So let us
join together to pay tribute to the millions of victims
of slavery and to remember the pain, suffering and
violence that have been passed down from generation
to generation. And then let us honour them and their
legacy by taking swift action to end racism and root out
oppression wherever it remains.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guyana, who will deliver a joint
statement on behalf of the Group of African States and
the Caribbean Community.
Mrs. Rodrigues-Birkett (Guyana): I thank
the Secretary-General for his participation and
Ms. Coleman for her insightful remarks.
I am honoured to speak on behalf of the 68
member States of the Group of African States and the
Caribbean Community (AfCAR). The horror of slavery
separated 12 million Africans from their motherland
and created a diaspora in the Caribbean. Separated
from our families, we are now here, standing reunited
with one voice. Given that historic reality and linkage,
it is indeed fitting that AfCAR’s first statement within
the United Nations should come as we commemorate
the International Day of Remembrance of the Victims
of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade, which is
being held under the theme “Ending Slavery’s Legacy of
Racism: A Global Imperative for Justice”. This annual
meeting provides us with an opportunity to reflect
on the progress made in our collective endeavour to
eliminate all forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and intolerance, which gave rise to one of
21-07451

25/03/2021

the most horrific enterprises in human history. This
year, it comes at a time when racial discrimination
all over the world prompts the plaintive cry of “Black
Lives Matter”. Irrespective of the country in which they
reside, the children of Africa deserve to live and to do
so with dignity. And the social and economic structures
that prevent that must be dismantled.
In 2015, the beginning of the International Decade
for People of African Descent, Member States stood in
solidarity as we erected the Ark of Return, a permanent
memorial designed not only to honour and remember
victims but also to pay tribute to those who fought to
secure fundamental human rights and freedoms for
their descendants. The memorial stands as a reminder
that we should never cease to denounce all vestiges of
racism, discrimination, xenophobia and intolerance,
as well as modern-day slavery, while promoting the
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
On this day, the memorial and other related activities
have particular resonance in the hearts and minds of
the millions of Africans and people of African descent
whom we represent. But a memorial must be more than
a symbol of the remembrance of history. It must be
a call to action for the creation of a meaningful and
sustainable future and the prevention of any repetition
of the events we now call to mind.
We commend the ongoing efforts of Member States
and the continued support of the Secretary-General, the
Department of Global Communications, UNESCO and
other international agencies and urge them to further
raise awareness about the impact and legacy of slavery.
We also advocate for a broadening of discussions on
ways in which the international community can tackle
the related complex historical, sociocultural and
economic issues. We note from the Secretary-General’s
most recent report (A/73/88), issued in June 2018, that
activities related to the United Nations Remember
Slavery programme have increased, both in number and
quality. There has also been an increase in the use of
social-media platforms and strengthened partnerships
with Member States and civil society to raise awareness
about the Ark of Return and issues covered by the
educational outreach programme on slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade.
It is a travesty, however, that decades after the
abolition of the odious and nefarious enterprise that
was the transatlantic slave trade, people of African
descent continue to confront systemic and structural

A/75/PV.58

forms of hatred, built on deeply entrenched mindsets
and attitudes, which deny them their human rights and
dignity. The events of 2020 sparked by the death of
George Floyd in the United States, together with the
birth and growth of the Black Lives Matter movement,
have brought into sharp focus the need for greater
attention to be given to addressing the legacy of slavery
and the transatlantic slave trade. That legacy can be
seen today in the entrenched and systemic racism that
results in discrimination against people of colour all
over the world. They are more likely to be unemployed,
to have less access to jobs, opportunities, housing and
education, and in fact to be criminalized and suffer
inequity and injustice in all aspects of social and
economic activity.
That reality has been tragically borne out during
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which
has revealed deep disparities in care and outcomes for
persons of African descent, as well as other minorities
who are disproportionately affected and killed by the
virus. The Economic Commission for Latin America
and the Caribbean noted recently that since Afrodescendants have worse indicators of well-being
than their non-Afro-descendant peers, they represent
one of the groups most vulnerable to the COVID-19
pandemic, in terms of both infection and mortality.
Those disparities are attributed to multiple factors
relating to marginalization, discrimination, limited
access to health care, bias in the provision of care,
economic inequality and overcrowded housing and
environmental risks. We need urgent action on the part
of Governments to address these issues, which have
resulted in social exclusion and the perpetuation of
racism, prejudice and discrimination.
Despite the inclusion of Sustainable Development
Goal (SDG) 10, which focuses on reducing inequality
within and among countries, none of the SDGs calls
explicitly for the eradication of systemic racism and
racial discrimination. That has implications for the
overall delivery on the promise to leave no one behind.
We therefore welcomed the historic debate on racially
inspired human rights violations, systemic racism,
police brutality and violence against peaceful protests
convened in June 2020 during the forty-third session
of the Human Rights Council, and the Council’s
subsequent unanimous adoption of its resolution
43/1, which mandated the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, together with United
Nations experts, to prepare a global report on systemic

21-074519/19

A/75/PV.58

racism and the excessive use of force against people of
African descent by law enforcement. That is a step in
the right direction, at a time when issues of systemic
racism and police violence around the world are under
increased international scrutiny.
We also look forward to the debate on the midterm
review of the International Decade for People of
African Descent, which will be held later this year. It
will provide an important opportunity to deepen our
analysis and review of existing mechanisms in order
to identify gaps in the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. It will also
offer an opportunity for all relevant stakeholders to
exchange views on the broad range of recommendations
emanating from several agencies and institutions,
including the Pan American Health Organization, the
United Nations Population Fund and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
More importantly, the review will enable discussions
on how the global community can tackle the pandemic,
while emphasizing the importance of implementing
participatory policies that are culturally relevant and
free from racism and that promote equality and rights
for all persons of African descent. This is an opportunity
for us to move beyond discussion to taking tangible
steps to ensure that the post-COVID-19 world is one
in which racism is finally eliminated. In that regard,
reparations are pivotal for establishing restorative
justice and creating opportunity and equity for those
whose limbs and lives were used, without mercy or
remuneration, to build societies and strong economies.
There is much work to be done. We must continue
to take concrete steps to eliminate the scourge of
racism and act decisively to safeguard human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction as to
race, sex, language or religion. We encourage all to
support the ongoing public educational outreach so as to
ensure that the legacies of slavery are dismantled once
and for all. Slavery was inflicted on us. We continue to
carry its heavy and residual burden, but the multilateral
system can guarantee that the stain of slavery is finally
lifted from the lives of people of African descent. In
that fight, the Assembly can be assured of the unstinting
commitment of the member States of the African Group
and the Caribbean Community.
As I close, I call on all my African and Caribbean
brothers and sisters in this Hall and all who support the
Black Lives Matter movement to stand for five seconds.
10/19

25/03/2021

Mr. Pedroso Cuesta (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of today’s commemorative
meeting. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
Commemorating the International Day of
Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the
Transatlantic Slave Trade is crucial in today’s
environment, marked as it is by disturbing manifestations
of racism, racial discrimination and xenophobia in
some of the world’s most developed societies. For
Cuba, the issue is particularly symbolic because we are
immensely proud of our African roots and heritage. As
a consequence of the cruel and inhumane trade whose
victims we are remembering today, approximately
1.3 million enslaved Africans arrived in Cuba as labour
to replace that of the indigenous population, which had
been virtually exterminated by the colonial Power. The
Cuban nation and its culture, unique features and forms
of popular religion are a profound mixture that cannot
be explained without taking account of its African
contribution. In our struggle for independence and
self-determination, freed slaves and their descendants
were leading players. As we pay tribute to the victims
of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade, we therefore
also pay tribute to our people’s roots.
The crime against humanity committed against
the people we are remembering today is linked to the
structural inequality, racial discrimination, prejudices
and exclusion that even now, in the twenty-first century,
continue to affect people of African descent. As the
historic leader of the Cuban Revolution, Fidel Castro,
said at the Durban Conference,
“The inhuman exploitation imposed on the
peoples of three continents, including Asia, marked
forever the destiny and lives of more than 4.5 billion
people living in the Third World today whose
poverty, unemployment, illiteracy and health rates
as well as their infant mortality, life expectancy and
other calamities — too many, in fact, to enumerate
here — are certainly shocking and harrowing.
They are the current victims of that atrocity,
which lasted centuries, and the ones who clearly
deserve compensation for the horrendous crimes
perpetrated against their ancestors and peoples.”
It is a moral duty to ensure that reparations and full
compensation reach the peoples and groups affected
by this horrendous and ongoing crime. The developed
countries have been the beneficiaries of conquest,
21-07451

25/03/2021

colonization, slavery and the transatlantic slave trade
and are therefore responsible for the extermination
linked to them. For that reason, we support the just
claim raised by the member States of the Caribbean
Community. It is also only fair that there should be
special and differential treatment towards developing
countries, particularly those in Africa, where their
international economic relations are concerned. As a
general rule, those of us whose nations are yesterday’s
colonies are subject today to an unfair international
order that may have changed in name but not in essence,
because it continues to promote the wealth of a few at
the expense of a vast impoverished majority.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has turned a
harsh spotlight on the inequities of the world in which
we live today. How many doses of the millions of
vaccines produced have reached developing countries
in Africa, Asia, Latin America or the Caribbean? And
in the developed countries, is there equal access to those
vaccines for people of African descent and migrants?
The best tribute we can pay to the victims of slavery and
the transatlantic slave trade in today’s world, in addition
to the necessary remembrance, is to show international
solidarity with the countries from which those millions
of people were snatched. For that reason, and based on
its humanist stance, Cuba has continued to strengthen
its international cooperation programmes in the area
of health. Despite the unprecedented resurgence of the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
on Cuba by the United States, my country has sent
more than 4,900 health professionals in 56 brigades to
40 countries and territories in order to support their
efforts to address the pandemic. A majority of those
professionals were sent to countries and territories in
the Caribbean, Latin America and Africa.
The tribute we pay today means that we must
address and find a solution to the root causes of the
inequality, exclusion, racism and discrimination that
have survived slavery and from which millions continue
to suffer, especially people of African descent.
Mr. Ilnytskyi (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to welcome today’s important commemorative
meeting, aimed at paying tribute to all victims of
slavery and consolidating international cooperation in
combating contemporary forms of slavery. Given the
issue’s importance, it is unfortunate that it was once
again not possible to arrive at an agreed statement to be
delivered on behalf of the Group of Eastern European
States, for the same reasons we cited last week with

A/75/PV.58

regard to the Group’s statement on the elimination of
racial discrimination (see A/75/PV.57).
Slavery and the slave trade, including the
transatlantic slave trade, are appalling tragedies in
the history of humankind. It is beyond any doubt
that slavery constitutes a crime against humanity and
should always have been so. Slavery is a major source
and manifestation of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance. Peoples in Africa,
Asia and other parts of the world were victims of those
acts and continue to be victims of their consequences.
As was mentioned at the commemorative meeting
on racial discrimination last week, Ukraine, as a
founding member of the United Nations, took an active
part in the decolonization process. I would therefore like
to reiterate our solidarity with all the peoples who have
suffered from slavery and the slave trade. That said, I
would like to underline that my people, the people of
Ukraine, have also suffered from slavery. That scourge
harmed Ukrainians for centuries, from ancient times
until the end of the Soviet era. The greatest tragedy
for my people was the three centuries that we endured
as a part of the Russian Empire during our country’s
millennium-long history, three centuries marked by
enslavement practices and a slave trade. The Ukrainian
national poet Taras Shevchenko, who had been a serf in
the Russian Empire, once said, “People, people, if you
are asked to give away your mother for a piece of rotten
sausage, you will”.
It is true that a kind of apathy very often prevails in
some societies. Unless something violent and shocking
happens, an apathetic society will remain complacent
while valuables replace values. In that regard, we
should redouble our efforts to deliver on the Sustainable
Development Goals, aimed at ensuring peace and
prosperity for all peoples in the world by taking urgent
collective action in a global partnership.
Even in 1861, when the Russian Empire at last
abolished serfdom as a slavery practice, the repression
and exploitation of my people by Moscow did not
disappear. In the twentieth century, Stalin’s totalitarian
regime continued its practice of conducting the State
enslavement of Ukrainians through large-scale political
repression, sending thousands to the Gulag and other
forced-labour camps. Every peasant in the former Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics was enslaved through
enforced collectivization and limitations on freedoms.
It is hard to believe, but Soviet peasants did not receive

21-0745111/19

A/75/PV.58

passports until 1974. In the pursuit of collectivization,
Stalin inflicted genocide through a man-made famine
known as the Holodomor, which was designed to crush
Ukrainians’ spirit of resistance and took millions of
innocent lives. Ukraine therefore strongly condemns
any glorification of totalitarian regimes, especially
that of Stalin, although that glorification unfortunately
continues in the Russian Federation, where Stalin’s
methods for persecuting people are widely used in
internal and foreign policies today.
I believe that all crimes of slavery, whether
committed in Africa, Asia, Europe or elsewhere, should
be condemned and tribute paid to all of its victims. It
is our moral and legal responsibility to prevent any
repetition of such tragedies and to combat all existing
modern forms of slavery, which still harm our societies.
It is evident that despite its prohibition, slavery and
slavery-like practices, in the form of trafficking of
persons and other forms of modern slavery, persist
and constitute flagrant violations of human rights. In
Ukraine, we continue to receive worrying information
about cases of human exploitation and trafficking in
various areas of Ukraine that are still under foreign
occupation. We believe that the United Nations,
including the Human Rights Monitoring Mission in
Ukraine and the Special Rapporteur on contemporary
forms of slavery, should give due attention to the
situation in the temporarily occupied territories of
Ukraine through regular reporting.
The lessons of the past should urge us to address
the scourge of slavery, including in all its contemporary
forms. We must address its root causes, such as
discrimination on any grounds and violations of
international law, which fuel intolerance and ignorance
and lead to conflict.
Mr. Kuzmenkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing today’s meeting on such an important topic.
The Russian Federation attaches great importance
to disseminating knowledge and improving awareness
through the media of the causes, consequences, lessons
and legacy of the slave trade. Current and future
generations must not forget that tragic chapter in
world history, and the States Members of the United
Nations must take every possible measure to preserve
the memory of the victims of the slave trade and
its consequences.
12/19

25/03/2021

However, it is also important to call a spade a
spade. Slavery and the transatlantic slave trade, some of
the greatest crimes against humanity the world has ever
seen, have yet to be fully acknowledged and atoned for.
Thanks to the inhuman policies of European colonial
Powers and American landowners towards African
countries, the peoples of the African continent were
subjected to irreparable harm through the transatlantic
slave trade. Above all, this is about the loss of millions
of lives. The African men, women and even children
who were brought to the Americas were not only
forever separated from their homeland but subjected to
torture and ill-treatment. Many died or lost their health
working in inhumane conditions while others profited
from their suffering. African countries lost millions
of their countrymen whose labour was so essential to
their societies’ social and economic development. The
consequences of that criminal and racist colonial policy
are still felt today. We believe that it is justifiable to ask
not only for an apology for the atrocities committed, but
also for reparations for the moral and material damage
suffered by African States.
We in the Russian Federation are proud of our
country’s contribution to the struggle of African
States in the twentieth century for independence and
in dismantling the unjust global colonial system. We
express our solidarity with all who have suffered as a
result of the slave trade, and we support efforts to restore
historical justice and ensure accountability for the
crimes of colonialism. We feel compelled to point out
that the policies of aggressive neocolonialism pursued
by Western States are still with us and represent a
danger. Many States seeking to defend their sovereignty
and pursue an independent foreign policy have been
subjected to economic blockades, illegal unilateral
sanctions and brazen meddling in their internal affairs.
Such shameful practices are contrary to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
must be stopped.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
meeting, which is timely and very significant. The
slave trade and slavery represent the most appalling
violations of human rights in the history of humankind.
For more than 400 years, more than 15 million men,
women and children were the victims of the transatlantic
slave trade, marking the darkest chapter in human
history. Even more terrifying is the fact that people of
African descent continue to face racial discrimination,
21-07451

25/03/2021

prejudice, hatred and social injustice to this very day,
which is an affront to the human conscience.
Secretary-General Guterres pointed out that
while the transatlantic slave trade ended more than
two centuries ago, the notions of white supremacy
that underpinned it remain alive. Tens of millions of
people of African descent in the United States continue
to suffer all kinds of discrimination and injustice.
Freedom and equality are merely represented in laws
devoid of substance. After the George Floyd incident,
people were outraged and chanted, “I can’t breathe”.
And since the outbreak of the coronavirus disease
pandemic in the United States, violence against AsianAmericans has increased significantly. According to
statistics, between March 2020 and February 2021,
3,795 attacks and incidents of discrimination against
Asians in the United States were reported, and hate
crimes against Asians increased by 150 per cent in
the country’s 16 largest cities. In the aftermath of the
recent tragic shooting in Atlanta that claimed the lives
of six innocent people of Asian descent, we cannot help
asking who will be the next victims.
China notes that the United States has started to
openly acknowledge its serious human rights problems.
Coming to an understanding that systemic racism
and white supremacy are ugly poisons that have long
plagued it is a good start to acknowledging the problem.
But addressing it is key. We hope that the United States
will take concrete action to address its issues of racism,
racial discrimination and police brutality, among other
things, ensure the effective protection of the rights of its
racial minorities, engage in international cooperation in
a sincere and equal manner and stop spreading political
lies and waging unprovoked smear campaigns on other
countries. China is ready to work with other countries
to combat all forms of racial discrimination, ensure that
all people can live in dignity and build an inclusive,
equal and free society.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
today’s commemorative meeting.
I thank representatives for their active participation
today. As we strive towards 2030, the International Day
of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the
Transatlantic Slave Trade is an important reminder of
the genesis of inequality. We will not succeed in our
endeavours to leave no one behind if we forget those
who were left behind and subjugated by society in
the past. The statements we heard today demonstrate

A/75/PV.58

that although the transatlantic slave trade ended long
ago, the scars on the human psyche remain. We are
still unpacking the impact of that moral failure. We
are still navigating an unjust world. All of us have a
moral obligation to eliminate racial discrimination in
all its forms, which persist as the legacy of slavery. I
urge all Member States to engage constructively in our
work on the twentieth commemoration of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action, the permanent
forum on people of African descent and the midterm
review of the International Decade for People of
African Descent.
Our work is far from done. I hope that you will join
me in a moment of personal reflection to remember the
victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade.
The Assembly has concluded its commemorative
meeting to mark the International Day of Remembrance
of the Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave
Trade. May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 124?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: I now invite the attention of the
General Assembly to draft resolution A/75/L.68,
circulated under agenda item 56, entitled “Questions
relating to information”. Members will recall that at
its 2nd plenary meeting, on 18 September 2020, the
General Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 56
to the Special Political and Decolonization Committee.
To enable the Assembly to take action expeditiously on
the draft resolution, may I take it that the Assembly
wishes to consider agenda item 56 directly in plenary
meeting and proceed immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided (decision 75/504 B).
Agenda item 56 (continued)
Questions relating to information
Draft resolution (A/75/L.68)
The President: The General Assembly will now
resume its consideration of agenda item 56, to take
action on draft resolution A/75/L.68, entitled “Global
Media and Information Literacy Week”. I give the

21-0745113/19

A/75/PV.58

floor to the representative of Australia to introduce the
draft resolution.
Mr. Fifield (Australia): I have the honour to
speak today on behalf of a core group of countries:
Armenia, Burkina Faso, Chile, Costa Rica, Georgia,
India, Jamaica, Latvia, Lebanon, Lithuania, Maldives,
Morocco, North Macedonia, Qatar, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Serbia, Uganda, Ukraine and my own
country, Australia. Together, under agenda item 56,
we are pleased to present draft resolution A/75/L.68,
entitled “Global Media and Information Literacy Week”.
By improving people’s ability to access and analyse
information, media and information literacy skills
enable them to critically evaluate and differentiate
between various types of media in order to make
informed judgments and sort fact from fiction. The
development of media and information literacy is also
essential to countering the spread of disinformation and
misinformation, including combating false or misleading
information that threatens to divide communities and
delay the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals. For those reasons, the draft resolution presented
today seeks to proclaim the week from 24 to 31 October
an annual Global Media and Information Literacy
Week. It complements UNESCO’s adoption of its
resolution 56 in November 2019, at the fortieth session
of its General Conference, which also proclaimed an
annual Media and Information Literacy Week, which
UNESCO has already commemorated.
In the midst of a global pandemic, when people are
forced to evaluate new information daily, we consider
the draft resolution extremely timely, if not overdue. It
is our hope that the Assembly’s adoption of the draft
resolution will bring together academia, young people,
non-governmental organizations, policymakers, print
and broadcast media, Internet and communications
companies, educators and citizens to promote universal
media and information literacy skills.
The core group held three informal consultations
on the draft resolution and maintained an open dialogue
on the text throughout the consultation process. We
extend our sincere thanks to the sponsors, who so far
number 85, for their support, and to all delegations
for their participation and constructive engagement
during negotiations.
We trust that the draft resolution, which
successfully underwent a silence procedure, will enjoy
the consensus support of the Assembly.
14/19

25/03/2021

The President: We will now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/75/L.68. Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote or position, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats. I
give the floor to the representative of the United States.
Mr. Leiby (United States of America): The United
States appreciates Australia and Jamaica’s leadership
and skilled shepherding of draft resolution A/75/L.68,
and the core group’s decision to bring such an important
topic to the attention of the General Assembly. We
support efforts to highlight the importance of media and
information literacy, the challenges of digital divides
and data inequalities and recognize the importance
of access to information. We also appreciate the
draft resolution’s acknowledgement of the serious
challenge posed by misinformation and disinformation
and the need for Member State cooperation on this
important issue.
We take a holistic approach to countering
disinformation by promoting multi-stakeholder
collaboration to raise awareness among vulnerable
audiences and bolster societal resilience. That
includes promoting a free and transparent news media
environment and independent journalism, including
by supporting investigative journalism and local news
media. It also includes promoting media literacy and
fact-checking as key ways to enable individuals to seek
multiple sources of sources of information to assess
the origins of information and the viewpoints and
motivations of sources and to make informed judgments.
We appreciate the core group’s efforts to address
some of our concerns in the most recent draft. However,
we remain concerned about the eleventh preambular
paragraph, which calls for balancing the fight against
disinformation with respect for the right to freedom
of expression. We strongly disagree with the idea that
respect for human rights should be balanced against
other objectives. States must respect their international
human rights obligations and commitments, including
in their efforts to counter disinformation. Member
States must ensure that our approaches to countering
disinformation do not inadvertently abuse or violate
human rights and fundamental freedoms, which
undergird free and open societies, including freedom
of expression online and offline.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of position before adoption.
21-07451

25/03/2021

A/75/PV.58

The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/75/L.68, entitled “Global Media and
Information Literacy Week”. I give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.

Week, to the attention of the Assembly. We also thank
the Permanent Missions of Jamaica and Australia, which
as co-facilitators of the informal consultations ensured
that all interested parties could engage meaningfully.

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to the delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors of A/75/L.68: Afghanistan, Albania,
Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Austria, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bhutan,
Bulgaria, Canada, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Hungary,
Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya,
Kiribati, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Monaco, Montenegro,
Namibia, Nauru, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey and Tuvalu.

The EU supports the text because it addresses
a significant challenge of our time. The EU and its
member States are committed to media and information
literacy in their internal policies, but also through EU
development assistance in partner countries and by
taking part in the meaningful activities organized by
UNESCO since 2011. Enhancing media and information
literacy globally is crucial to enabling citizens of all
ages to navigate the modern information environment
and make informed decisions. In a world where the
wealth of sources is unprecedented and multiplied
by online platforms, and where we always defend
freedom of the press, identifying reliable, trustworthy
information requires perhaps more skill and judgment
than ever before. By supporting today’s resolution, the
EU remains committed to ensuring that all people are
equipped with the media and information literacy skills
they need to participate as well-informed citizens in
various aspects of public life.

The President: May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.68?
Draft resolution A/75/L.68
(resolution 75/267).

was

adopted

The President: We will now hear statements after
adoption. I give the floor to the representative of the
European Union, in its capacity as observer.
Mr. Gonzato (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. The candidate countries Albania,
Montenegro, North Macedonia, Serbia and Turkey; the
country of the Stabilization and Association process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.
I would like to express our appreciation to Jamaica
for taking this initiative and to the core group of 12
countries for their hard work in bringing resolution
75/267, on Global Media and Information Literacy

(spoke in French)
In bringing the issue before the General Assembly,
we acknowledge the progress that has been achieved
to date by several countries, regional organizations
and United Nations bodies in setting guidelines for
the future. We are also committed to a genuinely
comprehensive and inclusive approach to ensure
that all stakeholders, including civil society and the
private sector, can contribute to this global effort — a
multi-stakeholder approach that the Secretary-General
has called for numerous times.
(spoke in English)
The resolution ensures that the promotion of media
and information literacy takes place in accordance
with the principles of freedom of opinion and freedom
of expression, media independence and media
pluralism. It also provides strong encouragement to
fight disinformation and misinformation, an evolving
challenge that must be addressed both online and offline
while upholding freedom of opinion and expression and
media freedom. We regret that difficult compromises
had to be made with regard to some of the references to
those freedoms.

21-0745115/19

A/75/PV.58

In the text, we also recognize the leading role of
UNESCO in organizing the Media and Information
Literacy Week activities, including via greater youth
engagement and leadership, but we also particularly
address the role of the private sector and social-media
platforms in this effort to empower all citizens.
Social-media platforms play an increasingly critical
role in addressing the challenges of misinformation and
disinformation, including but not limited to the context
of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
and the infodemic. The resolution is positive, well
balanced, timely and action-oriented. We therefore
invite all States Members of the United Nations and
other relevant stakeholders to support its adoption and
to engage both politically and practically in promoting
its effective implementation worldwide.
(spoke in Spanish)
We would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his efforts in this area, in particular the Verified
campaign, announced in April 2020. The work of the
Department of Global Communications has been key in
combating disinformation, including pandemic-related
disinformation, while simultaneously appealing to
our shared humanity. We reiterate our support for this
crucial endeavour while also recalling the importance
of multilingualism, which is an essential pillar of
the United Nations and an essential condition for its
relationship with the peoples it serves.
(spoke in English)
In conclusion, you yourself, Mr. President, have
also addressed the challenge of misinformation and
disinformation in the context of COVID-19, including
in your statement in December 2020 on responding
to the infodemic and sharing best practices, and we
strongly support your continued efforts in that regard.
The President: We have heard the last speaker
under this item. May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 56?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: I now invite the attention of
the General Assembly to draft decision A/75/L.71,
16/19

25/03/2021

circulated under sub-item (b) of agenda item 105, entitled
“Report of the Disarmament Commission”. Members
will recall that the General Assembly concluded its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 105 at its
27th plenary meeting on 7 December 2020. In order for
the Assembly to take action on the draft decision, it will
be necessary to reopen consideration of sub-item (b) of
agenda item 105. May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to reopen consideration of sub-item
(b) of agenda item 105?
It was so decided.
The President: Members will also recall that at
its 2nd plenary meeting on 18 September 2020, the
General Assembly decided to allocate sub-item (b) of
agenda item 105 to the First Committee. To enable the
Assembly to take action expeditiously on the document,
may I take it that the Assembly wishes to consider
sub-item (b) of agenda item 105 directly in plenary
meeting and proceed immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided (decision 75/504 B).
Agenda item 105 (continued)
Review of the implementation of the
recommendations and decisions adopted by the
General Assembly at its tenth special session
(b) Report of the Disarmament Commission
Draft decision (A/75/L.71)
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): The present
statement is made in the context of rule 153 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of the second paragraph of draft
decision A/75/L.71, the General Assembly would
decide to postpone the 2021 substantive session of
the Disarmament Commission to a later period to be
decided by the Assembly. The adoption of the draft
decision would not entail any budgetary implications
with regard to the programme budget. Upon a further
decision by the General Assembly on the date of the
substantive session of the Disarmament Commission,
the Secretary-General would reassess the budgetary
implications and advise the General Assembly, in
accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure
of the Assembly. Furthermore, in accordance with
21-07451

25/03/2021

A/75/PV.58

established practice, the date of the substantive session
of the Disarmament Commission would be determined
in consultation with the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management.
The statement I just read out was distributed
through the plenary space on the e-deleGATE portal
and will be made available in the Journal of the United
Nations under the e-Statements link for the meeting.
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on draft decision A/75/L.71, entitled “Disarmament
Commission”. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to adopt draft decision A/75/L.71?
Draft decision A/75/L .71
(decision 75/519 B).

was

adopted

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 105.
Agenda item 130 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(s) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
Draft resolution (A/75/L.69)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tajikistan to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.69.
Mr. Mahmadaminov (Tajikistan): On behalf of all
the members of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO), including China, India, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Pakistan, the Russian Federation, Uzbekistan and my
own country, Tajikistan, I have the honour to present
for the Assembly’s kind consideration draft resolution
A/75/L.69, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization”.
As members may be aware, the draft resolution is just
a technical rollover from previous resolutions and we
count on the Assembly’s continued support today to see
it once again adopted by consensus, as has been the
case with the previous resolutions on the subject.
According to the draft resolution, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization is committed to acting
consistently in line with the purposes and principles of
the United Nations. It has become an essential regional
organization for addressing security in the region, in all

its dimensions, including through cooperation with the
relevant regional organizations. The member States of
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization are committed
to pursuing the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals outlined in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, and to achieving the peaceful
settlement of regional disputes, as laid down under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
The member States of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization will make every effort to transform
the SCO region into one of lasting peace, friendship,
prosperity and harmony, in accordance with the Treaty
on Long-Term Good Neighbourliness, Friendship and
Cooperation among the States members of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization to promote cooperation in
countering terrorism, including through the Regional
Anti-Terrorist Structure. In that regard, the SCO member
States welcome the protocol on cooperation signed
on 22 July 2012 between the Regional Anti-Terrorist
Structure of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
Another of the draft resolution’s main goals is
ensuring cooperation between the SCO’s Regional
Anti-Terrorist Structure and the Office of CounterTerrorism, including the United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre, with a view to implementing the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
and cooperation between the Regional Anti-Terrorist
Structure and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, with due consideration of the
memorandum of understanding on cooperation between
those two entities signed on 25 March 2019. We believe
firmly that strengthening cooperation between the
United Nations and other entities of the United Nations
system and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization will
be instrumental in promoting the goals and objectives
of the United Nations.
We should mention that the activities of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization are aimed at
strengthening peace, security and stability in the region;
countering terrorism, drug trafficking and other types
of transnational criminal activities; and promoting
regional cooperation in various areas, such as trade
and economic development, energy, transportation,
agriculture and agro-industry, the regulation of
migration, banking and finances, information and
telecommunications, science and new technologies,
the digital economy, customs, education, public health,

21-0745117/19

A/75/PV.58

25/03/2021

environmental protection and reduction of the danger
of natural disasters, as well as other related areas.
We would like to note that the member States
of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization support
and appreciate the cooperation between the United
Nations and the SCO and will continue their productive
cooperation with a view to achieving our common
goals. We would also like to take this opportunity to
extend our deep appreciation to all States Members of
the United Nations for their support and cooperation on
the draft resolution.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.69, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization”. I give the floor
to the representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I would like
to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to the delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of draft resolution A/75/L.69: Azerbaijan,
Belarus, Cambodia, Costa Rica and Kiribati.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.69?
Draft resolution A/75/L.69
(resolution 75/268).

was

adopted

(aa) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development
Draft resolution (A/75/L.70)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.70.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): I have the honour
to introduce draft resolution A/75/L.70, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development”, on behalf of its main sponsors, that is,
Spain and my own country, Slovakia.
The Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development (OECD) has a long history of
collaboration with the United Nations. Like the United
Nations, the OECD was born from the ashes of the
Second World War, and its founding document, the
18/19

Convention on the OECD, makes explicit reference to
the purposes of the United Nations and the importance
of economic growth and prosperity in their realization.
In 1971, the Economic and Social Council decided to
extend a standing invitation to the OECD to participate
as an observer in the work of the Council. In 1998, the
General Assembly invited the OECD to participate
as an observer in its sessions and work. Some 20
years after that, in 2018, the OECD took the decision
to establish a Permanent Observer Office at United
Nations Headquarters to further develop that special
partnership. Today, cooperation between the OECD
and the United Nations system spans almost every
policy area in the economic, environmental and social
domains. That includes participation in the relevant
bodies of both organizations, the exchange of data and
analysis and targeted, joint initiatives in support of
developing countries.
The main purpose of this biennial draft resolution is
to enable us to profile the existing partnership between
the United Nations and the OECD and illustrate the
global convening power of the United Nations at a
time when we find ourselves only a decade from the
target date for achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals and faced with an unprecedented challenge
of a truly global nature, the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic.
We believe that draft resolution A/75/L.70 is
streamlined, concise, highly relevant and institutional in
nature. We hope that it will be received as solid ground
for future deliberations. It welcomes the strengthening
of cooperation between the United Nations and the
OECD, within their respective mandates and in
line with the priorities of member States, in order to
accelerate the pace of the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals. It also emphasizes the
importance of optimal coordination and cooperation
between both organizations so as to create synergies
within their respective mandates.
This is the first time that the General Assembly
will adopt such a draft resolution. We believe that it is
particularly fitting that it is happening in the context of
the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations and
the sixtieth of the OECD. The unparalleled challenges
that have been created by the COVID-19 pandemic
further underscore the role that partnerships between
the United Nations and organizations such as the OECD
can and must play as we embark on a sustainable,
21-07451

25/03/2021

resilient and inclusive path to recovery. In our view,
it is a good sign that we have reached consensus on
such an important issue, particularly when the negative
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic limited delegations
to using challenging working methods and negotiating
on an entirely virtual platform. Following a series of
informal consultations, the compromise text of the
co-facilitators was placed under the silence procedure,
and I am pleased to note that the silence was not broken.
It is therefore our hope that the General Assembly will
adopt the draft resolution by consensus today.
In conclusion, on behalf of the main sponsors, I
would like to thank the representatives of all the Member
States that took an active part in the negotiation process
for their constructive input. Our thanks also go to the
Office of the Special Representative of the OECD to the
United Nations for the advice and support provided to
us throughout the consultation process.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.70, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development”. I give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should

A/75/PV.58

like to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to the delegations listed in the
document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of draft resolution A/75/L.70: Albania,
Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Iceland,
Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kiribati,
Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico,
Montenegro, Namibia, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
North Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea, Romania, Serbia, Slovenia, Sweden,
Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States
of America and Uruguay.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.70?
Draft resolution
(resolution 75/269).

A/75/L.70

was

adopted

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (aa) of agenda item 130?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

21-0745119/19
