United Nations

S/PV.4845

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-eighth year

4845

th meeting
Thursday, 16 October 2003, 12.20 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Negroponte . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (United States of America)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Tidjani
Mr. Maquieira
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Mr. Florent
Mr. Pleuger
Mr. Sow
Mr. Pujalte
Mr. Khalid
Mr. Karev
Mr. Quintero
Mr. Mekdad
Sir Emyr Jones Parry

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

03-56250 (E)

*0356250*

S/PV.4845

The meeting was called to order at 12.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Armenia, Azerbaijan, Brazil,
Colombia, Ecuador, India, Indonesia, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Peru, South Africa,
Switzerland, Uganda and Yemen, in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: If I hear no objection, I shall take
it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to His Excellency Mr. Inocencio Arias,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Arias to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. At this meeting
the Security Council will hear a briefing by His
Excellency Mr. Inocencio Arias, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Arias.
Mr. Arias (spoke in Spanish): I speak today as
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)

2

in order to brief you on the status of its work, and to
submit to you the ninth work programme for the
months of October to December 2003.
On 4 October, I completed six months as
Chairman of the Committee. It has been a period in
which a great deal of serious work has been done on
our task of monitoring the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). There is no need to reiterate here the
importance of the Security Council’s work in the
international community’s fight against the threat to
peace and security represented by terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, but I believe it is appropriate
to emphasize that our Committee represents the
consensus shared by all Members of the United Nations
that affirms that it is necessary to struggle, by all
means, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, against acts of terrorism.
Before presenting a brief summary of the content
of the ninth work programme, I shall refer briefly to
the implementation of what was agreed to in the eighth
programme. With regard to the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), the Committee has continued
reviewing the reports submitted by States in response
to the letters addressed to them by the Committee. It
should be noted that the rate of review has slowed
down somewhat compared to previous periods because
we are gradually entering a more complex phase of our
work.
As States move from stage A, which basically
relates to verifying that adequate anti-terrorist
legislation is in place, to stage B, which focuses on the
actual implementation of these measures, the
Committee has taken more time to review reports and
draft letters.
It has become necessary to find a balance
between the amount of attention given to stage A and
stage B States. For that purpose, we have prepared a
working paper on the criteria for the drafting of letters
and the need to give attention to all States in line with
the principle of equal treatment, while providing the
essential flexibility that will allow the Committee to
maintain the proper follow-up of States’ efforts to
implement the provisions of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001).
In our work ensuring that all States become
parties as soon as possible to the relevant international
conventions and protocols relating to terrorism, the
CTC considered specifically the issue at one of its

S/PV.4845

meetings, during which its team of experts presented a
report on the status of State participation and of the
positive impact of resolution 1373 (2001) and of the
work of the Committee itself.
Secondly, on the working methods of the
Committee, we have continued our efforts to apply the
criteria of coordination, transparency and equality of
treatment to the circumstances of each case.
Thirdly, in the field of technical assistance, we
are still working to ensure that the Committee takes an
increasingly active approach to its collaboration with
those States which, although they have a real political
will to implement resolution 1373 (2001), are
nonetheless facing difficulties in doing so.
Fourthly, with regard to transparency, the
Committee’s web page has been completely redesigned
so as to be consulted as easily and quickly as possible.
The English version is now fully operative and in the
next few days the French and Spanish will also be
ready. Lastly, the web page will also be available soon
in Arabic, Chinese and Russian.
Fifthly and lastly, in the context of cooperation
with
international,
regional
and
subregional
organizations, ties have been strengthened between the
Committee and those who are working more directly in
the fight against terrorism.
On 7 October 2003, a second meeting was held
with such organizations at the headquarters of the
Organization of American States, in Washington, D.C.,
at which a great deal of information was exchanged.
The Committee is pleased to have initiated this
coordination
process
between
international
organizations and notes with satisfaction that it will
continue in the future, since the next meeting has
already been scheduled for March 2004 in Vienna.
We have also taken steps to assure proper
coordination between the CTC and the Committee
established under Security Council resolution 1267
(1999). Both chairs have conducted a meeting with our
respective experts, in which it was agreed that there
will be periodic meetings to ensure better coordination
between these two bodies.
Now I would like to address the general outlines
of the ninth report, which run from October to
December 2003. By 30 September 2003, the committee
had received 419 reports from Member States and
others. This includes 191 initial reports from Member

States and five from others, 100 second reports from
Member States and 2 from others and 71 third reports
from Member States. It is important to note that to
date, all Member States of the United Nations have
submitted their initial reports.
Nevertheless, by 30 September 2003, 48 States
were late in submitting their reports. In accordance
with the obligation of transparency in our work, the
Committee has agreed that the Chairman will submit to
the Security Council, no later than 31 October 2003, a
list of States which have not yet submitted their reports
on time as of that date. I therefore take this opportunity
to reiterate to the representatives of States that are late
that they should submit their reports as soon as
possible. In any case, it should be remembered that the
focus of the Counter-Terrorism Committee is on
cooperation. We are therefore at the disposal of those
States, not only to assist them in the submission of
their reports but also to work with them in overcoming
any problems responsible for the delay. I repeat that
our team of experts will address any questions they
deem it appropriate to address.
With regard to the Committee’s work, we will
continue to follow closely the development of the flow
of information exchanges with States through, among
other means, letters and reports. Technical assistance
will continue to be one of the main priorities of our
work, as will ensuring adequate coordination of
counter-terrorism efforts by international and regional
organizations in combating terrorism.
With regard to transparency, reference has
already been made to progress in revamping the
Committee’s Web site. I am grateful for the work done
in that regard by the Secretariat team, the Department
of Public Information and the translation services of
the United Nations.
I conclude by noting that the chairmanship of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee is aware of its
responsibility to do all it can to ensure that the
Committee works at an appropriate pace and functions
effectively. Here I draw attention to paragraph 21 of
the ninth work programme, which provides that the
chairmanship shall submit to the Committee, for
subsequent evaluation by the Security Council, a report
on problems being encountered by States in the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and on
difficulties being experienced in the same regard under
the present structure and functioning of the Counter-

3

S/PV.4845

Terrorism Committee itself. The purpose of that report
will be to identify major issues in order eventually to
debate possible measures to be taken by both the
Committee and the Security Council to solve them. All
that will be done in order to ensure that the obligations
contained in resolution 1373 (2001) are met as fully
and rapidly as possible by all Member States.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I thank
Ambassador Arias for his comprehensive briefing and
for his leadership of the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
I would also like to make a procedural comment.
There remain on the speakers’ list the members of the
Council and 19 non-members. Ambassador Pleuger has
graciously agreed to postpone this afternoon’s meeting
to prepare the Afghanistan trip until 10.30 tomorrow
morning, in order to free up time for us to continue this
important discussion today. We will therefore break for
lunch a little after 1 p.m. and then resume at 3 p.m.
sharp to continue the discussion.
Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): The
sad memory of those who died in Baghdad on 19
August 2003, in the United States on 11 September
2001, in Bali on 12 October 2002, and more recently in
Morocco and many other parts of the world is a timely
reminder of how vulnerable the world still is to
terrorism.
This is a new type of terrorism in its methods,
intolerance, wantonness and cowardice. It attacks all of
society, inflicting indescribable suffering upon the
peoples of the United Nations and plunging them into
what Voltaire described as convulsions of anxiety — to
which one might add fear. It poses a serious threat to
our most basic right: the right to life, a peaceful life,
based on love, fraternity, justice and solidarity.
Terrorism is therefore a matter of great concern, a
threat to international peace and security.
We have refused to give in to the diktat of
terrorism. We have not given up; to the contrary, we
have decided to react firmly and with perseverance. We
have defined a mobilizing strategy that is daily being
honed by the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) to confine this monster and
fight more effectively against it.
The success of our collective struggle necessarily
requires a firm commitment by all international actors
and the strengthening of cooperation between all
States, on the one hand, and, on the other hand,

4

between States, international, regional and subregional
organizations and civil society.
However, we will not achieve maximum
collective security unless we develop a real policy to
exchange information, experiences and assistance. My
delegation believes that to be fundamental.
Against that backdrop, we believe that as a purely
legal matter there is an urgent need for an overall
international regulatory instrument to combat this evil.
Although there is an impressive body of anti-terrorism
conventions, there are gaps, due to the sectoral nature
of current measures. On that precise point, I recall with
regret that political differences are delaying consensus
in the Sixth Committee on the drafting of an overall
convention and a convention for the suppression of acts
of nuclear terrorism.
It would be suicidal for the international
community as a whole to continue to be passive
spectators in the face of the risk to all humankind of
the use of weapons of mass destruction by terrorists.
The effectiveness of our struggle also depends on
improving the international environment by eliminating
situations of injustice and poverty, which feed
intolerance and hatred.
Cameroon welcomes the largely positive work
done by the Counter-Terrorism Committee. In its twoyear existence it has received an impressive number of
reports — over 419; it has contributed greatly to
consolidating consensus on the objectives and
modalities of the struggle against terrorism, and to
strengthening national anti-terrorism capacity as well
as international cooperation in this sphere; and it is
helping to promote existing conventions, where its
effectiveness is illustrated by the growing number of
States parties.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee has become
the best tool to coordinate dynamic cooperation
between States and international and regional
organizations.
We owe all of that to the tenacity of a dedicated
and effective team, energetically presided over by our
colleague Ambassador Inocencio Arias, to whom I
once again express our full confidence and convey our
encouragement. The new programme covering the next
90 days, which he has just presented to us, is very
ambitious in its objectives and pragmatic in its
approach. My delegation fully supports that

S/PV.4845

programme, and very much looks forward to the report
that the Committee intends to submit regarding the
main problems encountered by States in implementing
resolution 1373 (2001). We urge the Committee to
submit periodically a report on the follow-up of the
major recommendations of the Council.
Finally, we are convinced that, after two years of
existence, the Committee could benefit from a process
of self-evaluation in order to look to the future in
practical terms and to remain effective in the fight
against terrorism.
The frequency of public debates on this topic
should not mean that they should be seen as a
commonplace ritual — quite the opposite. They should
enhance the awareness of almost all the peoples of the
United Nations of the scope of this pernicious threat to
our collective security.
The delegation of Cameroon is therefore grateful
to you, Mr. President, for having agreed to the
convening of a public meeting on this question.
Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful to Ambassador Inocencio Arias for his
exhaustive and useful presentation of the programme of
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee for the next
90 days and also, in more general terms, for his
efficient and effective guidance of the work of the
CTC.
I should like first of all to say that the Chilean
delegation associates itself with the statement to be
made shortly by the Permanent Representative of Peru
on behalf of the Rio Group. For that reason, I will
underscore only a few aspects of the programme of
work outlined to us by Ambassador Arias — those to
which we attach the highest priority.
It is vital that, as is stated in the programme of
work, the principles of transparency, cooperation and
equal treatment continue to be applied in the work of
the Committee. The joint action of the international
community in the struggle against terrorism requires
this. This is an initiative that is the responsibility of us
all. The Committee, as we have said in the past, is
making practical and effective efforts to apply these
principles case by case; this is certainly what makes
consensus possible and what gives legitimacy to our
action.
We must move forward with practical measures in
order effectively to confront the scourge of terrorism

and to help all States to increase their capacity to
prevent and react to actions of that nature.
Identifying the difficulties and the problems
confronting States in the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) is a vital task. We take note of the report
which will soon be presented in this regard by the
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee to the
Security Council, which is referred to in paragraph 21
of the programme of work. That report, we believe,
will be very useful in planning the future work of the
Committee.
We welcome the fact that the Committee has
continued to broaden its contacts and its cooperation
with
international,
regional
and
subregional
organizations. The 6 March meeting with those entities
was followed by one on 7 October last, held in
Washington under the auspices of the Committee on
Terrorism of the Organization of American States. That
exchange will now continue, on 12 March 2004, in
Vienna, with European organizations. All of this work
of cooperation and collaboration should lead to more
concrete operational results.
Technical assistance to those States that need it
should also be among our constant concerns. We know
that the Committee is taking a more active and
dynamic role in this field; the Security Council should
ensure that this approach continues to be followed.
In connection with the reports of States to the
Committee, the figures given to us today by the
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee are
encouraging. All States have completed their initial
reports. A large number of States have completed the
second report, and an equally large number have
already submitted the third report.
Furthermore, the Committee has prepared a
working paper on criteria for the preparation of draft
letters addressed to those States that are beyond stage
B, which, under the principles of transparency,
cooperation and equal treatment, will allow for more
dynamic assessments and contacts with States, which,
ultimately, are the main protagonists of this joint effort.
For that reason, above and beyond numbers, what
we need to underscore is the ongoing relationship
between the Committee and States, so that they can
contribute together to the resolution of their problems
in the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). It is
relevant to recall that effectiveness in the fight against

5

S/PV.4845

terrorism, in the final analysis, depends on the
responses of States and of international organizations.
At the global level, the threat of terrorism is one
of the gravest and most urgent — one that transcends
all geographic and cultural boundaries. Unfortunately,
this meeting is further clouded by the criminal attack in
Baghdad which took the lives of many staff members
of our Organization, including the outstanding Latin
American Sergio Vieira de Mello. It is our duty to
redouble our efforts to defeat that scourge.
Resolution 1373 (2001) was the beginning of
unparalleled cooperation aimed at effectively
confronting the global challenge of terrorism, and it
made the Counter-Terrorism Committee the focal point
in a process of cooperation that must involve every
country of the world. We welcome the fact that the new
programme of work continues to envisage the taking of
practical measures to increase the ways and means that
States have at their disposal in the fight against
terrorism.
Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like, like previous speakers, warmly to
thank the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, Ambassador Inocencio Arias, for his
presentation of the Committee’s programme of work,
as well as for the outstanding work he and his team in
the Spanish Mission are doing in the context of the
chairmanship of the Committee.
As an associated country of the European Union,
Bulgaria aligns itself with the statement to be made
shortly by the Permanent Representative of Italy on
behalf of the European Union. I should like, however,
to make a few comments in my national capacity.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee remains at the
heart of efforts to combat the scourge of terrorism.
That devastating scourge poses a threat to all of
humankind. We are pleased that, during the past three
months, the Committee has continued to work actively
to implement Security Council resolution 1373 (2001).
We are grateful to Ambassador Arias, as I have
just said, and to the team of experts of the Secretariat
for their outstanding work. I should like also to add
that my delegation fully agrees with the assessment of
the activities of the Counter-Terrorism Committee just
given by Ambassador Arias in his statement.
During the past period, positive results were
achieved in terms of the implementation of resolution

6

1373 (2001). In this connection, we welcome the fact
that all Member States have already submitted their
initial reports. We should take note also of the fact that
ongoing efforts have been made to ensure maximum
transparency in the work of the Committee and to
ensure progress in the area of cooperation with
international, regional and subregional organizations.
By the same token, it should be noted that a great
deal remains to be done with respect to the full
implementation of the provisions of resolution 1373
(2001).
In this connection, I should like briefly to
emphasize a few trends in the work of the Committee
to which my delegation attaches particular attention.
First, we are aware that consideration of the
report has been slowed down because of the
complexity of the evaluation criteria used in stage B.
Furthermore, we are concerned that 48 States have still
not complied with the timetable laid down for the
submission of reports. In this connection, we share the
view that technical assistance should be facilitated for
those countries requiring it. We welcome all of the
efforts made to go from stage A to stage B, which
would focus on the practical application of universally
adopted counter-terrorism measures.
Secondly,
my
delegation
attaches
great
importance to cooperation between the CounterTerrorism Committee and regional and subregional
organizations. Bulgaria supports strengthening contact
and cooperation to combat terrorism between the
Committee and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
The priorities of the Bulgarian chairmanship of
the OSCE in 2004 will include giving final concrete
form to cooperation with the Committee and with
specialized agencies of the United Nations system. We
hope that the joint meeting of the Committee and the
OSCE, which is planned for 12 March in Vienna, will
make a useful contribution to this. The seminars and
other joint initiatives of the European Union and the
OSCE make a valuable contribution to drawing up the
necessary legislation and to strengthening the capacity
and expertise of States in such areas as banking,
customs and border control. We look forward to the
seminar to take place on 7 November under the aegis of
the Italian presidency of the European Union and of the
European Commission.

S/PV.4845

Thirdly, my country reiterates its position that the
struggle against terrorism should be waged with strict
respect for human rights. Any action, whether at the
national, regional or subregional levels, must be in
accordance with the norms of international law and
international humanitarian law. Terrorists should not
have the slightest pretext for their hateful acts.
Fourthly, we share the concern of numerous
delegations that the Committee’s work should be given
a more practical orientation. In this context, we support
the Committee Chairman’s idea of submitting to the
Council a report on the difficulties encountered by
Member States — and himself — in the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): Permit me
to express my delegation’s appreciation to Ambassador
Inocencio F. Arias, Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, for his complete and detailed report on the
Committee’s work. We also congratulate him on his
efficiency and dynamism.
This meeting gives us another opportunity to
evaluate what has been accomplished in the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
Through its structure, working methods and mode
of operation, the Counter-Terrorism Committee has
contributed to a better understanding of terrorism and
inspired trust among the different parties involved with
a view to greater cooperation for the eradication of
terrorism.
The submission of initial reports by 191 Member
States and five other entities, of second reports by 150
Member States and two other entities, and of third
reports by 71 Member States indicates in every respect
the will and determination of the various actors to
strengthen this cooperation. Nonetheless, we urge those
States that have not met the deadline for submitting
their reports to submit those reports as soon as
possible. In this regard, we support the proposals of the
Committee in paragraph 5 of its current programme of
work (S/2003/995). We encourage the Committee to
disseminate information on the progress made by
States as well as on solutions to strengthen their ability
to meet their obligations under resolution 1373 (2001).
My delegation attaches special importance to the
working paper entitled “Criteria for the preparation of
draft letters to States beyond Stage A”. This suggests
that the consideration of the passage of a State from

one stage to another should be conducted carefully, in
order to provide concrete responses to Member States’
problems in implementing the resolution. For this
purpose, the suggestions in paragraphs 8 and 9 of the
programme of work deserve our fullest attention.
The question of assistance remains fundamental
for strengthening the capacities of certain actors in the
fight against terrorism. In this regard, we welcome the
Committee’s development of the Directory of CounterTerrorism Information and Sources of Assistance. We
appeal to the donor community to give greater attention
to this question because the consequences of terrorism,
which strikes where the international system is
weakest, are unforeseeable. To this end, my delegation
encourages increased cooperation between Member
States and the Committee, which in our view should be
the central mechanism for coordinating assistance.
We welcome the transparency with which the
Committee is doing its work, especially through the
regular information given to Member States and close
contacts between experts and the institutions and
bodies of the United Nations system. We appreciate the
provision of a Web site, which is becoming an essential
source of information regarding all questions relating
to the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
In the framework of cooperation between the
Committee on the one hand and international, regional
and subregional organizations on the other, we are
delighted by the work under way to implement the
recommendations resulting from the meeting of 6
March 2003. My delegation believes that the Council
should be informed of the conclusions of meetings of
international, regional and subregional institutions and
organizations, and of the results of contacts between
the Committee and those institutions and organizations.
While
underscoring
the
importance
of
coordination between the different entities of the
United Nations system, we emphasize once again the
need to strengthen cooperation between the CounterTerrorism Committee and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999). These Committees
have focal points of interest that, to a great extent,
converge, just as they do with those of the Ad Hoc
Committee established by General Assembly resolution
51/210.
As for the Committee’s future activities, my
delegation believes that the report that the Chairman
intends to submit will shed further light on the

7

S/PV.4845

difficulties confronting certain Member States in their
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), and on the
proposed solutions, as well as the prospects for a better
functioning of the Committee.
The road leading to the eradication of terrorism is
long and full of obstacles. The results achieved thus far
by the international community indicate our shared
determination to eliminate terrorism.
The Committee, through its work, has in many
respects made clear the interdependence of terrorism
and other forms of organized crime, and the existence
of a global structure to combat terrorism. The entry
into force on 29 September this year of the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime was undoubtedly another victory for our
Organization.
The progress made by the Committee testifies not
only to its determination to fulfil its responsibilities
effectively and expeditiously, but also to the political
will of States to shoulder their obligations.
My delegation welcomes the Council’s renewed
confidence in the Chairman and the entire Committee
with the continuation of their mandates, and we assure
them of our full support. We are convinced that today’s
debate will give rise to initiatives that can enrich our
collective thinking in the fight against terrorism.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
should like to begin by complimenting Ambassador
Arias on his stewardship of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) over the past six months. His hard
work, his direction and his unstinting efforts have been
much appreciated by my delegation. The United
Kingdom fully endorses the proposed programme of
work and the principles that guide it.
I should like to associate myself with the
statement to be made later by the representative of Italy
on behalf of the European Union.
I should like to make four specific points on the
CTC and its work. First, sadly, the threat from
terrorism has not diminished or eroded. If the
Committee is to maintain and increase its successes in
reinforcing the capacity of Member States to tackle and
overcome terrorism, it must be strengthened further
and given the expertise and the remit to do that
effectively. For that reason, I very much welcome the
Chairman’s proposal to submit to the Committee and to
the Council a report on the problems and difficulties

8

and, I very much hope, containing proposed solutions.
The United Kingdom is prepared to assist the
Committee in whatever way we can to that end.
Secondly, Ambassador Arias has rightly
identified technical assistance as a priority; it is vital to
helping States implement the requirements of
resolution 1373 (2001). There are numerous examples
of excellent initiatives in this area; the Committee has
played a key role in the facilitation of assistance. But,
just as the Committee needs to adapt to maintain its
effectiveness, so, too, do the methods used to deliver
the assistance where it is needed most. Better
coordination, more contact with donors and recipient
States, and intensive follow-up action are all necessary
to ensure that assistance has been properly delivered
and will help achieve the objective: quite clearly, to
help States implement the measures called for in
resolution 1373 (2001). The CTC and its experts must
be given the support, the guidance and the resources
that will enable them to do that important work
properly.
Thirdly, much has been said about the value of
cooperation
with
international,
regional
and
subregional organizations in combating terrorism. The
CTC meeting in Washington last week, co-hosted by
the Organization of American States, demonstrated that
yet again. A global network is emerging to support and
underpin the work which individuals, States,
organizations and the CTC itself are doing in order to
develop counter-terrorism capacity. We should seek to
maintain, strengthen and focus that network in every
way possible. The meetings with subregional and
regional organizations are key to that, and the
Committee should continue its work to gain as much as
possible from this process.
Lastly, an important element in the fight against
terrorism is the ratification and implementation of the
12 universal conventions. Resolution 1373 (2001) calls
upon States to become parties to those conventions as
soon as possible. Much has been done to encourage
that, with some very good results. But we know, too,
that there are far too many gaps and that the efforts
need to be strengthened further. So the United
Kingdom very much welcomes the Committee’s
proposal to examine the reasons for low levels of
ratification and, again, to come forward with concrete,
practical suggestions as to how we can improve that
situation.

S/PV.4845

The Security Council has many urgent and
important subjects on its agenda. But, as far as the
United Kingdom is concerned, none is more vital than
the need to challenge, to combat and to defeat the
scourge of terrorism. Therefore, our support for the
CTC remains total. Much good progress has been made
so far, but terrorism remains a serious and grave threat.
Our responsibility, as the Council, is to see how we can
build on the achievements in order to strengthen the
interventions that we need to make globally so that all
of us can better face the challenges which we confront.
The work programme that Ambassador Arias has set
out is a real contribution to that effort.
Mr. Pleuger (Germany): First of all, we should
like to thank the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), Ambassador Arias, for his report
and for the good work that he is producing in the CTC.
The fight against terrorism within the broadest possible
international coalition remains one of Germany’s most
important policy objectives. While we fully subscribe
to the forthcoming statement by the presidency of the
European Union, we should like to highlight the
following points.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee has done
impressive work, and its Chairman, its experts and the
United Nations Secretariat deserve our recognition and
thanks. We support the CTC’s new work programme.
We appreciate the ever-increasing links that the CTC
has established with international organizations and
specialized agencies, as demonstrated recently during
the meeting in Washington organized jointly by the
CTC and the Organization of American States. Most
important of all, the CTC has established a continuous
dialogue with all United Nations Member States on key
counter-terrorism issues under resolutions 1373 (2001)
and 1456 (2003). The quality and intensity of that
dialogue are unprecedented in United Nations history,
and are an asset that we can build on.

Under the new work programme, the Chairman
plans to submit a report on the strengths and
weaknesses of international counter-terrorism efforts.
Such an evaluation could help us in further intensifying
cooperation by adopting a more operative approach.
For instance, one step forward might be for CTC
experts to form joint teams with members of
specialized international organizations and actively
assist countries in key areas of resolutions 1373 (2001)
and 1456 (2003), such as professionalizing their
financial control, border protection, weapons control
and law enforcement sectors. Another idea might be to
consider the creation of a high-level authority — such
as a United Nations counter-terrorism coordinator —
who might help to better focus and streamline
enhanced United Nations activities to counter terrorism
in all its aspects and on a global basis. Discussing such
steps or similar ideas more thoroughly would be in line
with many suggestions voiced during the General
Assembly’s recent general debate calling for the
strengthening of United Nations counter-terrorism
organs.
We are not here to offer ready-made solutions.
But my Government is convinced that the credibility of
United Nations counter-terrorism efforts depends on
their ability to make a difference on the ground. It
seems worthwhile to reflect on new ways to strengthen
the United Nations — including the CTC — in order to
fight terrorism even more effectively. We think the
time has come to increase the effectiveness of United
Nations and CTC action, within existing means and, of
course, while respecting the framework of the United
Nations Charter and international law.
The President: We will now suspend this
meeting and resume our discussion at 3 p.m. sharp.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.

9
