A/65/PV.63

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fifth session

63

rd plenary meeting
Monday, 13 December 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 31
Elimination of unilateral extraterritorial coercive
economic measures as a means of political and
economic compulsion
Mrs. Navarro Barro (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The application or promotion of the use by any State of
unilateral economic, political or other measures to
coerce another State so as to prevent it from exercising
its sovereign rights constitutes a flagrant violation of
the principles of international law set out in the Charter
of the United Nations, as well as of the basic principles
of the multilateral trade system.
Such practices have been denounced and rejected
in numerous resolutions of the General Assembly and
outcome documents of major conferences and summits
of the Organization. They have also been denounced in
the most significant documents issued by important
groups of countries of the South, such as the Group of
77 and the Non-Aligned Movement.
Cuba once again reiterates its vigorous
condemnation of the application of such measures,
which contravene the most elementary norms and
principles governing international coexistence. The
application of unilateral economic coercive measures
directly affects economic and social development in
the developing countries concerned; it undermines the
welfare of their peoples and constitutes a serious
obstacle to the enjoyment of their human rights,

including the rights to development, education, health
care, food and the necessary basic social services.
The promulgation of such measures highlights the
true character of the policies of those countries, which
claim to be advocates of free trade but, at the same
time, impose enormous barriers against international
free trade by trying unilaterally to impose their
national legislation on other countries, in open defiance
of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and international law.
Cuba is well aware of the impact that unilateral
economic measures have on the development of
countries against which they are applied. The Cuban
people have been victim of such measures for nearly
five decades. The blockade imposed on our country by
the United States Government is a concrete example
and it has had a negative and considerable impact on
every aspect of life in the country.
That policy seeks to destroy the Cuban revolution
and constitutes an act of genocide, under the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide of 9 December 1948. It is an act of
economic war, as there is no rule of international law
that can justify a blockade in times of peace.
On this occasion, we wish to underscore some of
the consequences that that unjust and criminal
blockade has had on the development of Cuba.
One of the restrictions of the blockade is that
Cuba can neither export any product to the United
States nor import any goods from that country. It

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-68782 (E)

*1068782*

A/65/PV.63

cannot receive United States tourists. It cannot use the
dollar in its foreign transactions, does not have access
to credit and cannot carry out operations with
multilateral, regional or United States financial
institutions. Its ships and aircraft cannot land anywhere
in United States territory. The direct economic damage
to the Cuban people caused by the application of the
blockade has exceeded $751 billion over the past
50 years, in the current value of that currency.
Numerous data and concrete examples about the effects
of the blockade on the daily life of Cuban men and
women are included in the response submitted by Cuba
to the Secretary-General’s note verbale requesting
information on the matter and included in full in his
report contained in document A/65/83.
On 26 October, for the nineteenth consecutive
year, Cuba presented to the General Assembly a draft
resolution entitled “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba” (resolution
65/6). The text was adopted by the overwhelming
figure of 187 votes in favour, in a historic session
where numerous delegations delivered statements
calling for the immediate lifting of the blockade
against Cuba (see A/65/PV.36). That illustrated once
again the international community’s firm rejection, not
only of the blockade against Cuba but also of the
absurd and irrational practice of imposing unilateral
coercive measures as a means of political and
economic compulsion.
Our country will continue to work actively with
the majority of the community of nations, in every
possible forum, to eliminate once and for all such
measures, based on a chaotic, unjust and
discriminatory international order, such as that which
prevails in the world today. To that end, it is essential
that we make the changes necessary to establish a new
international economic order, in which developing
countries can participate fully, as equals, in the global
process of taking decisions on all issues on the
international agenda.
The President (spoke in French): We have heard
the last speaker in the debate on this item. May I take it
that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 31?
It was so decided.

2

Agenda item 35
Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic
Draft resolution (A/65/L.22)
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Angola to introduce draft
resolution A/65/L.22.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): On behalf of the
States members of the zone of peace and cooperation
of the South Atlantic — Angola, Argentina, Benin,
Brazil, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Equatorial
Guinea, Gabon, the Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Liberia, Namibia, Nigeria, Senegal, Sao Tome
and Principe, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Togo and
Uruguay — I have the honour to introduce draft
resolution A/65/L.22, entitled “Zone of peace and
cooperation of the South Atlantic”, under agenda
item 35.
An organization that has been in existence since
1986, the zone of peace is a mechanism of South-South
cooperation that brings together 24 countries from
Africa and South America. Its States members are key
players in the international arena and are guided by the
desire to broaden cooperation in the field of concerted
political and diplomatic action so as to give greater
expression to their common interests within the
international community.
Zone of peace member States are fully committed
to democracy, political pluralism and the promotion of
human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the
right to development. In that connection, another
important goal that the zone of peace actively pursues
is to increase bilateral cooperation between its
members, especially in areas such as economic
cooperation; crime prevention; combating drug
trafficking and the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons and transnational organized crime and piracy;
fostering peace, stability and security, including
through conflict prevention and peacebuilding within
the zone; scientific research, environmental and marine
issues.
Since its creation, the zone of peace has been
involved in several initiatives in different corners of
the world, having provided, inter alia, forums for
presenting, discussing and furthering ideas with the
goal of informing the national policies governing our
productive sectors, and thus promoting bilateral or

10-68782

A/65/PV.63

multilateral cooperation. To cite a few examples, the
zone of peace organized the following events over the
past few years.
In March 2007, a workshop was held in New
York, the first in a series of events leading to the sixth
Ministerial Meeting of zone of peace member countries
in June that year. The workshop focused on economic
cooperation and nuclear non-proliferation, among other
issues of interest to the countries of the zone. In April
2007, the zone of peace held a workshop in
Montevideo, Uruguay, focusing on issues relating to
combating and preventing crime and on peacekeeping
operations. The workshop discussed, inter alia, ways in
which zone member countries could implement
national, regional and international legal instruments to
combat the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, including through full participation in the
United Nations Register of Conventional Arms.
Also in 2007, a workshop was held in Buenos
Aires, Argentina, the country that then held the
presidency of the zone of peace. The workshop focused
on marine issues, particularly the promotion of the
fishing resources of the countries of the zone. As the
Assembly will recall, 2007 marked the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the adoption of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, so the workshop
was a good opportunity for highlighting the importance
of promoting the sustainable use of marine genetic
resources, as well as the importance of fighting illegal
fishing.
On 18 and 19 June 2007, the sixth Ministerial
Meeting of zone of peace member countries, held in
Luanda, Angola, adopted the Luanda Ministerial
Declaration and Plan of Action, which was circulated
in a letter to the Secretary-General from the Permanent
Representative of Angola, contained in document
A/61/1019. The zone of peace has made strides in
implementing the Luanda Plan of Action with the
holding, also in Luanda, of a meeting of national focal
points of the zone on 15 and 16 April 2008. The
meeting discussed ways in which national focal points
could play a catalytic role in mobilizing and
coordinating our national sectors, as well as
transparency in the structure of zone organs.
More recently, on 6 and 7 December, States
members of the zone met, at the invitation of Brazil, in
Brasilia, with a view to further refining the
identification of areas for enhanced cooperation.

10-68782

Member countries agreed on the need for an exchange
of best practices and focused capacity-building in the
areas of mapping and exploring the seabed, as well as
for strengthened cooperation in the environmental area
and on aerial and maritime transportation, port safety
and security.
Both individually and as a community, zone
member countries are committed to preserving peace
and promoting development. This year’s draft
resolution affirms the connection between those two
undertakings. It also calls upon States to work together
to promote the objectives of peace and cooperation
established in resolution 41/11 and reiterated in the
Luanda Final Declaration and the Luanda Plan of
Action.
On behalf of the States members of the zone,
allow me to express our profound gratitude and
appreciation to those countries that joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution.
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
will now take action on draft resolution A/65/L.22. I
give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department of General
Assembly Affairs and Conference Management): I take
the floor to announce that, since the issuance of
document A/65/L.22, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution contained
therein: Argentina, Benin, Brazil, Equatorial Guinea,
Gabon, Guinea-Bissau, Senegal, Togo and Uruguay.
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/65/L.22.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt it?
Draft resolution A/65/L.22
(resolution 65/121).

was

adopted

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Kingdom, who
wishes to make a statement in explanation of position
following the adoption of the resolution.
Mr. Hosking (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom would like to explain its position with regard
to this issue. The United Kingdom welcomes
continuing cooperation between States in the zone of
peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic. However,
with reference to the Luanda Declaration, the United
Kingdom reiterates its well-known position on the
sovereignty of the Falkland Islands. The United

3

A/65/PV.63

Kingdom has no doubt about its sovereignty over the
Falkland Islands. There can be no negotiation on the
sovereignty of the Falkland Islands unless and until
such time as the islanders so wish.
The President (spoke in French): We have heard
the only speaker in explanation of position.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Argentina, who wishes to speak in exercise of the right
of reply.
Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): With regard to what has been said by the
representative of the United Kingdom in connection
with agenda item 35, my delegation would like to make
the following statement in exercise of the right of
reply.
The delegation of Argentina fully reiterates the
statement made on 24 June in the Special Committee
on Decolonization by our Minister for Foreign Affairs,
International Trade and Worship. The Government of
Argentina recalls that the Malvinas, South Sandwich
Islands and South Georgia Islands and their
surrounding maritime areas are part of Argentine
national territory, are being illegitimately occupied by
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and are the subject of a sovereignty dispute
between our two countries that is recognized by
various international organizations.
The United Kingdom’s illegitimate occupation
led the General Assembly to adopt resolutions 2065
(XX), 3160 (XXVIII), 31/49, 37/9, 38/12, 39/6, 40/21,
41/40, 42/19 and 43/25, all of which acknowledge the
existence of the sovereignty dispute concerning the
question of the Malvinas Islands and urge the
Governments of Argentina and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to resume
negotiations in order to find a peaceful and lasting
solution to the dispute as quickly as possible. For its
part, the Special Committee on Decolonization has
repeatedly voiced the same sentiment, most recently
through a draft resolution adopted on 24 June.
Likewise, on 8 June the General Assembly of the
Organization of American States adopted a new
statement on the question in similar terms.
The Republic of Argentina reaffirms its legitimate
rights of sovereignty over the Malvinas, South Georgia
Islands and South Sandwich Islands and their

4

surrounding maritime areas, which are an integral part
of Argentina’s national territory.
The President (spoke in French): May I take it
that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 35?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 122
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
Report of the Secretary-General (A/65/382)
(a) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union
(b) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Asian-African Legal Consultative
Organization
(c) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(d) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Black Sea Economic Cooperation
Organization
Draft resolution (A/65/L.35)
(e) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Caribbean Community
(f) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Collective Security Treaty Organization
Draft resolution (A/65/L.6)
(g) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries
(h) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Council of Europe
Draft resolution (A/65/L.41)
(i) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Economic Community of Central African
States
(j) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Economic Cooperation Organization

10-68782

A/65/PV.63

Draft resolution (A/65/L.40)
(k) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Eurasian Economic Community
Draft resolution (A/65/L.32)
(l) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the International Organization of la
Francophonie
(m) Cooperation between the United Nations,
national parliaments and the
Inter-Parliamentary Union
Draft resolution (A/65/L.11)
(n) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Latin American Economic System
(o) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States
Draft resolution (A/65/L.33)
(p) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons
(q) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe
(r) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of American States
(s) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of the Islamic Conference
(t) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Pacific Islands Forum
(u) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Organization
Draft resolution (A/65/L.34)
(v) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
Draft resolution (A/65/L.29)
(w) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Southern African Development Community

10-68782

The President (spoke in French): Before we
proceed, I would like to consult members with regard
to our consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda
item 122, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union”. Members will recall
that, pursuant to paragraph 7 of the annex contained in
resolution 55/285, of 7 September 2001,
“A joint debate shall be held on the
cooperation item, during which all or some
aspects of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and other organizations may
be addressed”.
I have been informed that a request has been
made that sub-item (a) be taken up separately at a later
date to be announced. May I take it that the Assembly
agrees to take up that sub-item accordingly?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. John Freeman, Deputy Director-General of
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons.
Mr. Freeman (Organization for the Prohibition
of
Chemical
Weapons):
Please
accept
our
congratulations, Sir, on your election as President of
the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session, as well
as our best wishes for success.
It gives me great pleasure to address the
Assembly on behalf of Ambassador Ahmet Üzümcü,
Director-General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), under
sub-item (p) of agenda item 122, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons”. The Assembly
has consistently reiterated the importance of such
cooperation. I wish to take this opportunity to convey
to Member States our sincere appreciation for the
strong support they give to the work of the
Organization in its pursuit of the goals of the Chemical
Weapons Convention (CWC).
In his message to the fifteenth session of the
Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention, which recently concluded in The
Hague, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon reaffirmed the
importance that the United Nations attaches to
enhancing cooperation with the OPCW. He also
emphasized the need to continue to work together in a

5

A/65/PV.63

spirit of partnership with a view to promoting the
Convention’s universality and its full implementation.
The Assembly has been provided the report on
the work of the Organization for the year 2008, as well
as the report for 2009, which was approved by the
Conference of the States Parties earlier this month.
Since the Director-General of the OPCW last reported
to the Assembly, in 2008, considerable progress has
been made in advancing the disarmament agenda of the
Organization, with more than 63 per cent of all
declared chemical weapon stockpiles having been
destroyed.
Of the seven possessor States, three have already
eliminated their declared stockpiles. The two major
possessor States are advancing steadily in their
destruction programmes. As of the end of November,
the United States of America had eliminated 82 per
cent and the Russian Federation 49 per cent of their
respective stockpiles. For its part, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya overcame a series of difficulties and delays
to recently commence the destruction of its category 1
chemical weapons. It is expected to complete that
process by May 2011.
Iraq’s accession to the Convention was a
significant development during the last biennium. Iraq
declared a small quantity of chemical weapons, which
were secured and rendered unusable under the
activities authorized by the Security Council. Given the
conditions of that cache of weapons, their recovery and
destruction pose unique challenges. Currently, the
Technical Secretariat of the OPCW is providing
assistance to Iraq in clarifying its initial declaration
and devising the most appropriate approaches to
destroying those weapons.
The destruction of chemical weapons is a major
undertaking, given its intrinsic technical complexities
and its financial and safety implications. More than
90 per cent of the declared stockpile of chemical
weapons has been declared by the two major possessor
States, the Russian Federation and the United States of
America. In spite of their best efforts to date, both
States have indicated that they are unlikely to meet the
final destruction deadline of 29 April 2012. As both
States have spared no effort in enhancing and
accelerating their destruction programmes to meet their
Treaty obligations, we hope that the question of
meeting the final destruction deadlines will be resolved
in a constructive manner. The traditional spirit of

6

consensus and cooperation that characterizes the work
of the OPCW promises to ensure an outcome
satisfactory to all concerned. This question is currently
being considered by the OPCW Executive Council,
with informal consultations being carried out by its
Chairperson.
The OPCW is rapidly approaching a new chapter
in its life, namely, the post-disarmament era. Indeed, in
any scenario, the great majority of declared chemical
weapons will have been destroyed by 2012. As a result,
the chemical weapons-related verification effort, which
today amounts to 85 per cent of inspection activity,
will scale down. As a comprehensive treaty, however,
the Convention’s non-proliferation aspects will
continue to remain relevant.
OPCW industry verification is the Convention’s
principal non-proliferation tool. One thousand ninehundred such inspections have been conducted at
industrial facilities on the territory of 81 States parties
since the Convention entered into force in April 1997.
Reinforcing the non-proliferation aspects of the
Convention will be crucial to the long-term success of
the CWC. That is so because of the very large number
of facilities that must be appropriately covered by the
verification regime. It is important to strengthen that
regime to verify the most relevant facilities in a
number sufficient to maintain confidence in
compliance with the Convention. These issues are
being considered by the OPCW’s policymaking organs.
In that light, in order to reflect on the next phase
in the evolution of the Organization, the DirectorGeneral has decided to establish an independent
advisory panel to review the implementation of the
Convention and make recommendations for future
OPCW activities. The panel will be wholly
independent and its members will serve in their
personal capacities. Ambassador Rolf Ekéus of Sweden
has kindly accepted the invitation to chair the panel,
which will comprise experts from relevant fields such
as diplomacy, industry and science and technology and
will be geographically representative. The panel, which
will convene for its first meeting in The Hague this
week, will hold a small number of meetings before
submitting its final report in June 2011.
Verification of industry is a crucial mechanism,
but not the only one, for ensuring compliance with
non-proliferation. Under the Convention, States parties
are required to establish and reinforce the

10-68782

A/65/PV.63

administrative and legislative measures necessary to
redress any breach of the Convention within their
jurisdiction. That objective is especially important, as
it constitutes the most practical means of addressing
contemporary threats relating to chemical terrorism.
Effective domestic implementation also means
fulfilling the requirements of Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004). A year before the Council
adopted that landmark resolution, the first Review
Conference of the Chemical Weapons Convention, held
in 2003, adopted an action plan to boost effective
national implementation of the Convention globally.
Today, a total of 185 States parties — or 98 per cent —
have established or designated a national authority, as
required by the Convention. Forty-six per cent of the
States parties have enacted legislation covering all key
areas of the action plan, and 70 per cent of them have
laws in place that cover various aspects of the
Convention. The OPCW’s institutional capacity and
experience in assisting States in their implementation
efforts are particularly relevant to the objectives of
resolution 1540 (2004). In that context, the
Organization has continued to contribute to the
initiatives promoted by the United Nations in various
regions of the world on the implementation of that
important resolution.
One of our most notable achievements has been
the near-universal acceptance of the Convention,
whose membership has grown faster than any other
comparable treaty. With its membership of 188 States
parties, there remain only a small number of countries
that have not joined the Convention. The CWC
constitutes a strong moral and ethical imperative rooted
in the tragic human suffering that has been inflicted by
chemical weapons, especially in the past century.
Today, our Organization renews its appeal to the seven
remaining countries to join the Convention as a means
not only of enhancing their own national security but
also as an affirmation of their commitment to global
peace and security.
The 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
decided to hold a conference on establishing a zone
free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass
destruction in the Middle East. In accordance with the
terms of that decision, the OPCW looks forward to
making a substantive contribution to that process.

10-68782

In view of contemporary security threats,
emanating particularly from concerns about terrorism,
a number of OPCW States parties are seeking the
Organization’s support to increase their national
capacities in the event of an attack or threat of attack
with chemical weapons. For that purpose, the OPCW
conducts regular capacity-building and training
programmes for the relevant authorities of States
parties, such as civil defence organizations. Delivering
a quick response also necessitates adequate
preparations by the OPCW to coordinate actions with
member States that have pledged assistance and with
relevant international organizations. In that area, the
highlight of this year was our latest major field
exercise on the delivery of assistance, called
ASSISTEX III. That large-scale exercise, which was
conducted in Tunisia from 11 to 15 October, included
the participation of teams from 11 States parties and
from the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Assistance.
International cooperation in promoting the
peaceful uses of chemistry is also an important goal of
the CWC. The OPCW has been successful in providing
a large number of well-targeted programmes aimed at
building national and regional capacities relevant to the
peaceful uses of chemistry. In that context, I am
pleased to report that the OPCW will make an
appropriate contribution to the activities to be
organized next year under the aegis of UNESCO to
celebrate the 2011 International Year of Chemistry.
Apart from contributing to relevant events, the OPCW
will itself host a conference on international
cooperation and chemical safety and security.
The international community can take due
satisfaction from having created an effective safeguard
against chemical weapons. Achieving the goals of the
Convention requires the support not only of its States
parties, but also of other key stakeholders that have a
crucial role to play in its implementation. In that
context, cooperation with the United Nations is
especially vital and indispensable to ensuring the
Convention’s ultimate success. Let me therefore once
again express the readiness of the Technical Secretariat
to continue along the path of enhancing and expanding
interaction and cooperation between our two
Organizations in pursuit of our common quest to
eliminate forever the threat of chemical weapons.

7

A/65/PV.63

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belarus to introduce draft
resolution A/65/L.6.
Mrs. Kolontai (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the member
States of the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO): Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
the Russian Federation, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan.
The Collective Security Treaty Organization has
had observer status in the General Assembly since
2004. Since then, the CSTO secretariat has established
contacts with the Department of Political Affairs, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
Security Council’s Counter-Terrorism Committee and
its Executive Directorate. The signing in March of a
joint declaration on cooperation between the
secretariats of the United Nations and the CSTO gave
new impetus to relations between the Organizations.
The current mechanism for the CSTO’s
peacekeeping activities provides opportunities for
harnessing its potential in peacekeeping operations,
including under the aegis of the United Nations. The
aims of the CSTO — a regional and international
organization whose statute entered into force on 18
September 2003 and was registered with the United
Nations Secretariat on 16 December of that year — are
to strengthen peace, international and regional stability
and the protection, on a collective basis, of the
independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of
its States members. In achieving those goals, the
members of the CSTO give priority to political means
in cooperation with the United Nations. The results of
the CSTO’s activities have enabled us to speak of the
real potential of its cooperative action with the United
Nations based on the principles of partnership and
coordinated effort.
Considering our growing struggle with new
challenges, as well as the importance that the United
Nations attaches to developing multilateral cooperation
with regional organizations, we believe that the
Assembly’s adoption of draft resolution A/65/L.6, on
cooperation between the United Nations and the CSTO,
would be significant in the light of the agreement on 2
March and the signing, on 18 March, of the joint
declaration on cooperation between the Secretariat and
the CSTO.
Following that statement on behalf of the member
States of the CSTO to introduce the draft resolution,

8

the delegation of Belarus, would like to express its
deep gratitude to the delegation of the Russian
Federation for its thorough work in preparing, and
achieving agreement on, the draft resolution on
cooperation between the United Nations and the CSTO,
including on the text of today’s statement.
In our capacity as current Chair of the CSTO, we
would also like to inform the General Assembly that,
on 10 December, the Council for Collective Security,
the highest body of the CSTO, discussed more than 30
items on its agenda and took a range of decisions on
them, including a declaration by CSTO member States
and a statement on CSTO peacekeeping forces, which
are directly linked to cooperation between the CSTO
and the United Nations. In particular, the declaration
notes that CSTO member States intend to closely
coordinate their international activities and develop
practical cooperation with international and regional
organizations, while also paying special attention to the
issue of cooperation with the United Nations vis-à-vis
the General Assembly’s resolution on cooperation with
the CSTO as agreed in the joint declaration with the
United Nations signed on 18 March.
The CSTO member States’ statement of
10 December notes the central role of the United
Nations in conflict resolution and post-conflict
peacebuilding. We also noted, inter alia, the
preparedness of member States of the CSTO to carry
out peacekeeping activities and, under specific
conditions, to provide forces for peacekeeping
activities being carried out under the aegis of the
Security Council.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Namibia to introduce
draft resolution A/65/L.11.
Mr. Emvula (Namibia): I take the floor under
sub-item (m) of agenda item 122, “Cooperation
between the United Nations, national parliaments and
the Inter-Parliamentary Union”, in order to introduce
draft resolution A/65/L.11, which the General
Assembly considers in plenary meeting on a biennial
basis. This has always been a consensus resolution, and
we firmly believe that it will continue to be so.
As the current holder of the presidency of the
Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU), Namibia has taken
the initiative to sponsor this year’s draft resolution for
debate in the Assembly. We therefore put forth draft
resolution A/65/L.11 as a group of 13 Member States.

10-68782

A/65/PV.63

Today, we are joined by more than 50 other sponsoring
States. The full list of sponsors is available in
document A/65/L.11/Add.1, which has been circulated
by the Secretariat. I would like to inform
representatives that the list of sponsors is still open at
the Conference Officers’ desk here in the Hall.
Each new draft resolution seeks to carry forward
the partnership between the United Nations and the
IPU, and usually succeeds. That is attested to by the
Secretary-General’s report (A/65/382) and by the
growing cooperation between the two Organizations
over the years. It was only eight years ago that the IPU
gained permanent observer status in the General
Assembly, but we can all acknowledge that the road we
have travelled together has been an impressive one.
This year’s draft resolution builds on the
language agreed in the preceding one, namely,
resolution 63/24, of 18 November 2008. It also serves
as a follow-up to the outcome document of the third
World Conference of Speakers of Parliaments, held
earlier this year in Geneva (see A/65/289), the outcome
document of the High-level Plenary Meeting on the
Millennium Development Goals (resolution 65/1) and
the report of the Secretary-General and the vision of
the IPU President on building a strategic partnership
between the United Nations and the Union.
On that last point, allow me to underscore that the
current President of the IPU, who was here with us in
New York just two weeks ago for the annual
parliamentary hearing at the United Nations, is
Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab, Speaker of the National
Assembly of the Republic of Namibia. Those
participants who have been here for a while will recall
that Mr. Gurirab is a product of the United Nations
system. He served as a representative of the South
West Africa People’s Organization for many years in
this Hall before assuming a number of high offices,
including as first Minister for Foreign Affairs of an
independent Namibia, President of the General
Assembly at its fifty-fourth session and Prime Minister
of Namibia. He played a major role in the drafting and
adoption of the Millennium Declaration (resolution
55/2)10 years ago.
It was in the Millennium Declaration that, for the
first time, Heads of State and Government pledged to
strengthen cooperation between the United Nations and
national parliaments, in various fields and through the
world organization of the Inter-Parliamentary Union,

10-68782

including peace and security, economic and social
development, international law, human rights and
democracy and gender issues.
As I mentioned earlier, the operative paragraphs
of draft resolution A/65/L.11 are based largely on the
language agreed in 2008, which, among other things,
established that rather than examining the purely
international relations between the two global
organizations, as of its sixty-fifth session the General
Assembly would examine how the United Nations as a
system engages with national parliaments under a
separate agenda item entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations, national parliaments and the IPU”.
The IPU report on how parliaments organize their
work with the United Nations (A/65/289, annex II),
which has been circulated in the General Assembly and
referenced in the draft resolution, was to provide a
possible starting point for discussion. Paragraph 14 of
the draft resolution seeks to make operational the
decision of the General Assembly contained in
resolution 63/24. In addition to that, new elements
include the potential for substantive cooperation
between the IPU and the new UN Women in areas such
as the empowerment of women, institutional gender
mainstreaming, support to parliaments in promoting
gender-sensitive legislation, combating violence
against women and the implementation of relevant
United Nations resolutions.
In the past few years, we have seen how the IPU
has helped to organize and generate a parliamentary
contribution to major United Nations processes, be
they the review of the Millennium Development Goals,
the International Climate Change Conferences in
Copenhagen and Cancún and the Assembly’s high-level
meetings on financing for development and HIV and
AIDS. That is something that we acknowledge and that
we encourage should be continued.
The draft resolution is also inspired by the idea of
further enhancing, within existing resources, the
parliamentary dimension of the work of the United
Nations as an important component of its undisputed
international governmental nature. The importance of
enhancing the parliamentary dimension of United
Nations activity should also be seen in the context of
the current international juncture, in the role played by
national parliaments in shaping national policies and in
the exercise of greater transparency and accountability
at all levels. Its importance should also be seen from

9

A/65/PV.63

the perspective of the centrality it attributes to the role
of the multilateral system, and specifically the United
Nations.
Before I conclude, I would like to correct a
mistake in paragraph 7 of the draft resolution, which
should read as follows:
“Further encourages the Inter-Parliamentary
Union to strengthen its contribution to the United
Nations human rights treaty body system and to
the Human Rights Council, particularly as it
relates to the universal periodic review of the
fulfilment of human rights obligations and
commitments by Member States.”
In conclusion, allow me to commend draft
resolution A/65/L.11 for consensus adoption by the
Assembly today.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan to introduce
draft resolutions A/65/L.29 and A/65/L.32.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): I should like to
recall that resolution 58/84, of 9 December 2003,
granted
the
Eurasian
Economic
Community
(EURASEC) observer status in the General Assembly,
while resolution 63/15, of 3 November 2008, dealt with
cooperation between the United Nations and
EURASEC. I have the honour, on behalf of the
member States of the Community — the Republic of
Belarus, the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz
Republic, the Republic of Tajikistan and the Russian
Federation — to introduce draft resolution A/65/L.32,
on cooperation between the United Nations and the
Eurasian Economic Community.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(A/65/382); which deals, inter alia, with the
implementation of resolution 63/15 and includes
important recommendations. We also wish to express
our satisfaction with the mutually supportive and
beneficial collaboration that has been forged between
the Community and the United Nations. We attach
great importance to the regular meetings of the
Secretary-General
with
leaders
of
regional
organizations, including the Secretary-General of
EURASEC. We are confident that the efforts by the
United Nations to expand and enhance its multifaceted
and multidimensional agenda of cooperation with its
regional partners will pay dividends.

10

Kazakhstan continues to strongly support the
collaboration between our two organizations, which is
making a significant contribution to overcoming
contemporary problems and challenges at both the
regional and global level. That joint synergy has
enabled the effective launching of a number of
noteworthy projects and programmes. The systematic
and comprehensive interactive processes of inclusion
and integration have over time become more mature
and active. That has led increasingly large numbers of
countries from neighbouring subregions to pay
attention to areas such as ensuring economic
development and trade.
We support the further strengthening of
cooperation
between
the
Eurasian
Economic
Community and the United Nations. As EURASEC is
developing rapidly, strengthening cooperation with the
United Nations can go a long way in addressing
diverse key issues — including those of transport,
energy, tourism, environmental protection, migration,
education and other areas — and, especially, in
overcoming emergency situations. The issues of water,
energy resources management and the development,
dissemination and transfer of technologies have
particular importance for the sustainable development
of EURASEC member countries.
Steps have been taken to establish a customs
union, a free trade area and a single energy market.
This year, considerable progress has been achieved
with regard to regional economic integration with the
establishment of a customs union between Belarus,
Kazakhstan and the Russian Federation. Now that
intensive and concrete actions are in line with
achieving the Millennium Development Goals, they
serve to reinforce commitment to the principles of the
United Nations Charter, which are also enshrined in the
Community’s constitutive documents.
EURASEC member States also recognize the
value of regional and subregional cooperation in
meeting the challenges of the global economic and
financial crisis. They have therefore established an
anti-crisis fund within EURASEC as a multilateral
response to the current critical situation. We
acknowledge with satisfaction the programme of
activities of the Eurasian Development Bank to
promote the advancement of EURASEC States
members and facilitate their full integration into the
Community.

10-68782

A/65/PV.63

Through its recent initiatives focused on
extensive
structures
for
multilateral
regional
cooperation
aimed
at
ensuring
sustainable
development, stability, peace and security, EURASEC
has become an important partner of the United Nations
system in our region. In his report, the SecretaryGeneral highlights the main achievements of that
cooperation. We very much welcome that cooperation
and strongly encourage that it be strengthened on an
ongoing basis.
In that respect, I urge Member States to note the
progress that has been achieved by EURASEC in its
cooperation with the Economic Commission for
Europe, the Economic and Social Commission for Asia
and the Pacific, the United Nations Development
Programme,
the
United
Nations
Industrial
Development Organization, the International Atomic
Energy Agency and the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development. That partnership has enabled
the Community, as a collective entity and together with
its individual member countries, to work in additional
new areas, including water and energy resources
management, energy efficiency, development, the
dissemination and transfer of technologies, trade
facilitation, investment promotion, transport, the
environment, capacity-building and education, science
and
innovation
through
biotechnology
and
nanotechnology.
With a view to strengthening the outcome of that
cooperation, Kazakhstan, as current Chair of the
Community and on behalf of the Republic of Belarus,
the Kyrgyz Republic, the Republic of Tajikistan and
the Russian Federation, commends to the General
Assembly draft resolution A/65/L.32, on cooperation
between the United Nations and EURASEC. We
consider the consensus adoption of the draft resolution
to be a very important milestone. We wish to thank all
delegations that have participated in its elaboration and
joined us as sponsors.
I now have the honour to address the Assembly
on behalf of the member States of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO) — the People’s
Republic of China, the Kyrgyz Republic, the Russian
Federation, the Republic of Tajikistan and my own
country, the Republic of Kazakhstan — to introduce
draft resolution A/65/L.29, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization”.

10-68782

The declaration establishing the SCO was signed
on 15 June 2001 by the Presidents of its member
States. Mongolia, the Republic of India, the Islamic
Republic of Pakistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran
enjoy observer status in the SCO.
The SCO Charter reaffirms the adherence of its
member States to the goals and principles of the
Charter of United Nations and to the norms and
principles of international law concerning the
maintenance of international peace and security and the
development of good neighbourly and friendly
relations between States. That cooperation takes place
in the spheres of politics, trade and economy, science
and technology, culture, education, energy, transport
and environmental issues, to mention but a few areas.
Other priorities of the SCO include stability in the
region and building a democratic, fair and rational
political and economic international order.
The Council of Heads of Government of SCO
member States is the supreme governing board of the
SCO. The implementation of the goals and tasks
embodied in the SCO Charter is coordinated by the
following bodies: the Council of Heads of
Government, which is made up of Prime Ministers of
SCO member States, the Council of SCO Foreign
Ministers and the meetings of heads of ministries and
agencies of SCO member States, including ministers of
defence, foreign trade, transport, education and culture.
The SCO secretariat is located in Beijing. The
permanent representatives of SCO member States are
appointed to the secretariat and the executive
committee of the SCO regional anti-terrorist structure,
which is one of several standing bodies of the
organization. Regular meetings are held between heads
of judiciary, law enforcement and customs agencies.
All activities are coordinated by the Council of
National Coordinators of SCO member States.
The SCO has enjoyed observer status in the
General Assembly since 2004. Our organization
cooperates closely with the United Nations system on
most of its major mandate areas and activities. The
United Nations Economic and Social Commission for
Asia and the Pacific is the SCO’s principal partner, a
memorandum of understanding having been signed in
January 2008. That represents the first step towards
strengthening the institutional framework for
cooperation between the SCO and United Nations
bodies. Future prospects for joint work with the United

11

A/65/PV.63

Nations system in the areas of environmental
protection, humanitarian efforts and migration look
very promising.
It is becoming obvious that, in order to enhance
cooperation and coordination to address our common
objectives, it is essential to make the relationship
between the SCO and the United Nations more
systematic. That is why we have introduced today’s
draft resolution, which enunciates the overall goals and
programmes of the SCO aimed at strengthening peace,
security and stability in the region by countering
terrorism, separatism, extremism, illicit drug
trafficking and other forms of transnational crime. It
also highlights activities for promoting regional
cooperation and environmental protection and reducing
the danger of natural disasters. Other related areas also
feature in the draft resolution.
The goals of the SCO and the issues it addresses
converge with those of the United Nations and its
global agenda. The draft resolution therefore
emphasizes the importance of strengthening dialogue,
cooperation and coordination between the United
Nations system and the SCO and proposes that the
United Nations Secretary-General continue to hold
regular consultations with the Secretary-General of the
SCO through the existing United Nations interagency
forums and platforms, including the annual
consultations with heads of regional United Nations
organizations.
The draft resolution also proposes that the
specialized agencies, programmes and funds of the
United Nations system and other organizations
cooperate with the SCO to achieve common goals. It
recommends that their respective heads commence
consultations with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations to explore how collaboration can be forged
with the SCO.
I believe that the draft resolution will be adopted
by consensus.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates
to introduce draft resolution A/65/L.33.
Mr. Altenaiji (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): As the Chair of the Arab Group for December
2010, I have the honour to introduce draft resolution
A/65/L.33, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the League of Arab States”, on behalf of

12

Algeria, Bahrain, the Comoros, Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the
Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, the United
Arab Emirates and Yemen.
Draft resolution A/65/L.33 recognizes the need to
strengthen cooperation between the United Nations
system and the League of Arab States and its
specialized agencies in order to achieve the goals
shared by the two organizations. It requests the United
Nations Secretariat and the General Secretariat of the
League of Arab States, within their respective fields of
competence, to strengthen their cooperation for the
realization of the purposes and principles enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations, to strengthen
international peace and security, ensure economic and
social development, promote disarmament, end
colonialism and ensure self-determination and the
eradication of all forms of racism and racial
discrimination.
The draft resolution also calls on the institutions,
agencies and programmes of the United Nations system
to strengthen cooperation between the League of Arab
States and its specialized institutions in all areas and to
continue cooperation in order to ensure follow-up of
multilateral proposals that seek to strengthen and
broaden cooperation between the two organizations in
all areas. Cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States in all areas reflects the
keenness of Arab States to ensure ongoing
consultations in order to implement United Nations
resolutions.
One of the main goals of the League of Arab
States is to find a just and lasting solution to the
situation in the Middle East and the question of
Palestine in accordance with international resolutions
and the Arab Peace Initiative. The United Nations has
full responsibility for the issue until a definitive
solution is found to the question of Palestine.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Tibor Tóth, Executive
Secretary of the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization.
Mr. Tóth (Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty
Organization): I have the pleasure to address the
Assembly under the agenda sub-item “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Preparatory

10-68782

A/65/PV.63

Commission of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban
Treaty Organization”. I am here to report on the status
of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
(CTBT) and the progress achieved by the Preparatory
Commission.
The United Nations has worked relentlessly to
maintain international peace and security through
collective action. Ridding the world of the dangers of
nuclear weapons has been a key area. Active and
sustained cooperation among States, and between them
and international organizations, is vital for achieving
that noble ambition. The Preparatory Commission
works closely with the United Nations, and this is the
right moment to thank the Secretary-General for his
unwavering support as Depositary of the Treaty.
Enhanced cooperation in the field of nuclear
non-proliferation and disarmament reinforces the
cooperative
security
structures
that
promote
international peace and security. The General Assembly
resolution on cooperation between the United Nations
and the Preparatory Commission (resolution 63/16) is
an embodiment of the importance of such cooperation.
It is a necessity if we are to realize peace and security
in a world without nuclear weapons.
Most of the past decade has been particularly
challenging
for
multilateralism
and
nuclear
non-proliferation. It witnessed the erosion of the
multilateral approach and the retraction of previous
commitments on nuclear disarmament. The CTBT felt
the full brunt of those realities. The Treaty endured
especially difficult times politically. Yet despite those
challenges and the less than favourable political
environment, a certain momentum has carried it
through. States signatories have proved their
conviction in the noble goals of the Treaty, making
political, financial and scientific investments.
The Treaty promises to be, as it has always been,
a uniting force in the multilateral system. The
international community has rallied around the Treaty,
bringing it to near universal membership. Since I last
addressed the Assembly (see A/63/PV.36), two
additional States have signed the Treaty and eight have
deposited their instruments of ratifications. Today, 182
countries have signed the Treaty. Ten years ago, there
were only 50 ratifications. Today 153 States have
ratified the Treaty, representing a threefold increase in
ratifications. That is indeed an outstanding
achievement.

10-68782

The Treaty was and remains the rallying point for
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. The
international community’s belief in this unique
political and scientific arrangement, as an all-inclusive,
democratic, non-discriminatory legal instrument, is
overwhelming. What lies behind this political
determination is a vision aimed at bringing an end to
nuclear weapons, a strong desire to establish an
international norm against nuclear testing and a firm
political will to advance the Treaty’s entry into force.
But for the Treaty to enter into force, the signature and
ratification by the remaining nine annex 2 States are
still required.
I am also pleased to report that there has been
substantial progress in the development of the Treaty’s
verification system over the past decade. The
Commission is within sight of the fulfilment of its
mandate. Through commitment and very hard work, we
are approaching the point of readiness for the Treaty’s
entry into force and the preparedness level of the
verification system. The number of certified
International Monitoring System stations has increased
from zero to nearly 260 in the past 10 years. In parallel
with the steady installation and certification of stations,
the activities and services of the International Data
Centre have multiplied significantly. The volume of
data and data products shows significant growth.
Progress in the on-site inspection regime has also been
steady.
The Commission recognizes the unique value of
the investment with which member States have
entrusted it. Its members have invested approximately
$1 billion in the System. The System is truly
unprecedented in its global reach. It is a significant
asset of the international community. That investment
is a platform for scientific knowledge and capacity
development in member States. Whether in the area of
early tsunami warning, aviation safety, climate change
or marine life research, the four monitoring
technologies provide clear benefits.
The System has been tried and tested by the two
test explosions by Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea in 2006 and 2009. Those tests have been
deplored by the international community. They posed a
direct challenge to the Treaty and the Commission. But
they demonstrated the reliability of the System. The
two events tested our technical capabilities and
procedures. They proved the value of the Verification
System to the international community. The

13

A/65/PV.63

international community’s investment has proved to be
sound and effective. Coupled with on-site inspections,
the Treaty’s verifiability need not be questioned.
Recently, renewed efforts have been made
towards
global
nuclear
disarmament
and
non-proliferation. Aspirations for realizing the dream
of a world free of nuclear weapons have been revived.
The conclusion of the New START agreement was an
important milestone. High-level events such as the
global Nuclear Security Summit and the Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons have deepened
that sense of optimism.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon launched his
five-point nuclear disarmament proposal. Proposals to
rid the world of all nuclear weapons have been put
forward by influential leaders worldwide, as well by
highly respectable non-governmental actors. The
Security Council’s summit in 2009 also reaffirmed its
commitment to work towards a world without nuclear
weapons (see S/PV.6191). The Article XIV Conference
of States signatories held here in New York in 2009
was attended by more than 110 countries, 40 of them at
the ministerial level. In its consensus Final
Declaration, hold-out States were called on to sign and
ratify the Treaty for it to enter into force.
The political will of the international community
is evident. Multilateralism has not withered away.
Multilateral and plurilateral action to face common
challenges are indeed still possible. It is perhaps the
only way forward in a world of increasing complexity.
But we must seize the moment. We need leadership by
States that have ratified the Treaty, and by those that
have yet to ratify it.
There is no doubt that ratification by the United
States could be a transformational act, for both the
Treaty and the non-proliferation regime. United States
ratification would reinforce the hitherto excellent
cooperation between that country and the Commission
in building and operating monitoring stations on
United States soil. More than 90 per cent of the
facilities foreseen by the Treaty to be hosted by the
United States have already been built and certified. In
Russia, more than 70 per cent of the stations have been
built and certified. Ratification of the Treaty by all
nuclear-weapon States, and completion of the
monitoring facilities on their territories, can only
reinforce the Treaty’s democratic, non-discriminatory

14

character, and assure all States parties of equality in
obligations and transparency in verification.
But control systems can function only through
acceptance by all actors of the necessity, effectiveness
and fairness of the rules-based system. In this regard,
the steps that must be taken to strengthen the armscontrol, non-proliferation and disarmament architecture
are pretty clear. The entry into force of the Treaty is
among the first steps that must be taken. It provides a
firm legal barrier against nuclear testing, thereby
curbing the development of new types and designs of
nuclear weapons.
It also ensures that peaceful uses of nuclear
energy are indeed peaceful, and are crucial in a world
in which we see the resurgence of nuclear energy.
Since more and more States are mastering the nuclear
fuel cycle, technology alone will no longer be the
determining factor in a State’s decision to use nuclear
energy for peaceful or weapons purposes. Legal
instruments upstream of the nuclear fuel cycle are
facing increasing difficulties when it comes to
delineating between prohibited and permitted
activities. A nuclear test provides unquestionable
downstream proof of the intentions of a State. The
Treaty thus provides the last and clearly visible barrier
between the two. That legal line must be drawn clearly
and irrevocably. Having the Treaty in force would also
create an incentive for ending production of fissile
material for weapons, pending the negotiations and
entry into force of a fissile material cut-off treaty, as
well as reducing stocks of such materials.
The Treaty could also serve as a regional
confidence- and security-building measure. In that
regard, I am pleased to note the entry into force earlier
this year of the Pelindaba Treaty, establishing the
African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone. This is a most
welcome development. Nuclear-weapon-free zones and
the Treaty are bound together in spirit and letter, and
share a common history. The zones and the Treaty
complement each other. Both contain legal obligations
to prohibit nuclear tests. While the Treaty is not yet in
force, it is already effectively in force in all the States
covered by existing zones. The Treaty and its
organization bolster nuclear-weapon-free zones by
providing States with a powerful verification
mechanism. States covered by existing zones should
have no political obstacles to ratifying the Treaty. They
have already made a legally binding commitment not

10-68782

A/65/PV.63

to test nuclear weapons or to allow nuclear testing in
their territories.

action. I sincerely hope that we will not let it slip away.
We cannot afford to. It is too precious to let it pass by.

Nevertheless, around 30 per cent of the States in
these zones have yet to ratify the Treaty. Signing and
ratification by those States will have a significant
impact on both the universalization of the Treaty and
its entry into force. It will also further strengthen those
countries’
non-proliferation
and
disarmament
obligations under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. Equally, the ratification of the
African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty by African
States that have already ratified the CTBT but not the
Pelindaba Treaty will significantly boost membership
of the latter. It will further strengthen the resolve of
African nations: no nuclear weapons and no more
nuclear testing.

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa to introduce draft
resolution A/65/L.34.

By ratifying the CTBT, countries unequivocally
state that the Treaty is fundamental to their own
national security interests. Such action can also pave
the way for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the Middle East. The ratification of the CTBT
by Egypt, Iran and Israel, all of which are annex 2
States, can have wide-ranging implications for security
in a subregional and regional context. Ratification by
these three States would reinforce the political
commitment made by 90 per cent of the States in the
Middle East to the norm of non-testing. Such a step
would be a positive catalyst for other security issues
affecting the region. The CTBT represents an
opportunity to build confidence and promote regional
stability.
Mr. Askarov (Uzbekistan), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
The Treaty is clearly of great significance for the
global disarmament and non-proliferation regime. It
has a key role to play in today’s security environment.
More than 2,000 tests were conducted prior to the
Treaty’s conclusion in 1996. Every test eroded global
security and widened the gap in political trust. In the
past decade, there have only been two nuclear test
explosions. The difference is clear. But it is high time
for concrete action. The entry into force of the Treaty
may be the single defining factor for the nuclear
non-proliferation regime in the years ahead.
We must seize the moment. There is no room for
complacency, no place for inaction. The present
moment in time is the moment of truth, the moment for

10-68782

Mr. Paschalis (South Africa): As the Chair of the
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization at its thirty-fifth
session, South Africa has the honour to introduce draft
resolution A/65/L.34, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Preparatory Commission
for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Organization”. The draft resolution is aimed at
ensuring that this important issue will remain on the
agenda for continued consideration by this organ.
With regard to the issue of the prohibition of the
testing of nuclear weapons, the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) is an important
measure to accomplish our common goals of nuclear
disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation. Although it
has not yet entered into force, my delegation welcomes
the renewed momentum towards this important
objective.
The CTBT constitutes a core element of the
international nuclear disarmament and nuclear
non-proliferation regime. Its entry into force needs to
be achieved without delay and without conditions, in
accordance with the relevant constitutional processes.
While the moratoriums on nuclear-weapon testing
declared by certain countries are welcome, such
moratoriums cannot replace the legally binding
commitments under the CTBT.
South Africa notes with great satisfaction the
steady and continuing progress in the preparations to
ensure a fully operational CTBT verification regime at
the entry into force of the Treaty. South Africa
welcomes the efforts towards securing the necessary
ratifications to ensure the entry into force of the Treaty.
On both of those counts, my delegation wishes to
express its deep appreciation to the Executive
Secretary of the Preparatory Commission and the
Provisional Technical Secretariat for their tireless
efforts, as set out in the report that the General
Assembly is considering today (A/65/382).
Recent events have shown that we cannot become
complacent about achieving the Treaty’s entry into
force and that we should intensify our efforts to

15

A/65/PV.63

achieve that goal. They have also shown the urgent
need for us to provide the Provisional Technical
Secretariat with the necessary tools to fulfil the
requirements of the Treaty, pending its entry into force.
South Africa would welcome the adoption of this
draft resolution without a vote, and we thank
delegations for their sponsorship.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Greece to introduce draft
resolution A/65/L.35.
Mr. Mitsialis (Greece): On behalf of the member
States of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation
Organization (BSEC), I have the honour to introduce
the draft resolution under sub-item (d) of agenda item
122, which is contained in document A/65/L.35 and is
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization”.
At the outset, I would like to take this opportunity to
express my appreciation for the valuable support and
positive spirit demonstrated by all countries sponsoring
the draft resolution.
BSEC is the oldest as well as the most
institutionally mature and representative regional
economic organization in the wider Black Sea area,
advancing enhanced cooperation in many areas and
promoting a spirit of friendship and good
neighbourliness, mutual respect and confidence
between its member States. In recent years, the wider
Black Sea area has attracted considerable attention as a
hub for energy and transport between Europe and Asia.
The interest generated by the activity of BSEC has
increased likewise, as attested by the increased
participation of Observers and Sectoral Dialogue
Partners alike in the work of the Organization.

framework of the draft resolution before us, I think
there are ample opportunities for enhancing that
cooperation, in particular in areas where BSEC is most
active. That cooperation will be instrumental in
bringing the wider Black Sea area closer to its
neighbours and the world. It will also encourage us all
to move quickly forward through concerted efforts,
common initiatives and the implementation of joint
programmes.
To that effect, priority areas already existing
within BSEC — such as the environment, transport,
energy, institutional reform and good governance, trade
and economic development, agriculture and combating
organized crime — could constitute the necessary basis
for developing additional joint projects in the region,
including through the mechanisms of the BSEC Project
Development Fund and the BSEC Hellenic
Development Fund.
In recent months, under the current Greek
chairmanship-in-office, BSEC has expanded its activity
in
the
areas
of
green
development
and
entrepreneurship, under the motto “Black Sea turns
green”, with the aim of enhancing awareness on
environmental issues and helping foster business
synergies in this dynamically growing sector. In this
context, the BSEC Ministers for Foreign Affairs
adopted the Thessaloniki Declaration for the Black
Sea, on combating climate change in the wider area,
thus conveying the common vision for “greening” the
Black Sea and expressing the support of all the peoples
in the region for the success of the United Nations
negotiations on climate control in Cancún.

The enhancement of regional economic
cooperation within BSEC, as well as between BSEC
and other regional or international organizations, is a
safe way of easing tensions and creating the necessary
preconditions for addressing the many challenges that
still exist in the region. In this respect, the United
Nations and its family of institutions in particular
could provide an important contribution to regional
confidence-building and a more prosperous, peaceful
and secure world.

In all the areas I have mentioned, the existing
cooperation between BSEC and the United Nations
Economic Commission for Europe, the United Nations
Environment Programme, the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization and the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations should
be enhanced. We believe that the Black Sea Trade and
Investment Promotion Programme, which is now
entering its second decade and which is implemented
by the United Nations Development Programme with
the support of Greece and Turkey and the participation
of BSEC, provides a very inspiring success story for
such joint programmes.

In this context, I would like to underscore the
great importance that all BSEC members attach to
cooperation with the United Nations. Within the

In conclusion, I would like to express the hope
that this year’s draft resolution will be adopted without
a vote, as in the past; as well as my conviction that,

16

10-68782

A/65/PV.63

once adopted, it will further enhance United NationsBSEC cooperation, contributing to the promotion of
both the principles and objectives of the United
Nations as well as the purposes and goals of the Black
Sea Economic Cooperation Organization.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran to
introduce draft resolution A/65/L.40.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): In its
capacity as the Chair of the Council of Ministers of the
Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), the
Islamic Republic of Iran has the pleasure of
introducing the draft resolution entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Economic
Cooperation Organization” (A/65/L.40) on behalf of its
member States, namely, Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Pakistan, Tajikistan, Turkey, Turkmenistan and
Uzbekistan.
Among other things, the draft resolution invites
various relevant bodies of the United Nations system
and other international institutions to join in an effort
to attain the sustainable economic development of the
Economic Cooperation Organization region. Member
States of the ECO have vigorously pursued goals and
objectives of the organization, including through the
progressive removal of trade barriers and the
promotion of intraregional trade; the gradual
integration of their economies into the world economy;
the development of transport and communications
infrastructure linking member States with each other
and with the outside world; the effective utilization of
the agricultural and industrial potential of the region;
cooperation on combating narcotics; ecological and
environmental protection and the strengthening of
historical and cultural ties among the peoples of the
region. Accordingly, the ECO has embarked on several
projects in priority areas of its cooperation, including
energy, trade, transportation, agriculture, food security
and drug control.
The draft resolution highlights the overall
satisfaction of ECO members with the efforts
undertaken by the United Nations system and relevant
international and regional organizations in order to
extend technical and financial assistance to the ECO,
and encourages them to continue their support.
The ECO, as a thriving regional organization, has
bright prospects. The organization and its members are

10-68782

resolved to realize the ECO’s goals and objectives. In
doing so, they continue to seek the cooperation of and
assistance from all relevant partners, in particular the
United Nations. The member States of the ECO
therefore invite the General Assembly to adopt the
draft resolution contained in document A/65/L.40.
A small editorial correction should be made to
paragraph 6, where the reference should be to “member
States” rather than “States members”.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey to introduce draft resolution
A/65/L.41.
Mr. Çorman (Turkey): In my country’s capacity
as the current Chair of the Committee of Ministers of
the Council of Europe, it is my honour to introduce the
draft resolution contained in document A/65/L.41,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Council of Europe”.
At the outset, I would like to reiterate our belief
that strengthening the cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and other organizations
contributes to the promotion of the purposes and
principles of the United Nations. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s report on the cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and other
organizations (A/65/382).
In this context, the Council of Europe is one of
the regional organizations with which the United
Nations has been cooperating for a long time.
Established in 1949 to prevent the recurrence of the
tragedies that Europe had experienced by replacing
tensions and conflicts with trust and cooperation, the
Council of Europe has since become a significant actor
in defending and promoting the principles of human
rights, pluralist democracy and respect for the rule of
law. It has been playing a remarkable role in finding
solutions to the problems facing European society. The
Council of Europe aims to bring its members’ national
legislation in line with each other, thus creating
common norms through conventions and protocols that
are also open to the participation of States from other
regions.
Apart from its standard-setting role, the Council
of Europe also follows up on the implementation of
these standards in its member States through its
independent monitoring and reporting mechanisms.
Having assumed the chairmanship of the Council of

17

A/65/PV.63

Europe in November 2010, we set out as our priority
reinforcing the political role, influence and visibility of
the Council in the international arena.
The draft resolution demonstrates the wide range
of areas where the United Nations and the Council of
Europe cooperate and where the Council of Europe’s
activities contribute to furthering the goals of the
United Nations. Those areas include, but are not
limited to, the protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms; the promotion of democracy
and the rule of law; the fight against racism,
discrimination, xenophobia and intolerance; the
protection of the rights of refugees, asylum-seekers and
internally displaced persons; the fight against
trafficking in persons; the protection of children’s
rights, gender equality and the empowerment of
women; the protection of the rights of persons with
disabilities; the promotion of intercultural dialogue and
the fight against transnational organized crime and
terrorism.
The first version of the draft resolution was
prepared by the Council of Europe in Strasbourg and
forwarded to Permanent Missions in New York by the
outgoing chairmanship of the Committee of Ministers
of the Council of Europe. As the current Chair, we
would like to thank the outgoing Chair for the support
it extended to us as a co-facilitator during the
consultations process. We would also like to express
our gratitude to all delegations for their constructive
and cooperative approach during the consultations,
which resulted in the text before us here today being
acceptable to all the concerned Missions.
We sincerely hope that text will be adopted by
consensus in the General Assembly. In addition to the
33 countries named in the text of draft resolution
A/65/L.41, 16 others also joined as sponsors as I took
the floor. I would like to call on all States members of
the Assembly to support and further strengthen
cooperation between the two organizations.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We concur with the assessment of the
representative of Belarus concerning the cooperation
between the United Nations and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO), as well as with that of the
representative of Kazakhstan concerning the work of
the United Nations with the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and the Eurasian Economic Community
(EURASEC), in connection with their introductions of

18

the draft resolutions on those subjects (A/65/L.6,
A/65/L.29 and A/65/L.32). In connection with the
discussion of the item on the agenda, I would like to
make some observations concerning the work of
EURASEC and the Black Sea Economic Cooperation
Organization (BSEC).
The outcome of the recent United Nations summit
on the Millennium Development Goals held here
underlined once again that, in order to achieve progress
in terms of international development, it is essential to
step up regional integration processes. In this regard,
we have given particular attention to the work of the
Eurasian Economic Community, which celebrated its
tenth anniversary this year. In that time, the Russian
Federation has been an active and engaged member of
EURASEC. It was present at its creation and
participated in its main initiatives.
EURASEC’s recent concrete achievements
include the entry into force of the customs union
between Belarus, Kazakhstan and Russia and the
establishment of the Anti-Crisis Fund and a high-tech
centre. A significant step forward within the framework
of the integration process was the completion of the
establishment of the treaty and legal basis for a single
economic area among Belarus, Kazakhstan and Russia.
That will allow the single economic area to begin its
work as early as 2012, produce an agreed economic
policy, ensure the free movement of capital, services
and the workforce, and provide States members with
reciprocal access to infrastructure. We believe that the
priorities for interaction between the United Nations
and EURASEC are reflected objectively in the draft
resolution on cooperation between the two
organizations. We thank our partners from the other
delegations for their constructive and positive attitude
to the draft resolution, as well as for their cosponsorship of it.
The process of economic integration in the
Commonwealth of Independent States area has been
appreciably assisted by the Eurasian Development
Bank, a needed and dynamically growing mechanism
for development financing. The Bank’s portfolio
already includes many large-scale projects. It has great
potential for expanding its work further, including in
the area of strengthening partnerships in development
coordination with international institutions such as the
United Nations, the World Bank, the European Bank
for Reconstruction and Development and the Asian
Development Bank.

10-68782

A/65/PV.63

On a separate note, we should like to touch on the
relationship between the United Nations and the Black
Sea Economic Cooperation Organization. We continue
to consider BSEC to be the main, fully fledged forum
for cooperation in the Black Sea region. We support
efforts to step up the practical impact of its activities.
We believe it particularly important to foster efforts to
implement priority projects within BSEC, including
developing a ring road around the Black Sea,
renovating regular passenger and ferry crossings
between Black Sea ports, establishing a Black Sea
electricity grid, cooperating in post-emergency
cleanup, and jointly combating organized crime.
Another priority for BSEC, noted by the
representative of Greece in his introduction of draft
resolution A/65/L.35, is the protection of the
environment. Its central pillar was included in the
recently concluded Joint Declaration on Combating
Climate Change in the wider Black Sea area, which
was presented to participants at the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change in Cancún.
We consider the implementation of the Declaration to
be an important regional contribution to solving global
problems related to climate change.
We are also in favour of mutually advantageous
and equal cooperation between BSEC and all its
international partners, including the European Union,
and of strengthening the ties between BSEC and the
United Nations. The main priorities for cooperation
between BSEC and the Organization are reflected in
the corresponding draft resolution, of which the
Russian Federation is a co-author.
Mr. Tag-Eldin (Egypt): I would like to start by
expressing Egypt’s sincere appreciation to His
Excellency Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab, President of the
Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) and Speaker of the
National Assembly of the Republic of Namibia; to
Mr. Anders B. Johnsson, Secretary-General of the IPU;
and to Ambassador Anda Filip, Director of the Office
of the Permanent Observer of the IPU to the United
Nations, for all their efforts to strengthen the
relationship between the IPU and the United Nations. I
would like also to thank His Excellency Mr. Joseph
Deiss and Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for all their
efforts to strengthen and develop this cooperation.
Egypt has always believed in the importance of
enhancing cooperation between the United Nations and
the IPU, one of the key organizations aimed at ensuring

10-68782

the complementarity of the efforts of Governments and
parliaments in support of the United Nations system in
order to achieve the Organization’s objectives,
particularly on issues that require legislative or
financial support and that touch on the welfare and
prosperity of all peoples. This covers a huge range.
As a strong believer in the central role of national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union, Egypt
played an active part in solidifying the cooperation
between the United Nations and the IPU, and thus
introduced this agenda item and resolution 51/7 to the
General Assembly in 1996. The international
community’s confidence in the accumulated experience
of the IPU was further highlighted by the proposals
submitted by Egypt that were included in the 2005
World Summit Outcome Document (resolution 60/1),
stressing the importance of strengthening cooperation
between the United Nations and national and regional
parliaments, in particular through the IPU.
Through its conferences and specialized
meetings, the IPU makes valuable contributions in
many important fields, such as disarmament; nuclear
non-proliferation; addressing various specific problems
of world economic and social development, including
financing for development, globalization, the
liberalization of trade, climate change and food
security; as well as combating the spread of pandemics
and their devastating human, economic and social
impact. It also plays an important role in supporting
Member States’ efforts to promote and protect human
rights through its close and systematic relationships
with the relevant United Nations bodies. In this
context, we encourage the IPU to work closely with the
new United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women in areas such as the
empowerment of women and gender mainstreaming,
and to enhance its interaction with the United Nations
on all issues of common interest.
The cooperation between the United Nations and
the IPU in addressing existing and emerging challenges
was demonstrated most recently by the parliamentary
hearing at the United Nations aimed at engaging with
permanent representatives during several sessions
discussing issues of paramount importance to all our
countries and peoples. Those discussions covered the
world economic and financial crisis and efforts to
achieve sustainable recovery; reform of the
international financial system; and global governance,

19

A/65/PV.63

particularly strengthening the role of the United
Nations.
In all these discussions, there was a common
recognition of the important role that parliamentarians
can play in these and other areas, particularly through
their legislative capacities, to avoid protectionism,
enhance regulations that can help prevent the
recurrence of crises, and push for greater democracy,
transparency and accountability in global economic
governance.
We believe that the IPU can play an active and
constructive role in the reform of the United Nations,
including the ongoing processes of the revitalization of
the General Assembly and the reform and expansion of
the Security Council. All those efforts reaffirm the
central role of the United Nations in global governance
in conjunction with the main theme of the sixty-fifth
session of the General Assembly.
The role of the IPU is of equal importance in the
promotion of peace, understanding and tolerance,
where the Union actively participates in international
efforts, including those of the United Nations, to
promote dialogue among cultures, civilizations and
religions.
Finally, as Egypt believes in the important role of
the IPU in supporting the international community’s
endeavours to achieve internationally agreed goals,
including the Millennium Development Goals, we
emphasize the need to continue developing and
ameliorating the cooperative relationship of the United
Nations with the IPU, including through the active
engagement of the IPU in the major United Nations
deliberative processes and the review of international
commitments and goals.
Mr. Rivard (Canada): Cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and other organizations is
fundamental to the success of the United Nations and
its bodies in achieving their objectives. It is key to
peace and security, to economic and social
development, and to deepening understanding of and
appreciation for both the diversity of the international
community and the shared humanity that unites us.
The expertise and skills of regional organizations
complement those of the United Nations system.
Acting together, they have the potential to produce
results beyond the sum of their constituent parts.
Canada has a particular interest in this issue, as it is a

20

member of or has established partnerships with many
regional organizations, such as the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Southern Africa Development
Community (SADC), the Organization of American
States, the Commonwealth, NATO, the Caribbean
Community, the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN), the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the International
Organization of la Francophonie (OIF) among others.
This depth and diversity of relationships demonstrates
the importance Canada places on the involvement of
regional players and organizations.
This year, as host of the Group of Twenty (G-20),
Canada was pleased to invite the Secretary-General to
participate in the G-20 Toronto summit to help ensure
that wider United Nations perspectives were
represented in the discussions.
Canada is very pleased with the progress that has
been made in reinforcing this cooperation. However,
great efforts are required to make cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations more
effective. These efforts must be guided by respect for
each organization’s mandate and responsibilities and
by achieving the best division of labour among them.
For example, donors and countries contributing to
peace missions under the aegis of various organizations
must ensure that troops and support personnel are
appropriately trained and equipped to carry out their
mandates. States must ensure that mandates are carried
out in full respect for the principles of efficiency,
transparency and accountability. These principles have
never been more relevant than today, when popular
opinion so often questions the value of multilateral
cooperation.
The partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union illustrates efforts to strengthen
coordination, especially in the areas of peace and
security. Key collaborative efforts are under way to
foster African solutions to threats to peace and security
on the continent. The establishment of the United
Nations Office to the African Union in Addis Ababa is
a positive step in that direction, as are efforts to
support the development of structures and institutions
that can serve the needs and meet the aspirations of the
peoples of Africa to greater freedom, increased
stability and enhanced prosperity.

10-68782

A/65/PV.63

Extensive cooperation among the relevant bodies
of the United Nations and the African Union, and
indeed all regional organizations, seeks not only to
meet existing challenges, but also to provide the tools
to further democratic governance, respect for human
rights and economic and social development over the
long term. In so doing, it serves to meet the criteria set
out in Chapter VIII of the Charter for this type of
cooperation and ensures that it remains consistent with
the purpose and principles of the United Nations.

proud to highlight the development of relations
between the United Nations and the International
Organization of la Francophonie. The OIF has
diplomatic capabilities in the areas of prevention and
mediation that we would like to see strengthened so
that it can more effectively help to resolve international
crises in francophone countries and fully participate in
finding collective and realistic solutions. Such
mediation efforts can contribute to achieving the
objectives of the United Nations.

I would like to highlight further examples of
cooperation with regional partners that are relevant to
the United Nations. Canada applauds the outcome of
the third ASEAN-United Nations summit, which took
place in late October 2010 in Hanoi. The declaration
issued following the summit sets out an ambitious
agenda for cooperation that includes the Millennium
Development Goals, peace and security, human rights
and humanitarian assistance. It is worth specifically
noting the work that will soon be undertaken to prepare
and implement the ASEAN-United Nations Strategic
Plan of Action on Disaster Management 2011-2015,
which will no doubt contribute to capacity-building in
a region all too often affected by natural disasters. Like
Canada, the United Nations Development Programme
became an ASEAN Dialogue Partner in 1977. Canada
remains a strong supporter of the assistance provided
by the United Nations to the ASEAN communitybuilding process.

As it has done in recent years, Canada, in
cooperation with other member countries, will continue
to ensure that cooperation between the two
organizations remains productive, that francophone
capabilities are used to the fullest extent in carrying out
United Nations mission, especially in supporting
peacekeeping missions in French-speaking countries,
and that the relationship becomes a model of
complementarity between United Nations action and
that of regional organizations.

The joint cooperation between the United Nations
and NATO in Afghanistan remains of vital importance
to the international community in our common efforts
to combat terrorism and provide greater security in that
country and the region. At their summit in Lisbon,
NATO leaders committed to strong and productive
cooperation between NATO and the United Nations.
Canada is committed to working in both organizations
to ensure deeper practical cooperation and political
dialogue, particularly in managing crises in which both
organizations are engaged.
The United Nations and regional and other
organizations must also cooperate closely to
incorporate fragile and conflict-affected States into the
world economy and to further recovery, reconstruction
and development efforts in these contexts.
(spoke in French)
In 2008, on the last occasion on which the
General Assembly considered this theme, Canada was

10-68782

Canada has long been engaged with its African
counterparts in finding durable solutions to protracted
conflicts across the continent, both through its direct
bilateral counterparts and through its engagement in
support of African institutions, in particular the African
Union, ECOWAS and SADC. Canada has participated
in several capacity-building programmes with these
institutions, particularly on peace and security. We
support these institutions taking a leadership role on
crises in the region. In this respect, I would like to
highlight two recent positive examples.
Via the International Contact Group, ECOWAS
was a key leader in the mediation and resolution of the
crisis in Guinea. This active regional engagement
helped Guinea to reach a peaceful and democratic
solution to the political crisis.
Currently, ECOWAS and the African Union are
playing an active role in pushing for a resolution to the
political crisis in Côte d’Ivoire. ECOWAS and the
African Union have recognized Alassane Ouattara as
the legitimate winner of the presidential elections and
called for outgoing President Laurent Gbagbo to yield
power. Canada has also taken this position.
Canada has enjoyed an excellent partnership with
ECOWAS, particularly through a wide range of
activities related to conflict prevention, mediation and
management in West Africa. That partnership includes
the work of several institutions, including the three

21

A/65/PV.63

ECOWAS-designated Centres of Excellence: the
Peacekeeping School in Bamako; the Kofi Annan
International Peacekeeping Training Centre in Accra;
and the African Centre for Strategic Research and
Studies in Abuja. Canada was also pleased to learn of
the launching of a United Nations roster of senior
security sector reform experts, as well as its immediate
operational use in 2010 in the context of a joint
mission with ECOWAS. This is an example of the kind
of concrete cooperation between the United Nations
and regional mechanisms that supports positive
innovations for all partners involved.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of
Canada’s membership in the Organization of American
States (OAS). Our decision to become a full member
came at a significant moment for Canada and our
hemisphere. The Americas stood at the dawn of a
period that has seen the restoration or consolidation of
democratic institutions across the region and the
development of new and more effective mechanisms
for cooperation, notably the Summits of the Americas.
The Summits have served not only to stimulate regular
dialogue among leaders on the major issues and
challenges for the hemisphere, but also to contribute to
developing action in support of economic growth,
democratic development and enhanced security.
As part of the current deepening of Canada’s
engagement in the Americas, we emphasize effective,
results-oriented multilateralism. Canada continues to
view the OAS as the key multilateral organization in
the Americas and as a crucial venue for cooperation
among hemispheric partners. We are keen to see it
continue to play a robust role in the region in service of
all its members’ needs. To that end, we actively support
efforts to better define the common future priorities of
the OAS and to ensure that its resources are aligned
with those priorities. Within the OAS, consistent with
Canada’s position within the United Nations system,
the promotion and defence of human rights rank among
our top priorities.
The OAS is a substantial partner of the United
Nations in Haiti. Canada’s engagement in Haiti has
been continuous for many years and we have supported
joint United Nations/OAS efforts to promote respect
for human rights and institution-building, beginning
with the creation of the International Civilian Mission
in Haiti in 1993. This was the first fully integrated field
mission jointly led by a regional organization and the

22

United Nations, and it was deployed before a political
settlement had been reached.
The OAS remains involved in Haiti, in
cooperation with the United Nations system, to this
day. The core mandate of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) reflects
the principles and priorities shared by the countries of
the Americas and attests to the fact that some 15 OAS
member States contribute to the Mission. The OAS has
also been active in support of relief efforts and in
contributing to the long-term response of the
international community to the earthquake that struck
the country in January. The OAS and the Caribbean
Community have worked with MINUSTAH to support
the Haitian Provisional Electoral Council in the
preparation and conduct of Haiti’s presidential
elections and to coordinate international electoral
assistance. That process has not been without
difficulties, but the effort reflects the ongoing
commitment of the OAS to institution-building and the
restoration of Government structures as part of Haiti’s
long-term development process.
(spoke in English)
Canada warmly welcomes the action the
Assembly is taking today to highlight and reaffirm the
importance of cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations. Our capacity to properly
manage the wide range of issues facing us will
determine how cooperation between regional
organizations and United Nations bodies, especially the
Security Council, develops. The collective efforts to
construct flexible, responsive and effective institutions
and arrangements to meet the complex political,
economic and social challenges that the international
community is confronting at the start of a new
millennium deserve all our support.
The Acting President: In accordance with
General Assembly resolution 58/84 of 9 December
2003, I now call on the Secretary-General of the
Eurasian Economic Community.
Mr. Mansurov (Eurasian Economic Community)
(spoke in Russian): The United Nations is the main
international forum for harmonizing the interests of
many countries and has a positive impact on the
sustainable social and economic development of every
region of the world. The member States of the Eurasian
Economic Community (EURASEC) — Belarus,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia and Tajikistan — are

10-68782

A/65/PV.63

all active Members of the United Nations working to
develop international cooperation in the interests of the
timely achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals.
In the post-crisis development of the global
economy, and in conditions of increasing global
interdependence, the role of international institutions
and integration organizations continues to grow. Today,
EURASEC is one of the most dynamically developing
integration associations. Its member States participated
actively in the successful summit of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe held in Astana,
at which Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon noted the
significance of sustainable development as a basis for
safer world.
This year, our organization celebrated the tenth
anniversary of the signing of its founding Treaty. In
that time, we have witnessed the success of such
concrete achievements as the creation of a customs
union between Belarus, Kazakhstan and the Russian
Federation, as well as the establishment of the AntiCrisis Fund and a high-tech centre. The current free
trade regime within the EURASEC framework has
increased the volume of reciprocal trade between
member States more than fourfold, from $29 billion in
2000 to $123 billion in 2008. The customs union
established within the framework of EURASEC has
been functioning since 1 January. The customs union
commission, a supranational body, was established and
authorized to conduct tariff and non-tariff regulation of
foreign trade, and the Union’s customs code entered
into effect.
The timely establishment of the EURASEC AntiCrisis Fund made it possible to furnish financial
assistance to Community member States to help them
overcome the effects of the world financial crisis.
Tajikistan has already received $70 million in financial
aid, while Kyrgyzstan’s application for a loan is now
under consideration.
Early in 2010, work began on establishing a
further and more advanced stage of integration — a
single economic area. On 9 December, heads of States
completed 17 international agreements assuring, within
the framework of a single economic area, the free
movement of goods, services, capital and labour, as
well as unified, functioning mechanisms for economic
regulation. Those documents come into force on 1
January 2012, signalling the start of a full-fledged

10-68782

single economic area between Belarus, Kazakhstan and
Russia.
In developing the customs union and the single
economic area, EURASEC is moving towards the
creation of a Eurasian economic union, aimed at
bringing the region into complementary and mutually
beneficial
cooperation
with
other
countries,
international economic associations and the European
Union with a view to creating a single economic area.
In that regard, at its current stage of development
EURASEC enjoys the practical results of integration
that can further enhance international interaction and
promote successful cooperation with the United
Nations. I am pleased to note that the Economic
Commission for Europe (UNECE), the Economic and
Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP),
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
the
United
Nations
Industrial
Development
Organization (UNIDO), the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) and UNESCO are now among
EURASEC’s key partners.
Since the adoption in 2008 of resolution 63/15 on
cooperation between the United Nations and
EURASEC,
focused
cooperation
among
the
Governments of our countries, EURASEC and the
United Nations has produced progress in a range of
specific areas. In accordance with the 12 December
2008 decision of the EURASEC Interstate Council at
the Head of State level, we intensified efforts to
produce a draft concept on the efficient use of water
and energy resources in the Central Asian region. That
issue has become a focus of our cooperation with
UNECE and the United Nations Department of
Economic and Social Affairs. Considering the
experience of United Nations entities in formulating
conceptual documents and their significant reserves of
expertise, we count on the support of the
aforementioned organizations in inviting international
experts to work on our draft concept and attract
funding sources for this project.
On a separate note, I would like to emphasize the
relevance of the international conference on the theme
“Water for Life”, which was held under the auspices of
the United Nations in June 2010 in Dushanbe and drew
the attention of the international community to the
issue of water problems in the region. EURASEC, in
cooperation with ESCAP, is currently implementing a
joint project on strengthening the institutional capacity

23

A/65/PV.63

to support energy efficiency in Central Asian countries.
As part of this project, two regional workshops are
being held in Kazakhstan and Tajikistan to develop
relevant guidelines for the participating countries.
Innovative activities are another area of
cooperation between the United Nations and
EURASEC. Since July 2010, EURASEC, alongside
UNECE and the Eurasian Development Bank, has been
undertaking performance reviews on innovation. The
pilot review, dedicated to the innovation performance
of the Republic of Belarus, was presented earlier this
month at the annual session of the UNECE Committee
on Economic Cooperation and Integration in Geneva.
In accordance with the memorandum of
understanding between the secretariat of EURASEC
and UNIDO, we have launched a project to develop
investment and technology promotion networks for
EURASEC countries.
We maintain continuous contacts with IAEA on
coordinating international institutions participating in
the implementation of the programmes to rehabilitate
territories affected by the negative impact of the
uranium mining industry.
EURASEC, together with the Government of the
Kyrgyz Republic and UNDP, participated in an
international high-level forum, held in June 2009 in
Geneva, on the theme “Uranium tailings: local
problems, regional consequences, global solution”. The
forum adopted a joint declaration that set expressed the
intention to resolve the problem of uranium tailings
and provide comprehensive assistance to implement all
agreements reached.
The cultural and humanitarian sphere is also
gaining in importance. Pursuant to a memorandum of
understanding, we are cooperating with the secretariat
of UNESCO, primarily in the field of biotechnology.
To conclude, I wish to highlight once again that
economic interaction among EURASEC member States
is a crucial element in the system to ensure the
effective maintenance of stability in Europe and Asia.
Considering the extensive positive experience we have
had in such collaboration, EURASEC welcomes the
strengthening of the role of the United Nations in the
region and has a sustained interest in the further
development of fruitful and mutually beneficial
cooperation. I thank the Assembly for supporting the

24

adoption of the draft resolution on cooperation between
the United Nations and EURASEC (A/65/L.32).
For this meeting, EURASEC has specifically
developed brochures on innovative technology under
way in our countries in the coming year and on the
tenth anniversary of our organization. I will donate
these brochures and materials to the United Nations
library.
The Acting President: In accordance with
General Assembly resolution 62/76 of 6 December
2007, I now call on the Chairman of the Executive
Board of the Eurasian Development Bank.
Mr. Finogenov (Eurasian Development Bank)
(spoke in Russian): When the Eurasian Development
Bank (EDB) was established on the initiative of the
Presidents of the Russian Federation and Kazakhstan in
2006, it was conceived as a significant instrument for
financial integration in the post-Soviet era.
Recently, the geographical scope of the work of
the Bank has expanded as new States have become
members of the Bank. The Republic of Armenia, the
Republic of Belarus and the Republic of Tajikistan
have become full participants in the Bank. Other States
have also shown interest in becoming members of the
Bank.
We are convinced that joining the Eurasian
Development Bank provides every State with new
opportunities to attract long-term investment to
implement large-scale national economic projects. In
selecting investment projects, we are guided by the
Bank’s mission to strengthen integration processes and
enhance the competitiveness of the economies of
member States of the Bank.
Other international organizations are also
working in this area. In this regard, the issue of
cooperation and coordination is decisive in achieving
positive results from the combined work of
international development institutions. There is a need
to develop and implement cooperation mechanisms
leading to specific results. EDB has good experience
with partnerships with such organizations as the
Eurasian Economic Community (EURASEC), the
International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea, the United
Nations Development Programme, the United Nations
Economic Commission for Europe, the Economic and
Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific and the

10-68782

A/65/PV.63

United Nations Special Programme for the Economies
of Central Asia.
To that end, the Bank is actively harnessing
existing technology assistance mechanisms and
financial support for research into current issues in
various areas of cooperation, promoting the adoption
and implementation of socially responsible decisions,
including by improving the effectiveness of investment
projects. For example, at the request of the Council for
Transport Policy at the EURASEC Integration
Committee, the Bank is financing a comprehensive
infrastructure plan to develop the highways and
railways on the list of EURASEC transport routes. It is
clear that building transport corridors linking the
western and eastern parts of the continent will facilitate
the development of transport capacity for the States of
Central Asian and the entire area.
The constructive corporation and partnership
within EURASEC was demonstrated by the decision by
the EURASEC Heads of State to endow the Bank with
management functions for the EURASEC Anti-Crisis
Fund. The Fund was set up with a view to overcoming
the negative impact of the international financial crisis
by providing stable credit and financing for
intergovernmental investment projects. The Bank has
already started work in this area and allocated the first
tranche of the funds. Without a doubt, this is one of the
main integration projects in the post-Soviet area, and
we trust that other member States of the
Commonwealth of Independent States will display
interest in this.
We have also had a positive experience in our
cooperation with the Executive Committee of the
International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea, resulting in
the drafting of a regional report on climate change and
water resources in Central Asia, which was presented
to the Fifth World Water Forum in Istanbul in 2009.
The report was well-received and is currently the first
major regional research paper on this issue. One
important practical consequence of the report was the
publication of the results of work to develop
international water use services.
In supporting international initiatives on the Aral
Sea issue, and in particular the Special United Nations
Programme for the Economies of Central Asia, the
Bank provided technical help to the International Fund
on Saving the Aral Sea in financing the preparation of
the regional report on security and technical

10-68782

cooperation in Central Asia. As part of work on this
document, international and regional practices on water
resource use were examined and recommendations
issued to the countries of Central Asia.
Previously, the Bank supported the United
Nations
Special
Programme’s
activities
on
international seminars to look into water loss in Central
Asia with the participation of experts from the Russian
International Science and Technology Centre. The
Bank is also looking into the rational exploitation of
hydroelectric energy use in Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan,
primarily by building small-scale hydroelectric plants.
The Bank is working with UNECE and ESCAP
on energy efficiency and energy provision, providing
hydroelectric and other sustainable sources of energy.
The Bank is providing expert support and technical
assistance to the organization in this field. Greater
attention is being paid to cooperation with United
Nations agencies on innovative development for
member States of the Bank. In this respect, a review of
innovative development practices in the Republic of
Belarus is being prepared with the participation of the
UNECE, from which new investment projects may
result. Just a week ago, the preliminary conclusions
and recommendations of this process were considered
at the fifth session of the UNECE Committee on
Economic Cooperation and Integration in Geneva. We
hope this project will make a significant contribution to
that country’s development activities. Other Bank
member States have shown a great deal of interest in
this area and together with UNECE we are preparing a
similar project for the Republic of Kazakhstan.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize once
more that the Eurasian Development Bank is ready to
cooperate actively with those organizations whose
activity is aimed at creating the conditions for the full
economic development of the Bank’s member States
and the realization of their economic potential.
The Acting President: In accordance with
General Assembly resolution 64/124 of 16 December
2009, I now call on the President of the Parliamentary
Assembly of the Mediterranean.
Mr. Salles (Parliamentary Assembly of the
Mediterranean) (spoke in French): It is a genuine
pleasure for me to be here today to share the recent
activities of the Parliamentary Assembly of the
Mediterranean (PAM) and to emphasize the growing
synergies between PAM’s efforts and those of the

25

A/65/PV.63

United Nations. A year after PAM’s attaining observer
status at the General Assembly, I will first give a brief
outline of the evolution of relations between our two
institutions.
As many here know, our Assembly, made up of
26 member States, all bordering or neighbouring the
Mediterranean, is a unique platform for parliamentary
diplomacy and dialogue in the region. PAM was born
in 2006 as a result of the transformation and maturation
of a regional political process begun within the InterParliamentary Union in the late 1980s, known as the
Conference on Security and Cooperation in the
Mediterranean.
PAM’s field of action encompasses political,
socio-economic and environmental issues. Our efforts
focus on issues that are strategic to our region, such as
the fight against terrorism and organized crime; the
regional aspects of the Middle East peace process; and,
at the request of the United Nations, other sensitive
geopolitical issues of the region, such as the Balkans.
We also endeavour to foster the changes necessary to
develop regional socio-economic integration; address
the challenge of climate change; make more rational
use of limited natural resources; better protect the
environment, such as by dealing with the thorny
question of the discharge of toxic waste at sea; and
promote the sustainable management of energy by
ensuring the security of supplies and encouraging the
use of renewable power sources.
We also deal with problems related to migration,
particularly the worrisome issues of trafficking in
human beings, human rights, and the status and
condition of women. PAM attaches special importance
to the promotion of intercultural and interreligious
dialogue, which is, in our view, essential in order to
make the Mediterranean region prosperous and stable.
Although the institutional framework may differ,
and we employ our own methods, the subjects of
interest to PAM intersect to a large extent with those of
the United Nations. Our Assembly also considers the
Charter of the United Nations to be the basis of all
legitimate international action, and the member
parliaments of PAM have chosen to exploit the
resources of parliamentary diplomacy in order to
support United Nations efforts in the region.
Since its founding, PAM has spared no effort to
develop excellent relations with the entire United
Nations system. Senior United Nations officials have

26

made valuable contributions to many of our meetings,
and members of various national delegations have
represented PAM at many United Nations meetings. As
examples of United Nations officials who have
participated in PAM meetings, we would mention Sir
John Holmes, former Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs
and
Emergency
Relief
Coordinator; Ms. Karen AbuZayd and Mr. Filippo
Grandi, former and current Commissioners-General of
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East; Ambassador
Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process; Ms. Margareta Wahlström, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
implementation of the International Strategy for
Disaster Reduction; and Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, Chair
of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force.
Representatives
of
the
United
Nations
Environment Programme, the World Food Programme
and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees have also participated in
our work, and specific agreements have been signed
with the World Meteorological Organization and the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization.
My presidency, which came to an end a few
weeks ago, endeavoured to continue the work carried
out by my predecessor, Mr. Abdelwahad Radi, to
strengthen and boost cooperation in the Mediterranean
and to establish PAM on the regional and international
scene. The Assembly rewarded these efforts last year
when it granted PAM observer status as an
autonomous, regional, inter-State organization. That is
the result of the work done by all of our
parliamentarians, who, individually and collectively,
committed
to
implementing
our
Assembly’s
programme and vision in order to make the
Mediterranean serve as a bridge rather than an obstacle
between its shores. The new President of PAM, my
friend the Egyptian parliamentary deputy Mohammed
Abu El Enein, is committed to continuing that work
over the next two years.
In the context of its new observer status, PAM
has participated actively in a large number of United
Nations events, including the Conference on Climate
Change in Copenhagen; the fifty-fourth session of the
United Nations Commission on the Status of Women,
held in New York; the third Forum of the Alliance of
Civilizations; the eleventh session of the United
Nations Open-ended Informal Consultative Process on

10-68782

A/65/PV.63

Oceans and the Law of the Sea, also in New York; and
the United Nations African Meeting on the Question of
Palestine, in Rabat. Obviously, representatives of PAM
have also participated in high-level meetings at the
sixty-fifth session of the General Assembly,
particularly the Millennium Development Goals
summit and the High-level Meeting on Biodiversity.
The synergies between the United Nations and
PAM are especially apparent in three areas. First, in the
peace process in the Middle East, the international
PAM-United Nations meeting in support of the IsraeliPalestinian peace process, held in Malta in February,
brought together members of parliament, diplomats and
experts from the entire region, as well as Quartet
representatives. The aim was to contribute to the
resumption of negotiations on issues essential to
resolving the conflict: Jerusalem, water, borders,
refugees and settlements. The progress made there was
further strengthened by the appearance in October of
the Speaker of the Knesset, Reuven Rivlin, at our fifth
plenary session, held in Rabat. I should emphasize that
it was the first official visit Mr. Rivlin had made to an
Arab country, and on that occasion he met with the
Vice-President of the Palestinian National Council.
In the field of scientific research and education,
enhanced cooperation between PAM and the United
Nations was established last month in Paris at the
launching of the PAM/UNESCO Inter-Parliamentary
Forum on Science, Technology and Innovation for the
Mediterranean Region, whose goal is to better
articulate relations between political decision makers
and scientific experts.
PAM has also been active in economic affairs.
The launch in May in Lisbon of the PAM Panel on
External Trade and Investments in the Mediterranean
gave our region a platform to bring together members
of parliament, national agencies promoting investment,
banks and other major economic players in order to
promote development and economic integration in the
Mediterranean. The Panel’s first operational meeting,
held last month in Naples, witnessed the active
involvement in this project of the United Nations
Economic Commission for Europe and the World
Bank, with their proposal to host the next meeting in
Geneva in the spring of 2011.
Next year’s agenda will enable PAM to
strengthen its relations with the United Nations in other
highly political areas, particularly the PAM/United

10-68782

Nations international parliamentary meeting in support
of the constitutional reform process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which will take place in Malta in spring
2011 at the invitation of the Maltese Parliament. That
meeting is the follow-up to a PAM Bureau mission to
Sarajevo in June, carried out at the Secretary-General’s
request, and to the fruitful consultations conducted on
that occasion with the Collegium of the Parliamentary
Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Special
Representative of the European Union in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Secretary-General of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Before concluding, may I once again thank the
Secretary-General and the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs for making available to us
Mr. Sergio Piazzi, a United Nations senior official who
has been Secretary-General of our Assembly since its
establishment. This is additional evidence of the
excellent atmosphere of cooperation that exists
between the United Nations and PAM.
With this brief outline of our Assembly’s
activities I hoped to emphasize how the activities of
PAM and the United Nations complement each other.
This first year of work in our status as observer in the
General Assembly has been a very rich one. The
cooperation between our organizations has been
fruitful in many areas. PAM is committed to continuing
along that road so that our joint efforts can bring about
a prosperous, stable world to the even greater benefit
and the peoples who live on the shores of the
Mediterranean.
The Acting President: In accordance with
General Assembly resolution 57/32, of 19 November
2002, I now call on the Secretary General of the InterParliamentary Union.
Mr. Johnsson (Inter-Parliamentary Union): It is a
particular pleasure to take the floor at a time when the
General Assembly is led by a formidable Swiss
politician. As an organization of national parliaments
that has its headquarters in Geneva, the InterParliamentary Union (IPU) owes much to the
Parliament, Government and people of Switzerland.
I bring the greetings of the President of the IPU,
Speaker Theo-Ben Gurirab of Namibia. A fortnight
ago, the President of the General Assembly and
Mr. Gurirab jointly opened the annual Parliamentary
Hearing at the United Nations which, I believe,
injected a strong parliamentary contribution into the

27

A/65/PV.63

discussions on global economic governance and the
central role of the United Nations system that the
President coordinates here.
Let me begin by thanking Ambassador Emvula
and the delegation of Namibia for spearheading
consultations with Member States and for introducing a
substantive and visionary draft resolution (A/65/L.11).
I would also like to thank all the delegations that have
sponsored it. Allow me also to extend a special word of
thanks to the representatives of Egypt, India, Chile and
Italy, whose countries have led and held the presidency
of the IPU in recent years and who have all shown
strong and proactive support.
As the latest report of the Secretary-General
amply demonstrates (A/65/382), there has been much
cooperation between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the IPU over the past two years.
Without dwelling on the details of this broad agenda, I
would like to highlight a few points of particular
relevance.
At the end of last year, the General Assembly
mandated the IPU to contribute to preparations for the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) summit. The
issue was high on the agenda of the third World
Conference of Speakers of Parliaments, held earlier
this year. Parliaments around the world have offered us
information on how they are performing legislative
work on the MDGs. Our findings were put before our
parliamentary summit and were shared with United
Nations Member States.
The speakers who met in Geneva pledged to do
more than try to factor the development goals into
daily parliamentary schedules and have them enacted
into law. They also encouraged all parliaments
examining draft budgets and bills to consider their
effects on the fulfilment of the MDGs. The IPU will
continue mobilizing parliamentary action towards the
achievement of the MDGs by the target date of 2015.
This, I would suggest, will anchor the role of the
United Nations in global governance more firmly in the
bedrock of national politics.
I arrived in New York today from Cancún. The
IPU was present at the Climate Change Conference,
bringing together members of parliament, building
support among parliaments for a sound international
agreement and feeding their viewpoints into the
Conference. Indeed, for many years the IPU has
engaged parliaments on issues that are central to the

28

ambitions of the United Nations, such as financing for
development, gender, HIV/AIDS, climate change and
least-developed countries. The draft resolution before
the Assembly acknowledges the value of such
exchanges and proposes more systematic engagement
with the IPU.
Other paragraphs of the draft resolution build on
the joint work we have conducted within the
Peacebuilding
Commission,
the
Development
Cooperation Forum of the Economic and Social
Council and the Human Rights Council and its
Universal
Periodic
Review.
We
salute
the
establishment of UN Women and look forward to
strong cooperation in the years ahead. When it comes
to the political empowerment of women, and speaking
out against violence against women, we know we have
something unique to share. We are also looking closely
at how national parliaments can bring a much more
profound appreciation of the mutually supportive roles
of men and women into the fabric of politics. Behind
the jargon of gender mainstreaming, the IPU is
currently undertaking pioneering work aimed at
instituting real change in parliaments so as to make
them gender-sensitive. The prospects are exciting, and
the draft resolution rightly recognizes this.
The IPU promotes democracy and helps build
strong parliaments. Representative, transparent,
accessible, accountable and effective parliaments are
vital to peace and development. Both our institutions
have much to contribute in this field, and we welcome
the fact that the draft resolution specifically encourages
us to help facilitate closer cooperation between the
United Nations and parliaments at the national level,
including in terms of strengthening parliamentary
capacities, reinforcing the rule of law and helping to
align
national
legislation
with
international
commitments.
The IPU is pleased that the General Assembly is
proposing a stand-alone agenda item, for consideration
at its sixty-sixth session, on interaction between the
United Nations, national parliaments and the IPU. As
Ambassador Emvula said, this is more than a
procedural review of the growing cooperation between
two organizations. It seeks to open up the discussion
on how the United Nations, as a system, can relate
more coherently to parliaments and parliamentarians.
Legislatures form a constituency that can bring
significant weight to global governance, making it
more transparent, accountable and effective.

10-68782

A/65/PV.63

This is not about setting up new institutions;
quite the opposite. What we want is a candid exchange
on what works well and what does not. Earlier this year
in Geneva, parliamentary leaders started this debate,
based on an IPU survey on how parliaments today
organize their work with the United Nations and on an
IPU position paper on parliamentary engagement with
the United Nations. The time has now come, we
believe, to widen that discussion to include the
Member States of the General Assembly.
The Acting President: In accordance with
General Assembly resolution 54/5 of 8 October 1999, I
now call on the Secretary-General of the Black Sea
Economic Cooperation Organization.
Mr. Chrysanthopoulos (Black Sea Economic
Cooperation Organization): At its fifty-fourth session,
the General Assembly, by its resolution 54/5, granted
observer status to the Black Sea Economic Cooperation
Organization (BSEC). After that, resolution 55/211, on
cooperation between the United Nations and BSEC,
opened up new avenues for BSEC to develop working
relationships with other organizations within the
United Nations system and beyond.
Allow me to give the Assembly just a brief
summary of developments in relations between BSEC
and the United Nations during the period from 2009 to
this year. On 6 April 2009, on the margins of the
Alliance of Civilizations Summit in Istanbul, I met
with Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to discuss the
ongoing and future cooperation between our two
organizations.
For the first time, BSEC has contributed to
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change negotiations — specifically, those that took
place in Cancún. At their meeting in Thessaloniki on
26 November, the Council of Ministers of Foreign
Affairs of BSEC adopted a joint Declaration on
combating climate change in the wider Black Sea area.
The Declaration was presented in Cancún last week by
Greece, which currently chairs BSEC. The joint
Declaration, if implemented, will be a small step
towards saving the planet and its passengers: the
human race and all other living species.
We need to make sure not just that future
generations will survive on this planet, but that Earth
itself will survive to offer those generations a place to
live. The planet can survive without humankind, but
not vice versa. Imposing pollution taxes will not make

10-68782

pollution disappear. The planet does not function
according to our economic strategies. Earth does not
accept money to become clean. It is for us the
passengers to do it, without taking into account
economic considerations.
Green energy is interrelated with planetary
environmental protection. In a split second of
astronomical history, human greed has exhausted the
savings of billions of years of energy conservation
made by our planet. Consequently, we must
immediately start operating on our vast daily energy
income from the sun, wind, tide and water. And since
we cannot produce solar cells and high-tech turbines
without oil, it is imperative to emphasize research into
new technologies.
We maintain very close and enhanced cooperation
with the United Nations Economic Commission for
Europe (UNECE), particularly in the area of transport,
and continue to maintain our contacts at the highest
level. I took part in UNECE’s Inland Transport
Committee sessions, and in Geneva in June 2009 we
organized jointly with UNECE a seminar on
implementing annex 8 to the International Convention
on the Harmonization of Frontier Control of Goods.
On 18 and 19 November in Ioannina, Greece, we
organized a joint conference on improving road safety
in the BSEC region, held to help implement resolution
64/255, which proclaimed 2011-2020 the Decade of
Action for Road Safety. The conference adopted the
Ioannina declaration, which reaffirmed the importance
of addressing road safety in the BSEC region;
supported continuing and further strengthening joint
BSEC-UNECE actions addressing road safety; and
invited all BSEC member States to set their own
national road-traffic-casualty reduction targets and to
monitor progress. This must be done, since human life
is priceless and cannot be measured in monetary terms.
All efforts towards reducing deaths are worthwhile and
noble. BSEC will follow up the conference through its
working groups.
Our cooperation with the United Nations
Development Programme continues to develop. The
Black Sea Trade and Investment Promotion
Programme, launched in December 2006, has proved
successful through its contribution to increasing
intra-BSEC trade and investments.
BSEC has also taken part in the activities of the
Alliance of Civilizations since its acceptance as a

29

A/65/PV.63

Friend of the Alliance in November 2009. I
participated in the Alliance Group of Friends meeting
held in New York on 24 September. We also
participated in the fifth meeting of focal points, held in
Berlin last month. Hopefully, humankind can gain from
this initiative, if it gets proper follow-up. A point that
could be added to the Alliance’s agenda is that because
all religions believe in the immortality of the soul,
wars become futile, since no one is actually killed.
BSEC’s success depends on concrete, effectively
implemented common projects. We have two ongoing
transport infrastructure projects of major significance:
the Black Sea highway project and the development of
the motorways of the sea in the BSEC region. The
highway ring project envisages a four-lane ring-road
system, approximately 7,100 kilometres long,
connecting BSEC member States with each other, and
Europe’s road network with that of Asia. The project to
develop the motorways of the sea is about
strengthening maritime links between the ports of
BSEC member States. Both projects are ongoing.
In February, we launched an important pilot
project establishing a BSEC permit system for road

transit of goods, with the participation of seven BSEC
member States. The new system is expected to
facilitate the work of road transporters and foster trade
relations among the participating countries. The BSEC
permit is used for a single round trip only; trucks
holding a BSEC permit are allowed, during that single
round trip, to transit through the territories of all
participating member States without having to present
any other bilateral transit permit. The term of the pilot
project was extended for an additional year last month.
Before concluding, I would like to pay tribute to
Greece, the current Chair of BSEC, for drafting and
introducing the draft resolution (A/65/L.35) that is now
before the General Assembly. I also wish also to thank
the sponsors of the draft resolution, which I hope will
be adopted by consensus. Its adoption will give further
impetus to BSEC’s cooperation with the United
Nations, its specialized agencies and others in pursuing
the objectives and principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations and those of the BSEC Charter.
BSEC will continue to play its role, making determined
efforts to strengthen multilateral cooperation in order
to meet the global challenges of this millennium.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

30

10-68782
