S/2009/360

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 July 2009
Original: English

Letter dated 14 July 2009 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the attached letter of 7 July 2009 addressed to me
by the Permanent Representative of Nepal to the United Nations, Madhu Raman
Acharya (see annex), in which he requested, on behalf of his Government, the
extension of the current mandate of the United Nations Mission in Nepal by another
six months, from 23 July 2009.
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter and its annex to the attention
of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

09-40547 (E) 160709

*0940547*

S/2009/360

Annex
Letter dated 7 July 2009 from the Permanent Representative of
Nepal to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
Upon instruction from my Government, I have the honour to request an
extension of the duration of the current mandate and the continuation of the related
works of the United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) by another six months,
beginning 23 July 2009. The Government of Nepal has decided to request such
extension in view of the consistent evolution of the situation in the country and in
recognition of the important role being played by UNMIN in providing support and
facilitation within its mandate to Nepal’s nationally driven peace process since its
establishment under Security Council resolution 1740 (2007) and subsequent
renewals.
I have further honour to inform you that the peace process which began with
the formation of the democratic Government as a result of the success of the
People’s Movement in 2006 and the signing of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
between the Government of Nepal and the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) in
November 2006, has consistently been making progress. The Government and the
major political parties of Nepal remain fully committed to taking the peace process
to its logical conclusion and they have been keenly engaged in that direction. The
elected Constituent Assembly is duly working to write a new democratic
constitution for Nepal within the stipulated time frame.
Meanwhile, a technical committee formed by the Special Committee
constituted in accordance with article 146 of the Interim Constitution of Nepal has
already been active and working to assist the Special Committee in taking
appropriate measures on the future of the Unified Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist
combatants currently living in the cantonments. Within the next month, the Special
Committee will be reconstituted as appropriate and will be strengthened with the
necessary support structure at the Ministry of Peace and Reconstruction. Similarly,
appropriate bodies of the Government, in consultation with all political parties, will
shortly come up with an action plan with timelines for discharging the disqualified
combatants and also for beginning the process of integration and rehabilitation of
the combatants living in cantonments.
(Signed) Madhu Raman Acharya
Ambassador
Permanent Representative

2

09-40547
