Reeolatlon• adopted on the reporb of the Seeond Committee

the development process of the countries affected,
through the .enlisting of all the expertise available from
public and private institutions and organizations of
Member States, including ongoing and planned research, studies and activities within the United Nations
system;
( c) The preparation of an effective, comprehensive
and co-ordinated action programme against desertification, including the building-up of the indigenous and
autonomous science and technology capacity in the
areas concerned;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to keep
the above-mentioned task force fully informed of the
results of the work carried out in implementation of
Economic and Social Council resolution 1898 (LVII);
6. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme and the Governing
Council of the United Nations Environment Programme, within the framework of paragraph 4 above,
to provide financial and technical assistance for undertaking the collection of data and information, analyses and studies on all aspects of the problem of desertification and on that basis, as part of the preparatory
process for the Conference and in consultation with the
Governments concerned, to sponsor, in co-operation
with the regional commissions, technical meetings at
the regional and subregional levels as appropriate;
1. Invites all Member States to make available to
the Conference secretariat, through the Secretary-General, relevant information on combating desertification;
8. Invites all the organizations of the United Nations
system concerned, particularly those listed in the fifth
preambular paragraph above, to take all appropriate
measures to assist in the implementation of paragraph 4
of the present resolution;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirtieth session, through the
Economic and Social Council, a progress report on the
implementation of the present resolution.
2323rd plenary meeting
17 December 1974

3338 (XXIX). DevelopiQg island countries
The General Assembly,
Recalling resolution 65 (III) of 19 May 1972 of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development• and Trade and Development Board resolutions
101 (XIII) of 8 September 197370 and 108 (XIV) of
12 September 1974,71
Recalling further General Assembly resolution 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974, containing the Programme of
Action on the Establishment of a New International
Economic Order, in which the Assembly, inter alia,
called upon the .international community to assist the
developing countries while devoting particular atten19 See Procudings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annext!s (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.11.D.4),
annex I.A.
741 See Official Rt!cords of tht! General Assembly, Twenty.
eighth St!s.sion, Supplt!mt!nt No. 15 (A/9015/Rev.l ), part three,
annex I.
T1 Ibid., Twenty-ninth St!ssion, Supplt!ment No. 15 (A/9615/
Rev.I), annex I.

65

tion to the least developed, land-locked and island
developing countries and those developing countries
most seriously affecte1 by economic crises and natural
calamities leading to serious retardation of development processes,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council decision
28 (LVII) of 2 August 1974 on the special economic
problems and development needs of geographically disadvantaged developing island countries,
1. Invites the executive heads of the organizations
concerned within the United Nations system, particularly those of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization, the International Labour Organisation,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the International Civil Aviation Organization,
the World Meteorological Organization, the InterGovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization, international financial institutions, regional development
banks and the regional commissions, to intensify their
efforts with respect to developing island countries within
their fields of competence, bearing in mind the aforementioned resolutions;
2. Calls upon the Secretary-General to take effective measures towards meeting the needs of the developing island countries in accordance with the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order;
3. Urges all Governments, in particular those of
the developed countries, within the context of their
assistance programmes, to consider extending appropriate financial and technical assistance to developing
island countries, especially for the expansion of their
transportation and communication facilities and the
development of their marine resources;
4. Requests the executive heads of the United
Nations organizations concerned to report on the implementation of the present resolution to the Economic
and Social Council at its fifty-ninth session, through
the Committee on Review and Appraisal at its 1975
session, within the context of their reporting in relation
to the mid-term review and appraisal of the International Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade and in preparation for
the special session of the General Assembly devoted
to development and international economic co-operation, to be held in September 1975.
2323rd plenary meeting
17 December 1974

3339 (XXIX). Economic, financial and tet-hnlcal
assi1tance to the Government of GulneaBi1aau
The General Assembly,
Ct:Jnsidering that the accession to independence of
the African Territories under Portuguese domination
has been and will be made under particularly difficult
economic and social circumstances,
Convinced of the urgent necessity for the competent
organiza.:ions of the United Nations to elaborate concrete programmes and projects of an economic, technical and financial nature destined to assist the newly
independent States in their efforts for reconstruction
and economic, social and cultural devt!opricnt,
