S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9378th meeting

Friday, 14 July 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kariuki/Mr. Phipps. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Stastoli
Mr. Wazima Szatmari
Mr. Yao Jialiang
Mr. Gross Pozo
Ms. Freudenreich
Mrs. Koumba Pambo
Ms. Barnor
Mr. Ishikane
Ms. Abela
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Kuzmenkov
Mrs. Chanda
Ms. Alshamsi
Ms. Trinh

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Conflict-related sexual violence: promoting implementation of Security Council
resolutions on conflict-related sexual violence
Report of the Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2023/413)
Letter dated 26 June 2023 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General (S/2023/476)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-20799 (E)
*2320799*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

The meeting resumed at 3 p.m.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Education, and Sport of the
Principality of Liechtenstein.
Ms. Hasler (Liechtenstein): It is my honour to
address the Security Council today on a topic that is
particularly dear to me. The women and peace and
security agenda, including the protection and support
of victims and survivors of conflict-related sexual
violence, is a priority of Liechtenstein’s foreign policy,
and I am personally committed to the cause.
As a result of escalating violence, militarization
and weakened rule of law protections, civilians bear
the brunt of armed conflicts across the globe. Sexual
violence is used as a weapon of war to attack civilian
populations and to break societies, communities and
families. Such violence is documented in virtually
every conflict worldwide, including in Myanmar,
Ukraine and Yemen. All those situations require
the urgent attention of the respective accountability
mechanisms. In the case of Ukraine, we will be looking
for in particular expeditious investigations by the
International Criminal Court (ICC).

14/07/2023

conduct is now supported by 129 States, including the
majority of the Council’s membership.
Although widespread and often systematic, sexual
violence against men and boys remains underreported
owing to stigma, cultural taboo and a lack of
criminalization. As a result, male survivors of sexual
violence are often unable to access legal remedies,
as well as medical and mental health services.
The pioneering work by the Liechtenstein-based
international non-governmental organization All
Survivors Project has helped to advance awareness
through tireless advocacy. Its work has informed
resolution 2467 (2019), which has paved the way for
strengthened accountability in that regard. The Council
should consistently call on States to live up to their
obligation to investigate and prosecute conflict-related
sexual violence, in line with the primacy of national
systems. The international justice system must be
engaged where national systems fail owing to inability
or unwillingness.

I also want to highlight our appreciation for
the briefing this morning by Naw Hser Hser, which
reflects her tireless advocacy on behalf of the women of
Myanmar. We were pleased to see the Security Council
adopt resolution 2669 (2022) last December. Given the
worsening situation on the ground, we believe that it is
now time for the Council to seriously consider a followup text that will bring accountability for the crimes
committed in Myanmar, including conflict-related
sexual violence.

International criminal justice mechanisms have
significantly advanced our efforts to fight impunity.
The Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court — the twenty-fifth anniversary of which we
celebrate on Monday — has played a vital role in
ending impunity for sexual violence crimes. It is
the first international criminal law instrument that
explicitly recognizes forms of sexual violence, such as
rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution and enforced
sterilization, as distinct war crimes and crimes against
humanity. It urges States parties to appoint judges
with special legal expertise on gender-based violence
and requests the Court to provide special protection to
victims, including with regard to age and gender.

All acts of sexual violence are not only morally
repugnant but also categorically prohibited under
international humanitarian and human rights law.
They constitute war crimes and may amount to
crimes against humanity and genocide. Concrete,
time-bound preventive measures, as explicitly
outlined in resolutions 2106 (2013) and 2467 (2019),
are necessary to bring an end to these atrocities. We
reiterate our call on the Council to include conflictrelated sexual violence as a designation criterion in
targeted sanctions regimes. Such measures are in line
with and complementary to the code of conduct of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency Group
regarding Security Council action against genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes. The code of

In practice, the ICC has done pioneering work
to hold perpetrators to account by establishing a
comprehensive and victim-centred framework. It has
firmly established conflict-related sexual and genderbased violence as crimes against humanity and war
crimes. We commend the office of the Prosecutor for
including charges related to sexual and gender-based
crimes in many of their cases and for prioritizing
those crimes as a matter of policy. The case of Bosco
Ntaganda resulted in a milestone verdict as sexual
violence crimes committed against males were held
to the same standards as those committed against
females. The ICC’s judgment against Dominic Ongwen
also succeeded in painting a comprehensive picture of
sexual and gender-based crimes suffered by victims

2/41

23-20799

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

and constitutes an important precedent for future cases.
Dedicated gender expertise in investigative teams,
including our partners from Justice Rapid Response, is
crucial for the ICC and other regional and international
accountability mechanisms in that regard.
No person should ever have to go through the
terrifying and traumatizing experience of conflictrelated sexual violence. We must therefore redouble
our efforts to prevent its occurrence. At the root of it,
that means combating structural gender inequality and
promoting the participation and leadership of women
in public life. By ensuring women’s rights to full, equal
and meaningful participation, we contribute to the
prevention of conflict-related sexual violence and to the
health of our societies, as a whole.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Ms. Skoczek (Poland): Poland thanks the United
Kingdom for convening this important debate and
for its efforts to advance the implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions. We also thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
on the issue (S/2023/413) and lend our support to the
mandate and activities of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Pramila Patten.
Poland aligns itself with the statements made on
behalf of the European Union and the Group of Friends
of Women, Peace and Security.

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

the rehabilitation of survivors, secure post-conflict
reparations, promote accountability and establish
vetting mechanisms to exclude perpetrators from
security forces. We support peacekeeping and
monitoring missions to provide adequate protection for
all victims. In that vein, we endorse the deployment
of women’s protection advisers and the use of earlywarning indicators to address conflict-related
sexual violence.
As a neighbour of Ukraine, currently hosting the
largest community of Ukrainian refugees, Poland
condemns the deliberate use of sexual violence by
Russian soldiers as a tactic of war and intimidation. We
welcome the reference to those appalling practices in
the report. The massive displacement caused by Russian
aggression has heightened the risks of all forms of sexual
violence. In response, Poland has swiftly implemented
new measures to support Ukrainian citizens seeking
refuge in our country, which Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Patten kindly referred to in
her briefing. Since the consequences of conflict-related
sexual violence extend beyond the physical dimension
and have lasting impacts on survivors’ lives, effective
prevention and multisectoral response mechanisms
are crucial in post-conflict settings. Mindful of that,
Poland’s Ministry of Health has initiated an intensive
therapy pilot programme aimed at providing trauma
treatment for women survivors in conflict and postconflict environments.

The use of sexual violence as a weapon or tactic
of war is widespread. Conflict-related sexual violence
remains a significant global concern, primarily
affecting women and girls, but we should not forget
to account for the male victims, as well. Poland stands
in solidarity with all victims and survivors and calls
for greater support that encompasses the recognition
of their suffering, the elimination of stigma and the
provision of medical and psychosocial assistance.
Impunity and the lack of accountability have allowed
conflict-related sexual violence to persist. By holding
perpetrators accountable, we can send a powerful
message to victims and survivors that their voices have
been heard, and to offenders that the days of empty
warnings are over.

Accountability is essential to ensure compliance
with international obligations. Failure to take decisive
action will only encourage further abuse. Consequently,
Poland actively assists the International Criminal Court
in collecting evidence of war crimes committed by
Russia in Ukraine. To that end, we have established a
joint investigation team with Lithuania and Ukraine. In
addition, the Raphael Lemkin Center for Documenting
Russian Crimes in Ukraine has been established in
Warsaw. Its purpose is to gather and preserve evidence
of war crimes and crimes against humanity and to
record witness testimonies. There are numerous
unreported cases for each one that comes to light. We
have the moral obligation to support the courageous
survivors who have come forward, as well as those who
have been silenced by fear.

Poland emphasizes the significance of women’s
participation in processes aimed at addressing sexual
violence, including peace talks. Female negotiators
can ensure a survivor-centred approach, facilitate

The President: I should like to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than three minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Flashing lights on the collars of the

23-207993/41

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

microphones will prompt speakers to bring their
remarks to a close after three minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Gaouaoui (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the United Kingdom for
holding this debate on a very critical topic that continues
to have serious implications, owing to the spread of
armed conflicts and the related brutal and inhumane
atrocities involving women and girls in particular.
My country, Algeria, reiterates its condemnation
in the strongest terms all forms of sexual violence
against women and girls in all their forms and
manifestations and in all circumstances. Such practices
are unequivocally rejected and have no place in our
present or future world. We believe in the importance
of combating all forms of violence, particularly those
that target women and girls. Consequently, Algeria
ratified all international conventions on combating
violence against women in response to their aspirations
and to establish a culture and values that counter all
forms of women’s marginalization and to guarantee
their participation in sustainable development.
Since 2007, Algeria has been a pioneer in
developing its national strategy to combat violence
against women and girls, which includes three areas of
intervention: tailoring services; mobilizing society and
achieving social and national solidarity; and building
alliances. In line with that strategy, we conduct regular
training sessions for the judiciary, the gendarmerie
and the police to ensure its effective implementation.
Furthermore, we have updated laws to protect women
from all forms of violence, while adopting a number
of protection mechanisms that have been implemented
in coordination with various sectors at the local level,
in civil society and in the media. Moreover, we have
promoted the legislation to curb violence against
women, which reflects the political will at the highest
levels in the country, including by adding a provision in
the Constitution that condemns violence against women
and makes it incumbent upon the State to protect women
everywhere and under all circumstances.
During this debate, we are discussing how to
implement the existing commitments and frameworks,
particularly those adopted by the Security Council,
as set forward in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/413), along with its valuable recommendations.
4/41

14/07/2023

Algeria, as a State, has worked to establish a
robust and integrated arsenal of laws and policies to
combat violence against women and girls. We will
work both within and outside the Council to combat
that phenomenon, especially during times of conflict,
to bring about a world free from violence. We also
highly value the role of women in resolving conflicts
and overcoming their repercussions. The resilience
and effective participation of Algerian women played
an important role in fighting terrorism in the 1990s.
Thanks to their participation, Algeria was able to
overcome that destructive scourge.
Based on our national experience in combating
violence against women, I would like to underscore the
following points.
First, we need to update legal frameworks and
national laws so that they correspond to current
developments in the world involving the spread of
conflicts and their changing nature. They must be
in line with the international community’s adopted
instruments, especially the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Secondly, we need to implement the relevant
Security Council resolutions, of which there are many,
beginning with resolution 1820 (2008) and through
resolution 2467 (2019). As the consecutive reports of
the Secretary-General demonstrate, sexual violence
in times of armed conflict continues to persist.
We therefore must take measures to guarantee the
implementation of those resolutions by including their
provisions in the mandates of peacekeeping operations
and consistently punishing perpetrators. Security forces
must protect women from all forms of sexual violence
during conflicts.
Thirdly, we need to adopt a comprehensive
approach so that, in particular, protecting women from
sexual violence in times of conflict is not limited to a
specific entity. We need concerted efforts by all actors,
including State institutions, international organizations,
the United Nations and civil society to put in place a
robust legislative, security and legal system that curbs
the phenomenon and addresses it effectively.
Fourthly, victims of sexual violence must be
guaranteed timely access to justice through effective
grievance mechanisms, measures to provide
compensation for damages and comprehensive
reparations processes.
23-20799

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

Fifthly, impunity must be prevented, since,
unfortunately, as the Secretary-General emphasized in
his report, “in most contexts, impunity remained the
norm” (S/2023/413, p. 4). Therefore, in order to ensure
that all those who have perpetrated acts of sexual
violence against women are punished, it is necessary
to enshrine the principle of the rule of law and build
strong national institutions, at various levels, to reduce
the risk of women and girls being subjected to conflictrelated sexual violence.
Sixthly, the root causes of conflict-related sexual
violence must be addressed by taking the measures
necessary to tackle the structural causes that make
women vulnerable and more subject to sexual violence
during conflicts, especially poverty, the collapse of
State institutions and lack of development. To that end,
conscious policies should be adopted that take into
account the needs of women and promote women’s
meaningful participation in political, development and
security institutions.
Putting an end to sexual violence in times of
conflict is a top priority and a moral and political
imperative incumbent upon us all. It is unacceptable
that the dignity of women and girls is undermined while
we are not able to address that scourge and punish the
perpetrators. The best defence against conflict-related
sexual violence is to build a society in which social
justice and equal opportunities reign and in which all
women and girls enjoy their rights and equal protection
under the law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): I thank the United
Kingdom presidency for organizing this debate and the
briefers for sharing valuable insights.
Croatia aligns itself with the statements made on
behalf of the European Union, the Group of Friends of
Women, Peace and Security and the Group of Friends
of the Responsibility to Protect.
I would also like to add some remarks in my
national capacity.
As we mark the fifteenth anniversary of the Security
Council resolution which condemned the use of sexual
violence as a weapon of war, the Secretary-General’s
report for 2022 (S/2023/413) shows that it still remains
one of the most widespread human rights violations in
conflict-affected countries. We must do everything we

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

can to improve prevention, protect survivors and punish
perpetrators. In that regard, let me thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict for her tireless efforts.
Sexual violence in conflict is closely related to
discrimination against women and sexual violence in
peacetime. In many countries, impunity prevails owing
to a reluctance to prosecute crimes of sexual violence.
This is added to the number of crimes that have
already gone unreported, as survivors fear retaliation
or social stigma. We strongly encourage all States to
align their laws with international humanitarian and
human rights law, especially the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and the jurisprudence of the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women, and to
monitor their compliance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Tackling structural gender inequality should be
prioritized in times of peace in order to minimize its
effects during periods of instability. We also need to
focus on a survivor-centred approach. As an example of
such a practice, Croatian survivors of sexual violence
suffered in the Homeland War are entitled to financial
compensation and psychological support even if the
perpetrators were never identified or brought to justice.
Finally, we fully support the use by the Security
Council of sanctions against all parties, including
mercenaries and private military companies, to prevent
the recurrence of conflict-related sexual violence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank the United Kingdom for convening
this annual open debate on conflict-related sexual
violence and express our appreciation for the statements
made thus far.
While Mexico recognizes the progress made since
the adoption of Security Council resolution 1820 (2008)
and subsequent resolutions, as well as the codification
of sexual crimes as atrocities in the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court, unfortunately, those
violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law persist and have even
worsened in situations such as those in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Haiti and South

23-207995/41

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

Sudan, as highlighted in the most recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2023/413).
In that regard, Mexico wishes to underscore three
calls to action.
First, it is crucial to ensure access to justice and
health-care services, including sexual and reproductive
health care and mental health care for victims and
survivors. In conflict contexts, doing so entails
providing holistic support to facilitate the reintegration
of survivors and ensure that there is no impunity. It
is important to recognize the importance of genderresponsive, timely and sufficient mental health and
psychosocial support, which is necessary not only for
survivors, but also for United Nations peacekeeping
personnel. We call on the Council to make further
progress on the provisions contained in resolution
2668 (2022).
Secondly, we must support the deployment of
women’s protection advisers in peace operations and
transition processes. Women’s protection advisers help
to prevent atrocities and provide a timely response.
It is also important to address discrimination against
women, lack of representation and lack of services
for survivors, which exacerbates the disproportionate
impact of sexual violence on women and girls.
Thirdly, a year ago the presidencies of Ireland,
Kenya and Mexico committed to making the women
and peace and security agenda a priority in the Council.
Since then, eight Council members who have served as
President, including the United Kingdom, have signed
a statement of shared commitments on that agenda.
We urge all Security Council members to continue to
commit to the women and peace and security agenda.
In addition, further progress is needed in the collection
and analysis of gender-disaggregated data to improve
our understanding of specific needs and the multiple
and intersectional forms of discrimination.

14/07/2023

Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
especially Nadine and Ms. Naw Hser Hser for their
actions to save future generations from this scourge.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect, and I would like to highlight
a few points in our national capacity.
Sexual violence in conflict is a devastating
phenomenon with harmful consequences for the victims.
Women and girls are those who are exposed to greater
risks as a result of that scourge, which is used as a tactic
of war, torture and terrorism in the midst of political and
security crises that are becoming increasingly severe
and common, causing displacement, the separation of
families and the disappearance of loved ones.
That situation not only contravenes the rules of
international humanitarian law but also undermines
human dignity, significantly exacerbates and prolongs
conflict situations, tears apart the social fabric and
hinders reconstruction efforts.
My delegation has repeatedly condemned violence
against women and children in conflict situations,
including sexual violence, and called on all parties
to armed conflict to cease such acts with immediate
effect. Regrettably, such actions continue to occur, and
some situations have become systemic and widespread,
reaching an alarming degree of brutality.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.

According to the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2023/413), regrettably, the level of compliance by
the parties to conflict with applicable international
norms remains disappointing, despite efforts by the
Council to establish sound regulatory frameworks.
That is evidenced by the devastating illegal, unjustified
and unprovoked aggression by the Russian Federation
against Ukraine, which continues to result in increased
loss of life, the denial of humanitarian access and
a heightened risk of sexual violence and human
trafficking because of mass internal displacement.
The data from the investigations conducted by the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
Ukraine is alarming, and it is inconceivable that girls
under the age of four are victims of those serious crimes.

Ms. Rodríguez Mancia (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala thanks the United Kingdom for
convening this important open debate, and thanks
Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the

We commend the work conducted by the Office
of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict in setting up
the inter-agency working group to address the issues

In conclusion, Mexico reiterates the importance
of addressing conflict-related sexual violence in a
preventive manner and promoting and ensuring the
effective participation of women in decision-making.

6/41

23-20799

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

of human trafficking, the provision of assistance to
survivors, access to justice and reparations.
We urge the Council to implement sanctions and
promote a commitment to addressing sexual violence in
armed conflict. We believe that sanctions can be used
as a tool to prevent and stop sexual violence in armed
conflict and address impunity for perpetrators.
In conclusion, we believe that the New Agenda for
Peace must incorporate strong measures that address the
root causes of the use of sexual violence in conflict, the
prevention of such violence and attendant new threats
identified by the Special Representative, including the
digital element. It is everyone’s responsibility to protect
populations from that scourge.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Costa Rica.
Ms. Chan Valverde (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica deplores the fact that impunity for
sexual violence in armed conflict continues to be the
norm and that justice continues to elude victims and
survivors, from Myanmar to Ukraine, and from Yemen
to Haiti. In that regard, allow me to make three points.
First, the proliferation and illicit flow of small
arms and light weapons and their ammunition
contribute to and perpetuate sexual violence in conflict
and post-conflict settings, thereby exacerbating
the vulnerability of individuals. Consequently,
disarmament and arms control are a key approach to
preventing and addressing such atrocities, as indeed
acknowledged in the United Nations Framework for
the Prevention of Conflict-Related Sexual Violence.
However, more must be done to define the practical
links between disarmament and arms control and the
women and peace and security agenda, in particular at
the multilateral level. Costa Rica calls on the Council
to promote and include disarmament and arms control
considerations in its discussions and decisions on
women and peace and security to further advance the
agenda’s implementation. At the practical level, Costa
Rica calls for greater harmonization between national
strategies for implementing the women and peace and
security agenda and those for regulating small arms
and light weapons, by integrating small arms and light
weapons control practices in women and peace and
security national action plans and women and peace and
security considerations in small arms and light weapons
national action plans. That could constitute a launching
pad for furthering those efforts at the global scale.

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

Secondly, conflict-related sexual violence is not
just a women’s issue, but a security issue with much
wider peace and security implications. Not only can
rape serve as a precursor to conflict, a diagnosis of
pre-conflict conditions and a symptom of impunity,
but it is also evidence of a weak and deficient security
sector. A robust security sector will indubitably support
women’s participation and improve the protection
mechanisms needed to eliminate sexual violence in and
out of conflict.
Thirdly, all resolutions under the women and peace
and security umbrella are focused more on protecting
women’s bodies than on unleashing women’s full
potential. We must do more to redefine that agenda,
such as by drafting a new stand-alone draft resolution
that reframes education bans as a new form of structural
violence against women and girls.
It is critical that survivors remain at the heart of
our efforts. We must recognize that survivors have
differing needs and may face multiple and intersecting
forms of discrimination. We must ensure that their
rights are protected, they are treated with dignity, they
are able to access to justice and that they can safely,
fully and meaningfully participate in decision-making
at all levels.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Colombia.
Mrs. Zalabata Torres (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Armed
Conflict, Pramila Patten, for her briefing and, in
particular, for her support for Colombia’s efforts to
prevent and eliminate sexual violence in our country.
In Colombia, as in other parts of the world, that
form of violence disproportionately affects women and
girls, who account for 92.6 per cent of all victims and are
overwhelmingly of African descent. LGBTIQ+ people
and people with diverse gender identities and sexual
orientations have also been subjected to sexual violence
of various kinds that seek to impose heteronormativity.
With a view to advancing the elimination and
prevention of sexual violence, the Government of
President Gustavo Petro Urrego is taking several actions.
First, Colombia is in the process of developing its
first feminist foreign policy. It is a pacifist, participatory
and intersectional policy that has at its core the fight
against gender-based violence, including, in particular,

23-207997/41

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

14/07/2023

sexual violence that occurs within and outside the
context of armed conflict.

Let me also thank the civil society briefers for sharing
their perspectives.

Secondly, after 23 years of indecision, Colombia is
working on its first national action plan on resolution
1325 (2000) — a project that has been tirelessly
supported by UN-Women and various civil society
organizations. That process has six regional forums,
of which four have already taken place, and a large
national forum with women from all over the country. It
also has territorial and sectoral forums with indigenous
women, lesbian, bisexual and transgender women,
women signatories of the peace process, victims and
women of the diaspora.

Over the past 15 years, the Security Council
has established a robust framework of applicable
international norms addressing conflict-related sexual
violence based on the condemnation of sexual violence
as a tool of war and the recognition that rape and other
forms of sexual violence can constitute war crimes,
crimes against humanity or a constitutive act with
respect to genocide. However, both the annual report
and today’s briefers paint a dismal picture with regard
to compliance with those standards. Rape, sexual
slavery, forced prostitution, forced pregnancy, forced
abortion, enforced sterilization, forced marriage and
other abhorrent forms of sexual violence continue to
be used in situations linked to conflict throughout the
world, including as a systematic tactic of war.

Thirdly, the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace establishes
clear and measurable commitments that seek not only
to integrate the gender perspective in peacebuilding,
but also to comprehensively address violence against
women in all its forms. In addition to developing specific
strategies aimed at emotional recovery for victims of
sexual violence and psychosocial rehabilitation, in
particular for victims of sexual violence, the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace made the critical decision to open
a macro-case to specifically address sexual and genderbased violence during armed conflict.
Fourthly, we are committed to the purposes and
activities of the international Alliance on Preventing
Sexual Violence in Conflict, within the framework
of which we have implemented security policies with
a preventive approach and training spaces for public
servants and civil society.
I conclude by emphasizing that the full guarantee
of human security that underpins Colombia’s “total
peace” policy is based on the fundamental premise
that victims and survivors must be at the centre of all
our efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Almoslechner (Austria): Austria aligns itself
with the statements made on behalf of the European
Union and the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security.
We commend the United Kingdom for its efforts
to organize the annual open debate on conflict-related
sexual violence and thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Pramila Patten for presenting the
annual report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/413).
8/41

While women and girls are the primary targets, it
is important to recognize that men, boys and persons
with diverse gender identities are also affected. Sexual
and gender-based violence is unacceptable in any
circumstance and is particularly despicable when used
in a widespread, targeted manner, which dramatically
affects not only the immediate victims, but also their
entire families and communities, as well as generations
to come.
Austria is appalled by the report’s findings of
persisting and even worsening patterns of sexual
violence in many different contexts, including in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Haiti and
South Sudan. We deplore the use of sexual and genderbased violence against civilians and prisoners of war
as a result of Russia’s unprovoked and unjustified war
on Ukraine, which has been documented extensively
by the United Nations human rights monitoring
mission in Ukraine and the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine, based in Vienna.
Austria also remains deeply concerned about the
situation in Afghanistan, where the Taliban de facto
authorities have effectively erased women and girls
from public life.
We strongly condemn all forms of conflict-related
sexual violence and join the Secretary-General’s call on
all parties to conflict to immediately cease such crimes,
comply with the relevant Security Council resolutions
and allow unhindered access to United Nations teams.
In particular, we call upon the Russian Federation,
all listed parties and other perpetrators to make and
23-20799

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

implement specific time-bound commitments to
combat sexual violence in line with their international
obligations and the recommendations contained in
the report.

on a New Agenda for Peace, Austria calls upon all
Security Council members to collectively recommit
to reinvigorating the women and peace and security
agenda and instil new life into its implementation.

The most effective way to prevent conflict-related
sexual violence is through strong compliance with the
rule of law, which is also an indispensable precondition
for sustainable peace and security. Therefore, we
commend the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict for continuing to
assist national authorities in over a dozen countries
in strengthening rule of law institutions to enhance
accountability for conflict-related sexual violence.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece.

Each State is responsible for ensuring accountability
and access to justice for victims of conflict-related
sexual violence. It is crucial to ensure that perpetrators
are swiftly tried and held accountable. In that regard, we
reiterate our full support to the International Criminal
Court and to United Nations-mandated commissions
of inquiry. Moreover, we wish to remind Member
States of their obligation, in accordance with resolution
2467 (2019), to apply a survivor-centred approach and
provide access to medical and psychosocial care.

While fully aligning myself with the statements
made by the representative of the European Union and
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security, allow me to make some additional remarks in
my national capacity.

Austria applauds Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Pramila Patten for all her efforts to
fulfil her mandate by working with Member States and
armed groups towards compliance with international
law, international humanitarian law, human rights
law and international norms. We also commend UNWomen, which we strongly support, including in
Ukraine and Afghanistan, and the United Nations
Population Fund. We have also renewed our support to
the United Nations Trust Fund to End Violence against
Women this year. The immeasurable contributions of
civil society organizations, in particular of women’s
and women-led organizations, in preventing and
responding to conflict-related sexual violence also
deserve to be emphasized.
We stand in solidarity with all victims of conflictrelated sexual violence and their families. Accordingly,
we urge the members of the Security Council to take
bolder actions, including the use of sanctions, in
order to address conflict-related sexual violence and,
ultimately, to stop blatant breaches of international law,
resolve conflicts and find solutions towards achieving
sustainable peace and security. As a staunch supporter
of resolution 1325 (2000), which was adopted by the
Council 23 years ago, and in view of the discussions

Mr. Sekeris (Greece): Greece would like to
warmly thank the United Kingdom for organizing
today’s timely event and the speakers for their thorough
interventions. We welcome in particular the presence of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten.

Despite systematic efforts by the United Nations
system to strengthen the normative framework on
conflict-related sexual violence, the latest report of
the Secretary-General (S/2023/413) clearly illustrates
a gap between standards and commitments and the
devastating reality on the ground. In many conflict
environments, the parties to conflict, whether State
or non-State actors, continue to deploy the strategic
use of conflict-related sexual violence against
civilians — mostly women and girls, but also men
and boys, as well as against members of the LGBTQI+
communities.
The alarming frequency of conflict-related sexual
violence and the prevailing impunity for those crimes,
which is the norm rather than the exception, indicate
rather low levels of compliance by States with the
United Nations normative framework. Against that
backdrop, there is undeniably an urgent need for holistic
and coherent international policy action.
In that vein, the international response to conflictrelated sexual violence should be inclusive and survivorcentred, addressing the specific needs of different
groups of survivors, focusing on their protection,
relief and recovery and therefore ensuring their full
and meaningful participation in peace and transitional
justice processes. At the same time, accountability
for perpetrators should be adequately addressed by
facilitating their prosecution through appropriate
judicial mechanisms and by ensuring unhindered

23-207999/41

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

judicial access and gender-responsive reparations
for victims.
Conflict-related sexual violence is a horrific crime
with devastating consequences for civilians, their
families and their communities at large, a threat to
security and an impediment to the restoration of peace.
In that regard, Greece supports a human-centred and
gender-responsive approach to peace and security
that focuses primarily on the protection of civilians in
conflict settings, especially women and children — girls
and boys. That is also reflected in the priorities of the
Greek candidacy for an elected seat on the Security
Council for 2025–2026, which include the promotion of
the interlinked agendas on the protection of civilians;
women and peace and security; and children and
armed conflict.
In that vein, I would like to reiterate my country’s
determination to join hands with all like-minded
stakeholders in order to accelerate the prevention of and
response to any form of conflict-related sexual violence
as the only way to build peaceful, resilient, inclusive
and gender-equal societies.
The President: We still have 40 names remaining
on the list of speakers, so I would encourage speakers
to limit their statements to three minutes, as our Greek
colleague just did.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Malaysia.
Mrs. Zin Zawawi (Malaysia): At the outset, my
delegation would like to express our appreciation to the
United Kingdom for convening this important debate.
Malaysia would also like to thank the briefers for their
updates and assessments.
I will try to be brief.
Malaysia condemns the abhorrent use of sexual
violence as a tactic of war, torture and terrorism. We
are gravely concerned with the reported heightened
risk of sexual violence against civilians, particularly
women and children in conflict. The recent report of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence
(S/2023/413) presents disturbing findings on patterns of
sexual violence that have persisted and further deepened
in conflict situations. Against that background, we are
dismayed by the prevalent impunity, with perpetrators
quite regularly avoiding formal accountability.
10/41

14/07/2023

Efforts to address sexual violence in conflict
situations should employ an integrated and holistic
approach by all important stakeholders, including States,
the entire United Nations system and civil society. It
is critical for countries in conflict and post-conflict
situations to take adequate and necessary measures to
prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual violence.
In that regard, my delegation would like to highlight the
following points.
First, it is incumbent on States to introduce
or strengthen legislation and judicial processes to
document, investigate and prosecute sexual violence
in conflict and post-conflict situations. Importantly,
the duty of States to ensure accountability must be
embedded in both domestic and international law. All
States have an obligation to prohibit conflict-related
sexual violence and prosecute the perpetrators. We also
call for provisions concerning conflict-related sexual
violence to be integrated into the negotiations and
agreements of peace processes.
Secondly, we see merit in broadening networking
and coordination between the Security Council and
the Human Rights Council with the aim of ensuring
accountability for violations, including sexual assault
and violence against women and children.
Thirdly, the meaningful participation of women
in prevention efforts, peacekeeping and peacebuilding
should be prioritized. When women have a role as
agents of change in the security framework, it can
enhance citizens’ trust in institutions and contribute
to improving intelligence-gathering, the reporting
of gender-based violence and treatment for victims,
witnesses and suspects. At the same time, we need to
end harassment and reprisals targeting women in peace
and security processes.
Malaysia remains committed to the women and
peace and security agenda and to collective efforts
to combat conflict-related sexual violence, including
through United Nations peacekeeping operations. The
Malaysian Peacekeeping Centre has been teaching
courses on gender and on the role of women in
peacekeeping missions since 2014. The elimination of
conflict-related sexual violence is our collective moral
duty. Let me conclude by stressing how important it is
for the Council to work with the relevant stakeholders
and partners in our efforts to strengthen the protection
of civilians, including women and children, in
conflict situations.
23-20799

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Turay (Sierra Leone): The delegation of Sierra
Leone is pleased to join this global discourse on the
theme of promoting the implementation of Security
Council resolutions on conflict-related sexual violence.
I would also like to congratulate your country on
assuming the presidency of the Council for the month
of July, Mr. President, and I thank you for convening
this timely debate.
Having experienced one of the bloodiest and
fiercest civil wars in recent history, during which sexual
violence, including rape, sexual slavery and forced
marriage, was used as a tactic of war by the warring
factions, Sierra Leone is fully aware of the horrifying
impact of such crimes on the lives and livelihoods of
its women and girls and will spare no effort to combat
that scourge.
While there is no gainsaying the fact that many
commendable actions have been taken by both the
General Assembly and the Council in the form of
treaties, conventions and resolutions, including
resolution 1820 (2008), women and children around the
world remain vulnerable to sexual violence, whether in
times of war or peace. There is still much to be done at
the national, subregional, regional and global levels if
we are to fully implement the landmark resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1820 (2008) and other relevant human rights
instruments in our grand efforts to turn the tide against
sexual violence in all its forms and manifestations.
Building on our domestic efforts, in his address to
the General Assembly in September 2021 (see A/76/
PV.6), President Bio called for global solidarity on
access to justice, remedies and assistance for survivors
of sexual violence in the form of a stand-alone
resolution, which the Assembly adopted by consensus as
resolution 76/304 on 2 September 2022. That resolution
not only highlights the gravity of sexual violence, but
specifically calls out such crimes as abhorrent and
destructive of international peace and security and
seeks to lift up survivors, who deserve dignity and
justice. I encourage all Member States to implement the
resolution’s directives, as most of its elements speak to
the issues of accountability and prevention. In our view,
peace is not merely the absence of visible conflict, and
in order to have true peace, survivors must have access
to justice.

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

Let me conclude by appealing to everyone here
today to reflect deeply on the fact that notwithstanding
the many stringent measures that have been adopted both
individually and collectively in this area, the despicable
crime of conflict-related violence, especially sexual
violence, has continued unabated around the world,
and often with total impunity. The time to accelerate
efforts is now, and concerted and concrete steps need to
be taken urgently to address the incidence of crimes of
sexual violence and to restore the dignity of survivors,
including by promoting forward-looking strategies
and strengthening accountability and prevention by
enforcing compliance with the relevant normative
positions that we are all agreed on.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Jurečko (Slovenia): We thank the United
Kingdom for organizing today’s debate. Slovenia
aligns itself with the statements made on behalf of the
European Union and the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security, respectively, as well as the statement
to be delivered on behalf of the Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s annual report
(S/2023/413) and its presentation. Slovenia condemns in
absolute terms the use of sexual violence as a tactic of war
or as an instrument of repression and intimidation, and
calls for the full implementation of the commitments to
end it. With a focus on the prevention of sexual violence
in situations directly or indirectly linked to a conflict,
we would like to underline the following three points.
First, impunity encourages the continued
commission of such crimes, as evidenced by the fact
that a sizeable majority of the same perpetrators
appear in these reports year after year. Supporting and
investing in strong justice systems and rule-of-law
institutions are essential to prosecuting and punishing
the perpetrators and those responsible. To that end,
Slovenia would also support listing sexual violence as
a stand-alone criterion for targeted sanctions by the
relevant Sanctions Committees.
Secondly, we need to resolutely address barriers
to reporting, monitoring and documenting this
crime. In that regard, we believe it is vital to ensure
humanitarian access; the accelerated deployment of
women’s protection advisers in all relevant situations
of concern, in line with resolution 2467 (2019); the
provision of comprehensive and tailored support to

23-2079911/41

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

survivors of sexual violence and children born of such
violence and close work with the affected communities
to address stigma, socioeconomic isolation and the fear
of retaliation.
Thirdly, we need to encourage and facilitate the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women
in humanitarian, recovery, political, peace, security
and development processes. That is also essential to
ensuring the availability and safeguarding of genderbased violence services.
In conclusion, Slovenia underlines its enduring
support for the work and mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. We will continue to work with
partners such as UN-Women, the International
Committee of the Red Cross, the United Nations
Population Fund and the Women’s Peace and
Humanitarian Fund to address the needs of survivors
of sexual violence in conflict and support the work of
human rights defenders and activists on this matter.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Ms. Hayovyshyn (Ukraine): I thank the United
Kingdom presidency of the Council for organizing
this important open debate and Special Representative
Pramila Patten for her insightful briefing. I am
especially grateful to the briefers, Ms. Naw Hser Hser
and Nadine, for sharing their testimonies and practical
recommendations with us today.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
made on behalf of the European Union and the Group
of Friends of Women, Peace and Security, respectively,
and I would also like to make a few points in my
national capacity.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/413) reveals
a distressing reality. Both State and non-State armed
groups extensively employ conflict-related sexual
violence, targeting civilians through rape, gang rape and
abductions. Those findings once again demonstrate that
the Russian Federation persistently uses sexual violence
as a weapon of war against Ukraine. Prosecutors and
investigators have documented 212 cases of such
crimes, including 13 involving children — 12 girls
and one boy. Those atrocities span a wide age range,
from the youngest victim, at the tender age of four, to
the oldest survivor, aged 87. The United Nations has
reported sexual violence used as a form of torture and
12/41

14/07/2023

inhumane treatment against civilians and prisoners
of war. It is crucial to recognize that those numbers
represent only cases in which survivors were able and
willing to testify, suggesting that the actual figures are
much higher.
Ukraine remains committed to replacing impunity
with justice and transforming indifference into action.
The experiences, needs and demands of survivors are
at the heart of our efforts. We commend the efforts of
Special Representative Patten and her team, who have
provided substantial assistance to the Government
of Ukraine in achieving those goals. Last year, we
signed a framework of cooperation with the United
Nations to respond to and prevent conflict-related
sexual violence, becoming the first country to establish
an all-encompassing coordination mechanism for
combating conflict-related sexual violence. Shortly
after that, Ukraine adopted a detailed implementation
plan involving State institutions, civil society and
international organizations. In partnership with the
United Nations Population Fund, we opened 11 survivor
relief centres across the country to provide victims with
access to various services. To structure and ensure the
effectiveness of that cooperation, we have established
an inter-agency working group, which focuses on
five key areas: access to justice and accountability,
comprehensive assistance to survivors of conflictrelated sexual violence, strengthening the security
and defence sector to prevent conflict-related sexual
violence, combating trafficking in persons for sexual
exploitation and reparations and compensation.
Another crucial step is gaining political
commitments and leading the international legal battle
for justice. Ukraine joined the International Alliance
on Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict initiative,
launched by the United Kingdom, and proudly became
a Vice-Chair. We firmly believe that solid cooperation
among Governments, multilateral partners, civil
society and survivors is a crucial prerequisite for
breaking the cycle of impunity. Our collective response
must be resolute, unwavering and decisive. There can
be no tolerance for those responsible for inflicting mass
suffering upon the most vulnerable and defenceless. All
perpetrators must face the most severe consequences
for their crimes. In that regard, criminal accountability
holds the utmost importance. However, above all, the
international community must consolidate efforts to
exert maximum pressure on Russia to end its brutal
war of aggression, its war crimes and crimes against
23-20799

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

humanity in Ukraine. The truth is there, the evidence is
there, and the punishment shall come.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Geisler (Germany): Germany aligns itself with
the statements made on behalf of the European Union,
on behalf of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility
to Protect and on behalf of the Group of Friends of
Women, Peace and Security.
Please allow me to make some additional remarks
in my national capacity.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/413),
which was presented here today, provides an appalling
picture of the global situation regarding conflict-related
sexual violence. It describes a deep crisis of impunity
and an unacceptable rule of lawlessness. Sexualized
violence is deliberately being used as a tactic of war
and as a means of torture and of political repression
by States and non-State actors, such as armed groups
and mercenaries. It leaves societies traumatized for
decades. It is a hindrance to reconciliation and goes
unpunished too often. We have to ensure accountability
by effectively prosecuting perpetrators. That is why
we strongly support the mandate and work of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Patten, her
Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence
in Conflict and the United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict. We support regularly
inviting Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Patten to brief sanctions committees. We call
on all States to join us in imposing restrictive measures
against perpetrators of sexualized violence in conflict.
How can we prevent conflict-related sexual
violence from happening in the first place? Wars
and armed attacks must be prevented at all costs.
Furthermore, we have to level power imbalances that
disadvantage women economically and politically, and
we have to combat misogyny and gender stereotypes,
which enable gender-based violence. While the fight
against the structural root causes of conflict-related
sexual violence is a long-term endeavour, I would like
to point out essential measures that can protect and
support survivors and victims in the short term.
Recent reports suggest that there is a strong link
between increased militarization and the proliferation
of weapons, on the one hand, and the occurrence of
sexual violence in conflict, on the other. Member States

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

must therefore establish effective arms and ammunition
control regimes. We also need to deploy more gender
advisers in peace operations and special political
missions. Moreover, Member States need to provide
accessible sexual and reproductive health services, and
psychological and legal support and reparations. Last
but not least, we have to match words with actions and
provide predictable and reliable funding to combat
conflict-related sexual violence.
Germany strongly supports the mandate of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Patten and the
Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence
in Conflict. This year we contributed a project budget
of €1 million for their important work. Since 2023, we
have been at the lead of the Call to Action on Protection
from Gender-based Violence in Emergencies, aimed at
systemically improving the prevention and mitigation
of gender-based violence. We will continue to be
strongly engaged.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for convening this critical debate today on this
necessary yet disturbing topic. We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Pramila
Patten, and the other briefers from the field for sharing
their insights with us today.
South Africa associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
Conflict-related sexual violence, as an occurrence,
is shameful, but its continued use as weapon of
war is especially heinous. It is a grave violation of
international human rights law and international
criminal law, and it is important that the international
community take a strong stance on that. It is distressing
to note that the victims and survivors of such violence
are often persons who already experience systemic
discrimination or persecution. In particular, women and
girls are targeted for rape, gang rape and abductions,
causing personal harm, social disruption and prolonged
socioeconomic consequences, which extend beyond
the end of direct violence. The report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2023/413) reminds us that people are often
targeted on the basis of their sexual orientation and
gender identity, and we encourage greater recognition
of that reality in the resolutions of the Council.

23-2079913/41

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

The report of the Secretary-General highlights
the strong linkage between instability, or weakened
governance, and the increase in sexual violence. Poor
rule of law and weakened State authority result in an
increase in sexual violence, as non-State actors conduct
themselves without any concern or accountability.
We must seek measures to act against such atrocity
crimes and crimes against humanity. That should be
done through prevention, protection and the provision
of support for victims and/or survivors. We therefore
recognize the value of women’s protection advisers
in the field and encourage the continued use of that
endorsed priority measure. Unfortunately, we are
disheartened by the limited resources allocated for
such personnel and strongly advocate for an increased
allocation of resources, including through measures
called for in resolution 2467 (2019).
It is important to recognize that most State actors that
are listed in the report have made formal commitments
to adopt measures to address conflict-related sexual
violence. We must therefore work to support those State
actors in their efforts. Yet it is non-State actors who
are particularly prone to the use of sexual violence as
a weapon, and the existence of such actors is directly
connected to instability and weakened governance. We
therefore continue to advocate for increased support
to State actors and actions that address instability,
including unconstitutional changes of Government,
an issue which is also highlighted in the SecretaryGeneral’s report.
In conclusion, South Africa remains committed in
its efforts to address this terrible crime. Our work and
focus must seek to prevent such crimes, support victims
and survivors, and hold perpetrators accountable. We
encourage the continued work on this issue by the
Security Council and remain committed to supporting
its ongoing efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.
Mr. Hermann (Denmark): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the Nordic
countries — Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and of
course my own country, Denmark.
I want to begin by thanking our distinguished
briefers, first and foremost, for their sobering
statements, and not least for their vital work in this field.
Sexual violence continued to be used throughout 2022
as a tactic of war, an instrument of intimidation and a
14/41

14/07/2023

way to dehumanize and destroy communities and the
lives of civilians in countries such as the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Haiti, Libya, Myanmar and
South Sudan. We are deeply alarmed by the reports of
persistent and deepening patterns of sexual violence
by both State and non-State actors. In Ukraine, the
United Nations Human Rights Monitoring Mission and
the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
have documented and reported sexual violence used as
a form of torture and inhumane treatment of civilians
and prisoners of war, violence that is overwhelmingly
perpetrated by Russian military personnel.
Let us not mince words. Conflict-related
sexual violence is a clear violation of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
and may constitute war crimes and crimes against
humanity. And as the Secretary-General has pointed
out time and again, impunity for acts of conflict-related
sexual violence remains the norm. That state of affairs
needs to be addressed, and it needs to change. Conflictrelated sexual violence can and must be prevented and
countered. It is within the power and responsibility of
Member States to make that happen. It is the Council’s
responsibility to act. To that end, the Nordic countries
would like to emphasize the following.
First, Member States must investigate all cases,
prosecute perpetrators through appropriate judicial
mechanisms and guarantee access to justice for victims
and survivors. Secondly, our humanitarian response
to conflict-related sexual violence must be gendertransformative and put survivors’ needs front and
centre. That can be done through cash programming,
sexual and reproductive health services such as access
to emergency contraception and safe and timely
abortion care, and mental health and psychosocial
support. Thirdly, all sanctions regimes must explicitly
include sexual and gender-based violence as a
designation criterion. The Security Council Sanctions
Committees should list perpetrators when there is
repeated evidence of conflict-related sexual violence,
including as put forward annually in the annex to the
Secretary-General’s report. Lastly, the capacity and
skills to respond to conflict-related sexual violence and
to refer different types of victims to appropriate service
providers must be built across peace operations — not
just among women peacekeepers. The notion that women
are inherently better at responding to conflict-related
sexual violence or specifically responsible for doing
so both perpetuates the idea that their primary added
23-20799

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

value is related to their gender and reflects a narrow
understanding of the survivors and perpetrators of
conflict-related sexual violence.

trafficking. Respect for international humanitarian law
and international human rights law is being challenged
to an unprecedented extent.

Protection is the bedrock for women’s full, equal
and meaningful participation in political, social and
economic processes, and that in turn is critical to
ending conflict-related sexual violence and preventing
its recurrence. We can therefore no longer watch
survivors being sidelined and excluded from security
policy. We, the Nordic countries, will continue to work
in collaboration with all partners, including security
stakeholders and institutions, civil society and womenled and feminist organizations, not least at the local
level, to push back on any attempt to hinder the full,
equal and meaningful participation of all women. Let
me conclude by underlining that we continue to stand
firm on zero tolerance for any reprisals against women
human rights defenders and fully support their advocacy
for gender equality and the defence of human rights.

We are deeply concerned about the blurring of
the distinction between the respective responsibilities
of State and non-State actors, highlighted in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/413), which
complicates the attribution of the heinous crimes that
are being committed and undermines accountability.
We condemn the use of sexual violence as a deliberate
tactic of warfare, and we join the call of the Group
of Friends of Women, Peace and Security urging the
Security Council to use all the tools at its disposal to
support effective action against conflict-related sexual
and gender-based violence as a weapon of war. We
also recognize the important role of the International
Criminal Court in investigating and prosecuting
sexual violence in the context of armed conflicts, in
accordance with its mandate under the Rome Statute
and the relevant Security Council resolutions.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Massari (Italy): I would like to thank the United
Kingdom for organizing this annual open debate, as well
as Ms. Pramila Patten, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and the civil-society representatives for their briefings.
Italy aligns itself with the statements delivered on
behalf of the European Union and the Group of Friends
of Women, Peace and Security, as well as the statement
to be delivered by the representative of Botswana on
behalf of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to
Protect, and would like to add the following remarks in
its national capacity.
This year we celebrate the fifteenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1820 (2008), which
established conflict-related sexual violence as a standalone security issue. Since then, the United Nations
has developed a more robust normative framework
to address the issue, in particular by establishing the
mandate of the Special Representative. We reiterate our
strong support for the mandate and work of the Office
of the Special Representative and the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Yet we are facing a disturbing reality in which conflicts
are increasing in frequency, scope and intensity.
Sexual violence, slavery and exploitation are also
proliferating in the context of internal and cross-border
displacement, protracted displacement, abduction and

As the Secretary-General writes in his report,
“harnessing the preventive power of the rule of law is
essential”, and it is indeed time to take action. All the
risk factors that contribute to making sexual violence
in conflict a largely underreported crime must be
addressed in a comprehensive way if we want to actually
break the cycle of impunity. On the one hand, we must
act on prevention, to disrupt the gender inequality
entrenched in harmful social norms and practices; on the
other, we must act on response, to remove the multiple
barriers that hinder access to services, reporting and
formal justice. We must invest in programmes and
policies aimed at ensuring that assistance is accessible
and safe for victims and survivors, free from the fear
of social stigma, intimidation and reprisal. We must
invest in gender-responsive security and justice sector
reforms. We must ensure that those same principles
are embedded in the training of military personnel
deployed at the national level, as well as in United
Nations peacekeeping and special political missions.
The women and peace and security agenda provides
a crucial framework for the collective action of the
Council. We commend the work of women’s civilsociety organizations, which are often at the front line in
wars and conflicts, providing relief and protection and
contributing to building and consolidating community
resilience. We reiterate the importance of supporting
safe spaces for women’s effective participation in the
framework of credible and sustainable national action

23-2079915/41

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

plans on women and peace and security. In that context,
we call on the international community to reaffirm the
commitment to addressing the root causes of conflict
and the structural gender inequalities and barriers
hindering the full enjoyment of rights by all women and
girls in all areas of public and political life.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Ruidíaz Pérez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile thanks the United Kingdom for convening today’s
open debate. We have taken note of the presentations
and contributions we have heard.
Chile aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security and to be made on behalf of the Group of
Friends of the Responsibility to Protect.
Chile condemns sexual violence in armed
conflict. Such sexual and gender-based violence, used
systematically and repeatedly as a tactic of war, is a
grave violation of human rights and constitutes a war
crime. The Security Council has rightly recognized
that sexual violence can significantly exacerbate
and prolong situations of armed conflict and hinder
the restoration of peace. These behaviours cannot be
trivialized, nor can they be assumed to be a collateral
cost of war or internal crisis situations.
For this and many other reasons, we believe
that it is essential that the gender perspective be
permanently integrated or deepened in the training of
the armed forces, including measures to prevent sexual
violence and, this should be extended to contingents
participating in peacekeeping missions. Accordingly,
Chile supports the Secretary-General’s Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, which requires appropriate
conduct by all personnel of the Organization in missions
and supports the United Nations zero-tolerance policy,
which includes a victim-centred approach to all forms
of sexual exploitation and abuse.
Chile is concerned that there are still many
situations of sexual violence in armed conflicts that
have not been investigated or prosecuted, which could
have a deterrent and preventive effect. It is therefore
incumbent upon the international community to react
and support countries in strengthening their justice
institutions, always bearing in mind the possibility
of resorting to international tribunals, such as the
International Criminal Court, when appropriate.
16/41

14/07/2023

Accordingly, Chile reiterates its commitment to
international instruments that punish acts of sexual
violence as war crimes, such as the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court and the Geneva
Conventions that form the core of international
humanitarian law. Likewise, compliance with the
resolutions of the Security Council is imperative
if we are to put an end to the use of sexual violence
as a weapon of war. Resolution 1820 (2008) was an
important step in recognizing this violence, and
subsequent resolutions demonstrate that the issue is an
ongoing concern of the Council. Resolution 1960 (2010)
also establishes a system of accountability to put an end
to sexual violence associated with conflict situations,
which has worsened in recent years.
In the same vein, Chile supports the designation of
targeted sanctions, applied by relevant Security Council
committees, against those involved in the commission
of crimes of sexual violence, either as perpetrators
or as ideologues. It is also important to provide
multidisciplinary, timely and non-discriminatory
assistance so as to enable victims to be fully reintegrated
into their communities and contribute to peacebuilding.
This is essential to promoting, protecting and
guaranteeing access for victims of sexual violence to
adequate health services that allow for the rehabilitation
of survivors.
Finally, there must be a commitment by the entire
international community to support the efforts of
post-conflict countries to incorporate the issue of
sexual violence in armed conflict as a specific issue
in transitional justice, promoting legal mechanisms to
receive complaints and carry out criminal investigations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Amorín (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to thank the United Kingdom’s
presidency of the Security Council this month for
convening today’s open debate on the particularly
relevant issue of conflict-related sexual violence
and linking it to the promotion of Security Council
resolutions on the subject. I am also grateful for the
presence of Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, who spoke this morning, as well as the
representatives of civil society who also spoke on the
subject this morning.
23-20799

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

Sexual violence in armed conflict is brutal,
deliberate and intended to punish and/or humiliate
individuals and their communities. It is often motivated
by political, military and economic objectives, and it
is used to control territory and resources. It is often
perpetrated in the context of abuses against civilian
populations that are likely to be targeted because of
their perceived or actual membership in an ethnic
group, a religious minority or a political group or
because of their actual or perceived gender identity or
sexual orientation.
The Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court includes rape and certain other types of sexual
violence in its list of war crimes and in the list of
acts constituting crimes against humanity when
committed as part of a widespread or systematic
attack against the civilian population. Resolution 1820
(2008), unanimously adopted by the Security Council,
recognizes that sexual violence can form the basis of
such international crimes as crimes against humanity
or torture or even be a constitutive act of genocide.
Through various resolutions, including resolution 2467
(2019), the Security Council has repeatedly reiterated
its concern about ongoing acts of violence against
women and children in conflict situations.
Despite the existence of a comprehensive normative
legal framework on sexual and gender-based violence,
the report submitted by the Secretary-General on
conflict-related sexual violence (S/2023/413) continues
to report on a variety of situations, including in
Afghanistan, the Central African Republic, Colombia,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq, Libya,
Mali, Myanmar, Somalia, the Sudan, South Sudan,
Syria, Ukraine and Yemen. In his recommendations
to the Security Council, the Secretary-General calls
on all parties to conflicts to put an end to all forms of
conflict-related sexual violence.
Uruguay understands that this recommendation
is fundamental, but also insufficient if the
recommendations set forth in sub-paragraphs (e) and
(f) of paragraph 90 of the Secretary General’s report, on
consultations in the field, especially with free womenled organizations, and early warning, respectively, are
not also followed. In this context, it is first essential to
ensure that sexual violence is systematically monitored
and incorporated as a separate designation criterion
for the imposition of targeted sanctions, in order to
deter all parties, including mercenaries and private
military and security companies, from committing

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

such violence (sub-paragraph 90 (g)). We believe that
the pressing seriousness of this issue must be addressed
with appropriate incentives to combat it.
Secondly, we echo the recommendation contained
in paragraph 90 (h) of the report to consider the
possibility that the Council refer to the Office of
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
situations in which crimes of sexual violence, as defined
in the Rome Statute, appear to have been committed.
The certainty that there will be accountability for these
crimes — which are, as I mentioned earlier, brutal and
deliberate — must be increasingly present if they are to
be fought with strength.
The President: I would remind all speakers to limit
their statements to no more than three minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Botswana.
Mr. Dabutha (Botswana): I have the honour of
delivering this statement on behalf of the Group of
Friends of the Responsibility to Protect, consisting of
55 member States and the European Union, and this
year co-chaired by Botswana, Costa Rica and Croatia.
The Group would like to thank the United Kingdom
for organizing today’s important open debate and the
briefers for their insightful remarks.
This year marks the fifteenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1820 (2008). Despite the progress
made to implement this important resolution, sexual
violence remains pervasive in conflicts today, affecting
thousands of persons every year, in particular women
and children.
The 2022 annual report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/413) identifies 17 countries in which conflictrelated sexual violence is being perpetrated. We can
only assume this is the tip of the iceberg, as sexual
violence remains severely underreported. It is therefore
urgent that we devise strategies to collectively address
and prevent conflict-related sexual violence and uphold
our own responsibility to protect, and we must reject
the perception that sexual and gender-based violence is
an inevitable product of war.
As it is the primary responsibility of Member States
to protect their populations against atrocity crimes,
including those involving rape and other forms of sexual
violence, the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to
Protect would like to stress the following points.

23-2079917/41

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

First, strengthening the capacity of national
institutions is critical to ensuring accountability and
to preventing and deterring such crimes in future. The
connection between conflict-related sexual violence
and gender-based violence and discrimination against
women and girls in times of peace is very clear. In
this regard, it is of utmost importance that States
put in place and enforce legislative and institutional
processes to comprehensively address all forms of
sexual and gender-based violence in peace time as
well as during conflict. Ensuring that States are aware
of their obligations and responsibilities to address
conflict-related sexual violence under international law
is essential if we are to close the implementation gap.
Secondly, where national institutions are not able
or willing to take action against perpetrators of sexual
violence, the international community should act to
ensure accountability for such crimes. For example,
the Security Council has shown that it can use targeted
sanctions against those who perpetrate and direct
sexual violence in armed conflict and we encourage it
to take further such action.
Thirdly, there is an urgent need for survivorcentred and trauma-informed approaches to support the
needs of victims and survivors of sexual and genderbased violence during and after situations of conflict,
including the needs of children born from sexual
violence in conflict.
Lastly, at the heart of sexual and genderbased violence lies a disregard for human rights,
as well as the perpetuation of systematic gender
inequality, asymmetric power structures and
pervasive discrimination.
Sexual violence in conflict must be addressed
with the full, equal and meaningful and leadership
of women, including women’s rights and civil society
organizations, in the establishment of prevention
mechanisms. That also requires the inclusion of
survivors and affected communities in identifying
holistic solutions that address their needs. It is equally
important to continue to engage men and community
leaders to play a positive role in combating sexual
violence and addressing gender stereotypes and the
exclusion of women and girls.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Dominican Republic.
18/41

14/07/2023

Mrs. Cedano (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to express my deep gratitude
to the United Kingdom for convening this important
debate. I would also like to recognize the leadership
and work of Ms. Pramila Patten and her Office, as well
as express my gratitude to the other briefers for their
valuable contributions. I thank them for shedding light
on the harsh realities of conflict-related sexual violence.
With 2,455 cases verified by the United Nations
and many other cases that remain hidden, it is clear that
sexual violence remains a perverse and devastating
scourge in conflict. Ninety-four per cent of the victims
are women and girls, and the vast majority are girls.
It is a bleak perspective that has worsened in several
conflict scenarios. It is used as a tactic of terror, torture,
intimidation and political repression, and a ruthless
tool of forced displacement and the dehumanization of
innocent and vulnerable people. The consequences of
that violence are deep and long-lasting for the victims.
They suffer not only physically and psychologically,
but also socially. They are often stigmatized, isolated
and weighed down by deep and heartbreaking trauma.
In the face of this urgent situation, we must confront
conflict-related sexual violence with unwavering
determination and collective action. It is necessary
to adopt a comprehensive approach that encompasses
prevention, protection, justice, support for survivors and
strong legal frameworks that criminalize such acts and
ensure accountability for perpetrators. Accountability
must be the fundamental pillar in our fight against
conflict-related sexual violence, thereby bringing
an end to impunity. At the same time, it is critical to
focus on the needs and rights of women and girls and to
tirelessly persevere in the struggle for gender equality
and the full respect for and enjoyment of their human
rights. International law establishes the obligations of
States and parties to conflict to prevent, investigate and
sanction such heinous acts. In that regard, it is vital that
the Council’s resolutions that address that issue be fully
implemented to ensure accountability and serve justice
for the victims.
Let me underscore the worrisome situation in
Haiti. The report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/413)
confirms alarming levels of conflict-related sexual
violence in that country. Criminal gangs have used the
violence as a weapon of war to punish and terrorize
entire communities. The adoption of resolution 2653
(2022), which creates a Sanctions Committee and a
Panel of Experts, has been an important step to monitor
23-20799

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

and address that unfortunate situation, and we hope
that the upcoming report of the Secretary-General
will provide us with more encouraging data following
the efforts made by the Haitian authorities and the
commitment of the parties to fulfil their obligations.

Luxembourg also continues to support the Stand
Speak Rise Up! initiative, the United Nations Population
Fund, UN-Women and Justice Rapid Response, as well
as the mandate of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.

I must emphasize that the renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH)
through resolution 2692 (2023) today was another
important step. That resolution establishes that BINUH’s
human rights unit will include dedicated capacity to
address sexual and gender-based violence, including
the identification of women’s protection advisers.

Despite the numerous resolutions adopted by the
Security Council since 2008, sexual violence persists
and continues to be used as a weapon of war in Mali,
Myanmar, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Sudan, South Sudan, Syria and other conflicts. As the
Secretary-General points out in his report (S/2023/413),
the number of actors involved is multiplying.

The situation in Haiti also reminds us how crucial it
is to work towards the elimination of illicit trafficking
in weapons and ammunition in combating violence
against women and girls.

In Ukraine, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights documented 109 cases
of sexual violence perpetrated by the Russian military.
Victims ranged in age from 4 to 82 years old. In that
regard too, we can speak of the use of sexual violence
as a weapon of war.

Empowering local communities and engaging
men and boys as partners in this struggle is critical to
achieve inclusive and sustainable change. Bringing an
end to this horrendous crime is up to all of us, together
with our collective responsibility to restore the dignity
of all victims and survivors.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the United Kingdom for organizing
this open debate as part of its presidency. We also
extend our thanks to Special Representative Pramila
Patten and her team and to the two representatives of
civil society for their recommendations.
Luxembourg fully endorses the statements
delivered on behalf of the European Union and on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security and the Group of Friends of the Responsibility
to Protect. Allow me to add a few considerations in my
national capacity.
The fundamental human rights of survivors, such
as the rights to dignity, privacy, health, safety, access to
justice, truth and an effective remedy, are at the heart of
Luxembourg’s feminist foreign policy. In that context,
my country has just signed the Murad Code and joined
the new International Alliance on Preventing Sexual
Violence in Conflict. We are grateful to the United
Kingdom for launching those initiatives and encourage
all Member States to join them.

In order to put an end to the cycles of sexual violence,
Luxembourg wishes to make four recommendations.
First, the fight against impunity must be at the
centre of our efforts. The International Criminal Court
has a key role to play. Sexual violence in conflict is a
war crime and may constitute a crime against humanity
or genocide. We support the work under way on a
convention on crimes against humanity.
Secondly, through investigative mechanisms, we
must support the documentation of the crimes committed.
Thirdly, close cooperation with civil society must
be ensured, and we must protect those key partners
from reprisals by taking appropriate measures.
Fourthly and finally, we must tackle the root causes
of sexual violence and redouble our prevention efforts.
It is a matter not only of putting an end to the culture of
impunity, but also of recognizing that sexual violence
is linked to gender inequality.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mr. Cardon De Lichtbuer (Belgium): Belgium
aligns itself with the statements made on behalf of the
European Union and the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security.
We would like to thank the United Kingdom
for organizing this important debate and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Patten for

23-2079919/41

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

her remarks, and we explicitly thank the civil society
briefers for their powerful and insightful contributions.
Participation by civil society allows us to take into
consideration the experiences of those affected.
Everything we say and do should fully take into
account the needs and perspectives of the survivors of
this abhorrent crime. By doing so, it is clear that access
to justice, as well as sexual and reproductive health,
rights and services, should be an integral part of United
Nations and national responses to conflict-related
sexual violence. For survivors of conflict-related sexual
violence this means, inter alia, access to treatment
for internal physical injuries, sexually transmitted
diseases, emergency contraception, safe abortion and
pre- and post-natal care.
(spoke in French)
Today’s presentations and the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2023/413) are quite disconcerting, particularly
with regard to the extremely low levels of compliance,
including by States. There is an urgent need to bridge that
gap. Implementation also means enforcement and the
fight against impunity. My Government is supporting
that effort, inter alia, by funding the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict,
which is cooperating with the authorities of Ukraine
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, among
others. We welcome their commitment, encourage them
and others to continue on that path and call on other
States to consider supporting the Team of Experts.
(spoke in English)
Moreover, while acknowledging that preventing
and addressing conflict-related sexual violence is the
primary responsibility of States, Belgium stresses the
need to explore how conflict-related sexual violence
can be connected to sanctions policy and practices,
for instance, by considering a more systematic
input of information from the Office of the Special
Representative to the Council’s sanctions committees.
Finally, we should recognize that conflict-related
sexual violence is rooted in structural gender inequality
and harmful social norms. Belgium could not agree
more with the Secretary-General’s recommendations
to tackle the root causes of conflict-related sexual
violence by promoting women’s and girls’ leadership,
by creating an enabling environment for women and
girls active in public life and by stepping up to protect
women politicians from violence and reprisals.
20/41

14/07/2023

Mr. Liepnieks (Latvia): On behalf of the Baltic
countries — Estonia, Lithuania, and my own country,
Latvia — I extend my gratitude to the United Kingdom
for organizing this open debate and to the distinguished
briefers for their presentations.
As we reflect upon the previous year, we see that
sexual violence persisted as a cruel weapon of war,
torture and terrorism in various regions, including in
Myanmar, Syria, Libya and Iran, where it was employed
to intimidate and punish political opponents. Displaced
women and girls in Mozambique, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Somalia and the Sudan fell
victim to sexual assault by armed individuals in and
around displacement sites.
The Baltic States commend the tireless efforts of the
United Nations in addressing those horrific situations.
We appreciate the work of the United Nations Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict inter-agency
network for their initiatives providing crucial support
to survivors, including medical, psychological, legal
and socioeconomic assistance. A notable example is
the project implemented in the conflict-free mining
sites in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We also
express our appreciation to the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict for their
contributions to strengthening rule of law institutions.
Their efforts, including assisting Guinean authorities
in establishing an ad hoc tribunal, deserve recognition.
Unfortunately, conflict-related sexual violence
is also part of the full-scale war of aggression waged
by the Russian Federation against Ukraine. Since
24 February 2022, the United Nations human rights
monitoring mission in Ukraine documented 125 cases
of conflict-related sexual violence affecting civilians
and prisoners of war, while the real number is even
higher. The heinous acts committed by the Russian
armed forces and groups as a tactic of war included
torture methods such as electrocution, beatings, burns,
forced nudity and rape, including gang rape. The
victims ranged from young children to the elderly, with
perpetrators even raping women and girls in front of
their family members. Moreover, Russia’s attacks on
hospitals hindered access to services for managing
the aftermath of sexual violence. It is horrendous
that a permanent member of this esteemed Council is
responsible for these crimes and continues to commit
atrocities on a daily basis. Furthermore, the Russian
Federation seeks to stifle the voice and actions of the
United Nations through its veto powers.
23-20799

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

Yet, the international community refuses to be
silenced. The General Assembly recognized the need
to hold the Russian Federation accountable and to
establish an international mechanism for reparations.
In May, a register of damage was established under the
Council of Europe, signifying steps towards justice for
Ukraine. We look forward to the meeting of Ministers
of Justice of the Council of Europe to be held in Riga
in September to continue implementing the register
of damage.
In conclusion, we express our appreciation for the
Special Representative’s tireless work. We pledge our
unwavering support to her and to anyone dedicated
to preventing sexual violence, assisting survivors and
ensuring accountability for the perpetrators, both in
Ukraine and elsewhere.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania.
Ms. Mocanu (Romania): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s open debate. I also thank the
briefers, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ms. Patten and the representatives of civil
society for sharing the realities of sexual violence
in conflicts.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement of
the European Union and also the statements delivered
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security and the Group of Friends of the Responsibility
to Protect.
Allow me to share some national perspectives.
Seventy-five years since the establishment of the United
Nations, the adoption of its Charter and of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, one thing remains clear:
a world without human rights is a world without peace.
This year’s report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/413)
identified 17 countries in which conflict-related
sexual violence is deployed as a strategy in conflict
by terrorist and non-State armed groups, but also by
State authorities. Unfortunately, in almost all settings
covered in the report, impunity persists, undermining
peace processes and reconstruction efforts.
Our national pledge to implement the provisions of
the Security Council resolutions on combating abuse
and sexual exploitation in conflict are mostly visible
in two areas. On the one hand, we have invested in
training our armed forces, including those participating
in peacekeeping activities, on the prohibition of all

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

forms of sexual violence against civilians. On the
other hand, the active presence of Romania as co-chair
of the Women and Peace and Security Focal Points
Network, reconfirms our commitment to advancing the
global women and peace and security agenda, which
also includes conflict-related sexual violence. We will
make sure that the topic will be diligently addressed at
the ministerial meeting of the Women and Peace and
Security Focal Points Network to be held in September.
The Secretary-General’s report raises awareness
regarding the increased risks of trafficking for the
purposes of sexual exploitation in Ukraine’s vicinity
following the large-scale displacements triggered by the
war of aggression started by Russia. Allow me to assure
you that the Romanian authorities, along with partners
from civil society and the private sector, worked
tirelessly to circumvent that phenomenon. Among the
measures put in place by Romania to prevent the risks
associated with human trafficking for refugees from
Ukraine, I would like to mention a mechanism for
the early identification of victims, the establishment
of a national emergency fund for victims, a dedicated
working group for preventing sexual exploitation and
the funding of non-governmental organizations for
delivering survivor-centred support, including access
to psychosocial, health care and legal services.
We invested all those efforts because we consider
that ending the climate of impunity is the way forward to
prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual violence.
Likewise, we believe that accountability measures
should be adopted and implemented at the national level
and international accountability mechanisms should be
in place. The stories of survivors of sexual violence,
mostly women and girls, like the ones we heard this
morning, need to be told, but most importantly, need
to be heard so that action can follow. As government
representatives, we need to create the conditions to
ensure that conflict-related sexual violence does not
remain underreported or continue to be one of the least
condemned crimes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. Gutiérrez Segú Berdullas (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): Spain aligns itself with the statements made
on behalf of the European Union and the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security, of which it is
a member.

23-2079921/41

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

The Security Council has recognized that the
best way to protect civilians, and in particular women
and girls, from sexual violence in conflict is through
prevention and deterrence, so that sexual violence
ceases to be used as a weapon of war. In addition, it has
established punitive measures against perpetrators and
reparations for survivors, which should guarantee the
prevention of impunity. However, we find that impunity
is the general and usual rule where accountability is
concerned. Impunity prevails when cases against
perpetrators fail in the first instance, or when there is
resort to extrajudicial solutions that are far removed
from international standards of justice and reparations
for victims.
Spain understands that the best way to strengthen
the prevention of sexual violence is to work for gender
equality, the promotion and protection of human rights
and the full, meaningful and effective participation of
women in their societies. Moreover, prevention works
best when women themselves and their organizations
are involved in the effort, and when they are provided
with the necessary resources to carry out that work.
Therefore, we must commit to predictable and sustained
funding for the multi-stakeholder trust fund.

14/07/2023

military and civilian personnel with practical means to
interact with local women and men. In addition, Spain
will organize in the coming months a series of meetings
on the fight against sexual violence in conflict, within
the framework of our presidency of the Council of the
European Union.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Ms. Zacarias (Portugal): Portugal aligns with
the statements delivered on behalf of the European
Union and the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security and categorically condemns the use of sexual
and gender-based violence by State and non-State
actors in situations of humanitarian crises and conflictaffected settings.
We welcome the convening of this debate, which
is particularly significant in the light of the concerning
trends emphasized in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2023/413). The widespread pattern of sexual violence
it depicts shows how pressing is the work and mandate
of Special Representative Ms. Pramila Patten, whom I
thank for her briefing.

Another effective way to combat impunity in
practice is to urgently deploy personnel with expertise in
sexual violence in conflict and gender-based violence to
investigate cases and create safe environments in transit
and destination countries. The generation of evidence
is key to continued efforts in that area. Similarly, it is
essential for peace operations to improve and expand
protection mandates. It is important that the response
to that violence focus on survivors and victims, with a
comprehensive approach that covers access to healthcare services, including sexual and reproductive, mental
and psychosocial health, legal support and livelihood
and/or income-generating projects. In that regard, we
welcome the fact that the United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict adopts such an approach.

One of the alarming trends highlighted in the
report is the use of sexual violence as a tactic of war
by non-State armed groups to consolidate control
over territories or exploit lucrative natural resources
in certain countries. Furthermore, the increasing
proliferation of mercenary groups has also led to a
rise in violations and abuses of human rights and
violations of international humanitarian law. Conflictrelated sexual violence continues to cause massive
displacement, both internally and across borders.
The refugee crisis stemming from the war in Ukraine
has led to a rampant risk of trafficking of women
for sexual exploitation. In that regard, we welcome
the establishment of a comprehensive inter-agency
working group to address sexual violence, with a focus
on anti-trafficking measures.

Spain’s third national action plan on women and
peace and security will pay special attention to women
in Ukraine. It will include measures to ensure the
investigation of the use of sexual violence as a weapon
of war and the protection of victims, as well as the
meaningful participation of women in peacebuilding
and reconstruction in Ukraine. Spain, together with the
Netherlands, organizes the course on a comprehensive
approach to gender in operations, which is taught four
times a year and has as one of its objectives to equip both

As armed conflicts escalate and their devastating
consequences unfold, disproportionately affecting
women and children, we cannot remain idle. Those
abhorrent crimes must be punished and the perpetrators
brought to justice. The Security Council has already
adopted a comprehensive framework to prevent and
address conflict-related sexual violence. We call on
all States to ensure its implementation in national
legislation and make clear efforts to combat sexual
and gender-based violence, safeguard women’s rights

22/41

23-20799

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

during times of conflict, provide redress for survivors
and ensure accountability for perpetrators.
But combating conflict-related sexual violence
is also a shared responsibility that rests with all of us
gathered here today. The Security Council can make
significant advances by designating conflict-related
sexual violence as a criterion in all relevant United
Nations sanctions regimes. The United Nations and
Member States can also bolster accountability efforts
and increase compliance with international legal
frameworks by assisting other Member States to
harmonize domestic laws with international standards
and providing support to justice systems, both military
and civilian. In order for that to happen, States must
cooperate with those efforts at every level, embracing
a genuine desire to promote equality between women
and men in the realization of civil, cultural, economic,
political and social rights; dismantling discriminatory
social norms and gender stereotypes and working on
prevention. That is the only way to ensure the end
of sexual and gender-based violence, in any setting,
while also fostering sustainable peace and political and
social stability, which should be the main driver of all
our actions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
Ms. Brandt (Kingdom of the Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with the
statements made on behalf of the European Union, the
Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security and
the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect.
Let me thank you, Mr. President, and the United
Kingdom for organizing today’s debate and for keeping
conflict-related sexual violence on the Council’s agenda.
We would also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Patten for her briefing this
morning and reiterate our full support for her mandate.
We are very grateful for the important work the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and her staff
are doing, despite difficult circumstances. Allow me
to also extend my special gratitude to today’s civil
society briefers. We would like to thank them for their
courage to break the circle of silence and stigma around
conflict-related sexual violence. Their experiences and
contributions — as well as those of other civil society
organizations and survivors — should guide our efforts
to prevent and address conflict-related sexual violence.

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

As we heard from the presentations and the debate
today, levels of sexual violence are increasing. Horrific
reports, including from the Sudan and Ukraine, have
illustrated its severe and lasting impacts on individuals,
communities and societies, and sadly, the numbers in
the report on conflict-related sexual violence are only
the tip of the iceberg. We urgently need more and better
data in order to fully capture the scale of this problem
and to better tailor our responses. Urgent and joinedup efforts are needed to improve the availability and
harmonization of data across the system, while, of
course, ensuring safety and confidentiality.
I would briefly like to mention three areas for
action today.
First, we need to eliminate harmful social norms
and gender stereotypes that perpetuate or justify
conflict-related sexual violence and address its root
causes. Such action is something that cannot be taken
overnight, but good practices already exist. For example,
in South Sudan, the Netherlands supports a project
that promotes discussions on positive masculinity, and
works with religious and local leaders to adequately
address gender-based violence. We should look at
sharing and scaling up those best practices.
Secondly, as also mentioned by Ms. Naw Hser
Hser this morning, we need to protect those in the
most vulnerable positions, including women human
rights defenders. The year 2023 marks 25 years since
the adoption of the United Nations Declaration on
Human Rights Defenders, so we should feel a special
responsibility to support those courageous women and
be clear that any form of violence or intimidation, or any
attempt to limit their space to speak up, is unacceptable.
Finally, it is important to adopt a holistic approach
to national and international accountability. Justice
should not be seen as limited to criminal proceedings.
We should respect the choices of victims and survivors
when it comes to their path to healing, recovering
and finding justice, and make sure that their choices
inform our policies and programmes. And a final
point on accountability: When States are unwilling or
unable to act, thematic sanctions can serve as a last
resort, as shown by the initiative of the Netherlands, in
collaboration with Germany and France, for European
Union sanctions for acts of violence against women.
With our feminist foreign policy, the Kingdom of
the Netherlands stands firmly for the right to a dignified
life free from violence for all. We are committed to work

23-2079923/41

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

with all stakeholders for concrete action and progress,
to take preventative action and to better the lives of
those affected by conflict-related sexual violence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Hwang (Republic of Korea): My delegation
would like to express its appreciation to the United
Kingdom for convening today’s open debate on this
important matter. We would also like to convey our
gratitude to all the briefers, including the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, and warmly
welcome this year’s report by the Secretary-General
(S/2023/413).
The Republic of Korea aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Canada
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security and the statement to be delivered by the
representative of Botswana on behalf of the Group
of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect. I would
now like to deliver the following statement in our
national capacity.
Since the unanimously adopted resolution 1820
(2008) in 2008, on conflict-related sexual violence, the
Council has renewed and strengthened its commitment
to eliminating conflict-related sexual violence through
several related resolutions in the years that followed.
The key promise that those resolutions made was
to prevent and eradicate such crimes. Nevertheless,
it is distressing to note that the latest report of the
Secretary-General documents over 2,000 cases of
conflict-related sexual violence again, including in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and
Ukraine, with little significant reduction observed over
the past decade.
In particular, the Republic of Korea is deeply
concerned about pervasive impunity for conflictrelated sexual violence, which not only discourages
the victims from reporting the crimes but also instils
fear of reprisals or the recurrence of violence. Impunity
must not become the norm, and conflict-related sexual
violence should not be seen as an inevitable consequence
of conflict. While ensuring accountability at both the
local and national levels is crucial, my delegation also
supports the Security Council’s efforts to incorporate
sexual and gender-based violence as a designation
criterion for United Nations sanctions regimes.
Targeted United Nations sanctions against those who
24/41

14/07/2023

perpetrate and direct sexual violence in conflict can
address impunity as well as serve as a deterrent.
The Republic of Korea would also like to emphasize
the importance of a survivor-centred approach in
addressing conflict-related sexual violence, as outlined
in resolution 2467 (2019). Heeding the voices of
survivors and responding to their needs are essential
to provide relevant support and help them reintegrate
into communities. In that regard, the Republic of Korea
takes pride in its continued contributions to the Global
Survivors Fund since its inception. As one of the main
donors to the Fund, we have promoted its activities
around the globe, which include providing survivors
with financial compensation, vocational training and
medical and psychological care.
Last but not least, it is critical that survivors not
remain mere victims of the violence but are transformed
into agents of peace. To that end, we need to make our
utmost effort to ensure the full, equal, meaningful and
safe participation of women at all stages of the peace
process. The Republic of Korea created an international
forum called Action with Women and Peace in 2018.
At the fifth conference, to be held later this year,
we look forward to hearing from more women,
including survivors.
As an elected member of the Security Council
for the term 2024—25, the Republic of Korea looks
forward to contributing to the Council’s noble work
of preventing conflict-related sexual violence and
ensuring justice for all those affected.
The President: We still have 20 speakers left, so
I encourage participants to limit their statements to
three minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Chatrnúch (Slovakia): My delegation aligns
itself with the statements made on behalf of the
Euroepan Union and of the Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect and wishes to add some
remarks in its national capacity.
We would like to start by thanking the United
Kingdom for organizing this important debate on women
and peace and security, with a focus on conflict-related
sexual violence. We would also like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Patten and the
representatives of civil society for their briefings.
23-20799

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

We seize this opportunity to express our deep
concern that, despite the systematic advancement of
the women and peace and security agenda, the heinous
practice of sexual violence in conflict is still present and
widespread. This was marked by the Secretary-General
in his latest report (S/2023/413). We fully agree with
the Secretary-General that enhanced investment by
the international community to break the vicious cycle
of sexual violence and impunity is urgently needed.
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Patten
also recently clearly stated that
“despite increased international awareness, the
global trendlines of conflict-related sexual violence
are worsening”.
We consider it crucial to foster an enabling environment
for victims and survivors and to provide them with
accessible and quality multisectoral assistance. This
includes all 17 conflict-affected countries, as described
in the report, including Afghanistan, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Myanmar, Syria and the Sudan.
As the co-Chair of the Group of Friends of
Security Sector Reform, Slovakia wishes to recall
Security Council 2151 (2014) on security sector
reform, which underscored the importance of women’s
equal, meaningful and effective participation and full
involvement in the security sector in order to build
inclusive, accountable and legitimate institutions that
more effectively protect populations and promote
lasting peace and sustainable development. Genderresponsive security sector reform is key to developing
security sector institutions that are non-discriminatory,
representative and capable of effectively responding
to the specific security needs of diverse groups. It is
critical to ensure that gender equality and women’s
empowerment are not side-lined and that funding for
the women and peace and security agenda is carefully
allocated. I wish to underline that the Security Council
mandates should explicitly recognize women’s
contribution to security sector reform process and more
clearly encourage peace operations to support women’s
meaningful participation and leadership in all stages of
security sector reform processes.
One of the questions that emerged from the concept
note (S/2023/476, annex) for today’s open debate is how
the Security Council responds to States that fail to hold
perpetrators to account. This is a highly relevant query,
as one permanent member of the Security Council has
blatantly violated international law and the principles

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

of the Charter of the United Nations. The situation
of many Ukrainian citizens has turned into a living
hell since the Russian Federation decided to start its
senseless war of choice. The ongoing, unjustified and
unprovoked Russian aggression against Ukraine has
resulted in serious violations of international human
rights and humanitarian law, including sexual violence.
That is not only a despicable act but can also qualify
as a war crime or crime against humanity. We want to
stress once again that all perpetrators must be brought
to justice and held accountable for the crimes they
have committed.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the United Kingdom presidency and in
particular Lord Ahmad, the Prime Minister’s Special
Representative for Preventing Sexual Violence in
Conflict, for convening this open debate on such a vital
aspect of international peace and security. We thank
Special Representative Patten and the other briefers for
the information they have provided today.
Despite the Security Council’s efforts since the
adoption of resolution 1820 (2008), there seems to be no
end in sight for the growing number of victims of conflictrelated sexual violence. The Secretary-General’s
report (S/2023/413) has documented 2,455 cases of
conflict-related sexual violence in 2022, and those
represent only a small proportion of that underreported
crime. The report lists 49 parties, including State and
non-State actors, responsible for such crimes. However,
the report’s credibility is seriously undermined by what
looks like a deliberate decision not to report the crimes
of sexual violence being committed in Indian-occupied
Jammu and Kashmir and in Israeli-occupied Palestine.
There is ample documented evidence that Indian
occupation forces have used rape and sexual violence
as a weapon of war in occupied Kashmir since 1989.
Thousands of women and girls have been raped, gangraped or subjected to enforced incarceration, torture
and abduction. The infamous Kunan Poshpora incident
is raw in the memories of all Kashmiris.
Thousands of women, girls, boys and men have
been detained and subjected to sexual violence
and torture as punishment and humiliation. Entire
communities, women, girls and boys, have been
prevented from enjoying their rights, including the
right to freedom of expression and religion and to

23-2079925/41

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

education and employment. That is corroborated by
the two reports of 2018 and 2019 issued by the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and by
international media and human rights organizations.
Since India’s unilateral and illegal measures of 5 August
2019, conflict-related violence and the harassment
and humiliation of women and girls in Kashmir have
increased significantly. We would therefore urge the
Secretary-General to rectify the report’s omissions,
include information on the incidence of sexual violence
in foreign-occupied Kashmir and Palestine and list
India and Israel among the parties perpetrating
conflict-related sexual violence in future reports to the
Security Council.
This open debate is a sombre reminder of the need
to take decisive action. We would urge that all Council
resolutions related to protracted conflicts be faithfully
implemented. The implementation of efforts to deal
with the issue should cover all four pillars of the women
and peace and security agenda, and the gaps in oversight
and investigation mechanisms should be addressed to
end the culture of impunity. Finally, the provision of
timely assistance, health services, rehabilitation and
reintegration in response to sexual violence in conflicts
should be strengthened and adequately funded.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Zoghbi (Lebanon): At the outset, we would
like to thank the United Kingdom for organizing
this important debate. We also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, and the
other briefers for their statements earlier today. We
still remember Special Representative Patten’s words
during last year’s debate on ending cycles of sexual
violence in conflict, when she stated that “[w]omen’s
rights are not Western rights. They are human rights”
(S/PV.9016, p.6). Lebanon, a country that played a role
in the drafting of the Universal Declaration on Human
Rights — the seventy-fifth anniversary of which we are
celebrating this year — strongly concurs with her.
The latest report of the Secretary-General on
conflict-related sexual violence (S/2023/413) states that
impunity remains the norm. We must ask ourselves how
many times we are going to keep saying that. Survivor
and Nobel Peace Prize laureate Nadia Murad’s words
can bring some key answers to our questions.
26/41

14/07/2023

“Sometimes I feel as if I am repeating myself
over and over again, but the messages remain
important. I will keep saying them until we solve
the issues”.
The devastating use of sexual violence as a weapon of
war — a humiliating and degrading one — continues
unabated, with women and girls the main victims,
although we are not forgetting that men and boys can
also be targets of sexual violence in conflict. Human
beings’ bodies are not and should never be considered a
tool of combat. In that regard, we commend the United
Kingdom’s leadership in preventing sexual violence
in conflict. Lebanon participated in the International
Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict Initiative
Conference in London in November of last year, and
also endorsed the political declaration on conflictrelated sexual violence.
One of the most powerful pieces at the Metropolitan
Museum of Art here in New York is the early
eighteenth-century French sculptor Philippe Bertrand’s
statue of Lucretia, which portrays Lucretia as she
commits suicide out of shame for her rape. No victims
or survivors of sexual violence should ever have to
go through that extra layer of pain and suffering. Our
common duty is to understand what they have gone
through, support and empower them and prevent such
atrocities from ever happening again.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Ms. Bakytbekkyzy (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan
thanks the United Kingdom presidency for
convening today’s open debate. We commend Special
Representative Patten for the insights drawn from the
Secretary-General’s annual report on conflict-related
sexual violence (S/2023/413), and we thank our civilsociety briefers for their passionate plea to us and their
horrifying analyses of that scourge in different parts of
the world.
Kazakhstan endorses the recommendations of the
Secretary-General’s annual report. Despite the robust
normative framework that has been established and the
progress achieved, we need to collectively reflect on
how to reduce conflict-related sexual violence. At the
same time, we must take measures to ensure that sexual
violence is not used as a tactic of war or aggravated
by human trafficking, which can become a source of
income for terrorist organizations and transnational
organized crime networks. We also need to address
23-20799

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

new and emerging threats from the largely ungoverned
digital space. This scourge requires concerted and
well-coordinated cross-national interventions with a
One United Nations approach. There is also a need for
improved coordination among United Nations entities,
regional and subregional organizations and civil society
in prevention, assistance to victims, research, advocacy,
information-sharing, capacity-building and exchange
of good practices in combating sexual violence.
An enhanced implementation of arms control
and disarmament measures can contribute to both
the long-term structural prevention and the shortterm operational prevention of sexual violence in
conflict. Our deliberations today make it clear that the
international community should ensure accountability
for sexual violence in conflict and bring a resolute end
to impunity.
Conflict-related
sexual
violence
affects
every aspect of a survivor’s life and leads to the
stigmatization of victims and devastation of physical
and economic security, especially of displaced and
rural women. We therefore need a survivor-centred
approach, which should include full, competent and
speedy attention for the victims, with increased access
to health care, psychosocial support, legal assistance
and socioeconomic reintegration. Cooperation with
religious leaders, civil society and local communities is
most important to change extremist narratives, shift the
stigma of sexual violence to the perpetrators, promote
education and create awareness on the empowerment
of women.
Kazakhstan strongly believes that preventing
sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers should
be an absolute priority, with a United Nations zerotolerance policy for such offences. All troop and police
contingents should have full training prior to and
during deployment. We support greater recruitment of
well-qualified women military and police officers and
the deployment of women’s protection advisers to the
peacekeeping missions.
Our country integrates all elements of the women
and peace and security agenda, including on conflictrelated sexual violence, in our national legislation, with
new strong pro-women policies. Training on gender
equality for the armed and security forces and women’s
deployment in United Nations peacekeeping operations
are a priority for Kazakhstan at the Kazakhstan

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

Peace Operations Centre, our national peacekeeping
training centre.
At the regional level, we are supporting Afghanistan
with a multidimensional approach of conflict prevention
and resolution, recovery and reintegration, accompanied
by humanitarian and development assistance, through
strengthening the security and development nexus.
At the international level, we are contributing to the
United Nations Trust Fund to End Violence against
Women that funds projects in post-conflict settings.
To conclude, I reiterate Kazakhstan’s strong
commitment to fully implementing the women and
peace and security agenda and promoting women’s
dignity and gender empowerment.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cambodia.
Mr. Mao (Cambodia): First, my delegation would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
debate on conflict-related sexual violence and promoting
the implementation of Security Council resolutions on
conflict-related sexual violence. We highly appreciate
the Secretary-General’s timely report on conflictrelated sexual violence and the efforts of United Nations
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict. Allow me
to also thank all the briefers and speakers before me for
sharing their insights on the topic.
We all know that it is difficult to reduce conflictrelated sexual violence when there are so many active
conflicts and so much instability around the world.
The trend of using sexual violence against women and
girls as a means of terror and retribution is alarming.
Therefore, I cannot agree more with the view of
Ms. Pramila Patten, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, that
more actions are needed.
Allow me to highlight a few points.
First, on prevention, Member States should
prioritize working together on the prevention of conflict
and the escalation of existing conflicts. It is important to
strengthen national legislation to ensure accountability
for sexual crimes committed by members of the armed
forces. Education and training with the involvement
of women and victims should be mainstreamed within
the armed forces, including those deployed as part of
international peacekeeping missions.

23-2079927/41

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

Secondly, on victims’ support, members of the
armed forces should also be a part of the efforts to
assist victims’ recovery and integration. More women,
especially those in the armed forces, should be
encouraged to get involved in that endeavour.
Thirdly, enhancing accountability is the most
difficult issue. Ideally, State or non-State actors
condoning sexual abuse or weaponizing it for attrition
or retribution should be made accountable. However,
the challenges lie in the process being politicized, the
question of victims’ safety and the need for a victimcentred approach.
In conclusion, Cambodia strongly condemns all
forms of sexual violence and calls for an end to all
conflicts. We believe that conflict and instability are
major factors that contribute to sexual violence and
that peace and stability are essential to preventing
that crime.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): We would like to express
our gratitude to the United Kingdom for convening an
open debate of the Security Council on conflict-related
sexual violence. We also express our appreciation
to Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Pramila Patten and all the briefers for their valuable
contribution and insightful perspectives.
Sexual violence in armed conflicts, perpetrated
by State and non-State actors, poses grave security
challenges. It is indeed disconcerting that sexual
violence continues amid a thriving culture of impunity
in armed conflicts. Over the past decade, the Security
Council has put in place a strong framework to combat
that menace, but the level of compliance by parties
to the conflict remains alarmingly low. We feel that
the Council must absolutely focus on identifying
and bridging the implementation gaps to prevent
such atrocities and facilitate the rehabilitation and
reintegration of survivors.
Allow me to make six proposals very quickly.
First, national Governments have the primary
responsibility for prosecuting and deterring such crimes
in conflict situations in their territories, even if these
are alleged to have been committed by non-State actors.
Secondly, Member States should ensure effective
prosecution of sexual violence as a stand-alone crime.
28/41

14/07/2023

There must be no impunity for the perpetrators, and
States should ensure accountability, in line with their
international obligations and their duty to uphold the
rule of law.
Thirdly, the United Nations, upon request, must
assist national authorities in conflict areas in developing
capabilities to strengthen their national investigative
and legal frameworks and related structures for the
speedy investigation and prosecution of perpetrators.
Fourthly, as survivors of conflict-related sexual
violence are not a homogenous group, countries
must adopt a tailored, victim-centred approach to
preventing and responding to sexual violence in armed
conflicts, in line with resolution 2467 (2019), which
calls for strengthening justice and accountability and
for a survivor-centred approach in the prevention and
response to conflict-related sexual violence.
Fifthly, States must ensure adequate focus and
resources for comprehensive and non-discriminatory
assistance for victims of sexual violence, by providing
for, inter alia, medical, psychological, social and
legal services.
Sixthly, sexual violence primarily directed against
women and girls, and also against men and boys, by
terrorists remains a cause of concern. The nexus
between terrorism, trafficking and sexual violence in
armed conflicts needs to be broken.
Going forward, we would recommend that a greater
participation of women in conflict resolution and postconflict reconciliation processes should be promoted
to address deep-rooted inequality and subordination in
society. It is important to make that a precondition for any
peace process to succeed. In addition, mainstreaming
the gender perspective in peace operations and
increasing the representation of women in peacekeeping
are prerequisites for prevention and response. In that
way, India welcomes the United Nations uniformed
gender-parity strategy to increase the number of
women peacekeepers. We also support increasing the
deployment of women protection advisers for effective
monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on
sexual violence in armed conflict. The experience of
India’s deployment of an all-women police contingent
in Liberia illustrates the enormous positive impact
that the deployment of women peacekeepers can have
on the effective participation of women in civilian and
political life in a post-conflict situation.
23-20799

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

We would also add that if we are to promote synergy
and effective coordination it is important to avoid
duplication in the work of various United Nations bodies.
The issue of violence against women, including sexual
violence, is discussed in other United Nations bodies,
including the Human Rights Council. Deliberations in
the Security Council should therefore remain focused
on such atrocities perpetrated in situations of armed
conflict that threaten international peace and security.
I strongly reaffirm India’s unwavering commitment
to actively contributing to our collective efforts to
effectively address sexual violence in situations of
armed conflict.
Lastly, I would also like to address the frivolous
remarks made by a representative from another
delegation concerning my country. I will not dwell on
them for long, but I feel it necessary to dismiss such
remarks with the contempt they deserve. A country
that fails to safeguard the rights of its women and girls,
allowing forced religious conversions and tolerating
sexual and gender-based violence, has no credibility
where passing judgment on any other nation is
concerned, least of all my own.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-dobhany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important meeting. I also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Patten and the
other briefers.
The Yemeni Government attaches great importance
to women’s issues. Very early on our Government
developed a national plan on women and peace and
security pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000), based on
the four pillars of prevention, participation, protection
and recovery. A normative framework and committees
were established in collaboration with Government
partners, including the National Committee on Women,
law-enforcement agencies, civil-society organizations,
academia and the private sector. Our Ministry of
Social Affairs and Labour has organized and currently
oversees the national team responsible for implementing
the national plan and relevant activities.
Sexual violence is a degrading and heinous violation
of human rights. It creates significant challenges to
achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
in the areas of gender equality, reducing inequality and

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

access to justice. That requires building effective and
accountable institutions at all levels.
My country’s delegation has taken note of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2023/413) on conflictrelated sexual violence, and we thank Ms. Patten for
her efforts. Yemen is committed to achieving peace
and to positively and constructively implementing all
regional and international efforts and endeavours, as
well as those of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, pursuant to the agreed terms of
reference for a political solution. We affirm that the
traditions and customs of Yemeni society proscribe any
form of violation of the dignity of Yemeni women, and
our national legislation criminalizes physical violence
against women.
The Houthi militias have continued their numerous
violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, which include violations
harming women and girls and depriving them of their
political, economic and social rights. Those violations
have been documented in national reports and those
of international human rights agencies, as well as
the reports of the Panel of Experts on Yemen, most
recently in 2022, as well as the report of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict for this year. They include
the following.
First, the Houthi militias have discriminated
against and marginalized women, imposing harsh
restrictions on them in areas under their control.
They have restricted their freedom of movement and
forbidden them to travel abroad unless accompanied
by a male. Women have been deprived of fundamental
rights and subjected to severe social practices and
gender-based segregation in schools and Government
institutions, as well as being denied a quality education
and the right to work outside the home and participate
in public political and social life.
Secondly, with regard to sexual violence, we have
documented many cases involving sexual exploitation
and abuse committed by the Houthi militias against
women and girls in areas under their control with the
aim of terrorizing the population, in flagrant violation
of international humanitarian law. One example is the
arbitrary arrest and detention of Intisar Al-Hammadi
and her colleagues, who were imprisoned, unfairly
tried by Houthi militias, accused of indecent acts and

23-2079929/41

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

possession of narcotics and condemned to a five-year
prison term.
Thirdly, there is the issue of arbitrary arrests and
detention. The militias have been arresting women and
girls without legal cause and based on false accusations,
after which they are detained in secret prisons in harsh
and inhumane conditions for their activities in the
political, media or other arenas.
Fourthly, women and girls are seeing their
fundamental freedoms violated, including freedom
of expression, through defamation campaigns against
women’s rights defenders aimed at obstructing their
work and undermining confidence in them and in the
cases they are defending.
The Security Council’s resolution 2564 (2021), on
sanctions against Yemenis, has imposed sanctions on the
Houthi leader Sultan Zabin, as a result of the horrendous
and systematic campaign of arrests, detentions, torture,
sexual violence and rape perpetrated against women
and girls in areas under Houthi control. The resolution
reaffirms the international community and the Security
Council’s refusal to tolerate practices of torture and
sexual violence in areas under Houthi control, and it
supports the rights of Yemeni women in those areas. We
stress the importance of continuing to list the Houthi
leaders who are responsible for such practices so that
they are held accountable and so that justice can be
served for the victims. Many women activists are still
languishing in their prisons and undergoing physical
torture, sexual violence and rape.
In
conclusion,
strengthening
international
cooperation to address conflict-related sexual violence
is an important step towards achieving real and sustained
change for women and girls by sharing information and
expertise and providing technical and financial support
for countries that are suffering in conflict or postconflict situations. In that regard, we thank all of our
regional and international partners, in particular the
Government of Norway, which has supported Yemen
in implementing and following up its national plan
on women, peace and security by providing us with
expertise and funds.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Ms. Kelly (Ireland): I thank our briefers today.
We would like to take this opportunity to reiterate our
steadfast commitment to Special Representative Patten
30/41

14/07/2023

and to the work of her Office, which is so indispensable
in shining a light on what is so often obscured. I
commend the contribution of our civil-society briefers
today, whose bravery is remarkable. They remind us
that our approach to this most heinous of crimes must
always be centred on survivors and prioritize their
needs, perspectives and aspirations.
Ireland aligns itself with the statements made on
behalf of the European Union, the Group of Friends of
Women, Peace and Security and the Group of Friends
of the Responsibility to Protect.
As the Secretary-General outlines in his report
(S/2023/413), 2022 has exposed civilians to heightened
levels of sexual and gender-based violence against
a backdrop of shrinking civil-society space and the
collapse of the rule of law in conflict settings. Across
the globe, whether in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Haiti, Myanmar, Ukraine or elsewhere, sexual
and gender-based violence continues to be brandished
as a weapon and tactic of war, and impunity regrettably
remains the norm.
First and foremost, we repeat the call on all parties
to conflict to immediately cease all forms of conflictrelated sexual violence. Furthermore, all States should
commit to a zero-tolerance policy for crimes of sexual
and gender-based violence, in line with their obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. That has been set out in numerous
Security Council resolutions since the adoption of
resolution 1820 (2008). Yet while our commitment
to eliminating all forms of conflict-related sexual
violence remains resolute on paper, translating that into
reality remains a challenge. Civilians on the ground,
mostly women and girls, continue to suffer, including
in new and emerging manifestations, whether online,
through the acts of mercenaries in private military
companies or in gang warfare. Where acts of sexual
and gender-based violence in conflict are ignored or
even emboldened, that scourge will persist. Access to
justice for survivors and accountability for perpetrators
is absolutely essential. Though we have seen some
encouraging developments in strengthening rule-oflaw institutions and national legislations on protection
and reparations, there remains much more to do in that
space. In that regard, we welcome the recent launch of
the legal guidebook on State obligations on conflictrelated sexual violence.
23-20799

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

Where national efforts fail, the international
community, in particular the Security Council, has a
duty to step up. Eight sanctions regimes of the Council
include conflict-related sexual violence within their
designation criteria. We believe that should be a
prerequisite across all regimes and that the Council
should continue to designate individuals who are
specifically responsible for acts of sexual and genderbased violence, as done recently in Haiti and Yemen.
The Council and its subsidiary bodies should continue
close collaboration with the Special Representative
and her Office and give due consideration to a
dedicated field visit on the topic of conflict-related
sexual violence. Critically, resource and budgetary
commitments to deploying women protection advisers
to United Nations missions and offices should match
the political commitment we heard around this table
today. Otherwise, we simply pay lip service to what is
a serious threat, not just to individual security, but to
international peace and security.
Finally, we wish to recognize the outstanding work
undertaken by women-led organizations at the coalface,
dealing with conflict-related sexual violence. Those
organizations provide meaningful and sometimes
life-saving to support to survivors in the absence of
more lasting solutions, often facing reprisals of their
own. We encourage Member States to keep such
organizations at the forefront of considerations in all
humanitarian and development funding and efforts.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Bangladesh.
Mr. Muhith (Bangladesh): I thank the presidency
of the United Kingdom for organizing this important
open debate. I also thank Ms. Pramila Patten, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the other briefers for their
comprehensive and insightful remarks.
Bangladesh aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security
and by the representative by Botswana on behalf of the
Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect.
We had the horrific experience of sexual violence
in conflict during our liberation war in 1971. More than
200,000 of our mothers and sisters were violated during
that war. However, in a war-ravaged country with a lot
of limitations, our father of the nation, Bangabandhu
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, took immediate action to

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

meet the urgent needs of the victims and established
a rehabilitation board for relief and reconstruction for
war-affected women. The board arranged rehabilitation
for the victims, including remedial measures to address
physical and psychological trauma. In addition to the
victim-support approach, most the perpetrators of the
sexual violence have been brought to justice through
a trial process. The contribution of victims to our
independence has also been recognized officially.
In line with our commitment to preventing and
stopping sexual violence in conflict, we have always
been an ardent advocate and supporter of the women
and peace and security agenda. We proudly recall that
the Security Council adopted the historic and landmark
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security in 2000, when Bangladesh was a member of
the Council and played an important role in advancing
the issue.
Regrettably, years later, we had to witness the worst
form of sexual violence against the Rohingya in our
neighbouring Myanmar. We have been providing all
critical support to those 1.2 million Rohingya who have
taken shelter in Bangladesh. Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Pramila Patten has also visited
the Rohingya camps in Cox’s Bazar and heard firsthand from the victims. We have been repeatedly urging
the Myanmar authorities to ensure the safe, voluntary
and sustainable return of the Rohingya. Unfortunately,
more than six years have passed, and no progress has
been made towards their repatriation. Not a single
Rohingya has returned, owing to a lack of conducive
conditions in Myanmar. I refer to the SecretaryGeneral’s call to allow immediate and unconstrained
access to United Nations-mandated investigatory and
reporting bodies and humanitarian actors to provide
support to the affected populations. At the same time,
we would like to see the perpetrators of sexual violence
held accountable in Myanmar.
It is unfortunate that sexual violence continues
to be used as a tactic of war, torture and terrorism.
The Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2023/413)
mentioned that, in most contexts, impunity remained the
norm, while emerging threats in the largely ungoverned
digital space and the combination of climate insecurity,
State fragility and structural gender inequality further
exposed women and girls to conflict-related sexual
violence. In that context, allow me to highlight a
few points.

23-2079931/41

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

First, States have the primary responsibility to
prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual violence.
In that connection, it is imperative to ensure the
capacity-building of States to effectively address the
root causes and to meet the needs of victims in order
to reintegrate them into normal life. National action
plans on women and peace and security can also play a
critical role in the efforts of Member States to address
sexual violence in conflict.
Secondly, we urge that the necessary steps be
taken in addressing the gender-based digital divide.
Gender-based hate speech and incitement to violence
are fuelling conflicts in many places. At the same
time, victims are disproportionately affected by the
lack of access to digital tools and resources, hindering
their access to life-saving security and public health
information and networks, among others.
Thirdly, in addition to condemning that impunity
for conflict-related sexual violence remains the norm,
we need to ensure accountability through ensuring a
gender-sensitive and efficient security and judicial
sector and strengthening legal frameworks and justice
mechanisms in national contexts. The Council needs
to use its mandate and authority when national justice
mechanisms are unable to deliver.
Fourthly, we highlight the role of United Nations
peacekeepers in providing life-saving services and
psychological support to the victims of conflict-related
sexual violence in various war-ravaged zones. In that
regard, we refer to the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral to include dedicated operational provisions on
gender-responsive security and justice sector reform
to prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual
violence in the mandate authorizations and renewals
of peace operations, as well as in transition plans. We
also underscore the importance of the deployment of
women’s protection advisers to peace operations.
Fifthly, we call for greater coordination and
complementarity
among
the
United
Nations
mechanisms, especially in the reinvigorated resident
coordinator system in the field, to complement the
Council’s work to address conflict-related sexual
violence. We also call for greater synergies between the
mandated United Nations entities and the Committee
on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women.
Finally, we underscore the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission in helping to implement the Council’s
resolutions, including resolution 2467 (2019) through
32/41

14/07/2023

its advice. The Peacebuilding Commission’s advice
can bring the voices of women briefers and women-led
organizations to the Council.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): First
of all, my delegation would like to thank the United
Kingdom for organizing this open debate on an issue
of the utmost importance — that of eliminating sexual
violence in times of conflict. I would also like to pay
special tribute to the civil society representatives who
shared their moving testimonies with us.
The Secretary-General’s annual report (S/2023/413),
published in June, shows that history is, unfortunately,
repeating itself, with further cases of sexual violence,
rape and torture, painting a picture of unacceptable
savagery and brutality and laying out a chronicle of
sexual violence in times of conflict.
Over the past decade, there has been a significant
paradigm shift, and progress has been made, thanks in
particular to the mandate of the Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the relevant
Security Council resolutions that succeeded resolution
1325 (2000). Today, sexual violence in armed conflict
and post-conflict situations is considered a threat to
international peace and security.
However, given that those abhorrent acts have
persisted, indignation is no longer enough. We need
to step up our collective action and come up with true
solutions that are pragmatic and, above all, sustainable,
to prevent and punish acts of sexual violence and help
survivors to rebuild their lives and reintegrate fully
into their communities, while also preserving their
rights and dignity. In this respect, let me highlight the
following points.
First, the international community would benefit
from a more comprehensive and holistic approach,
which prevents conflicts and addresses their root
causes. Conflict prevention is a central pillar not only
of the women and peace and security agenda, but also
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
whose Sustainable Development Goals, particularly
Goals 5 and 16, place great emphasis on conflict
prevention and prove that women’s issues, peace,
security and development are linked, interconnected
and inseparable.
23-20799

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

Secondly, women must be included in
decision-making processes, in particular by promoting
and encouraging national initiatives aimed at ending
gender-based discrimination. It is also crucial that
women’s participation in debates on conflict resolution,
the maintenance of peace and security, and post-conflict
peacebuilding is supported.
Thirdly, we need to fight impunity, enshrine a zerotolerance policy and ensure access to justice for victims.
At the same time, the stigma surrounding victims of
sexual violence, and the children born of such violence,
must be corrected, as it constitutes a new form of
victimization. They need to be provided with medical
care and reintegrated socially and economically.
Finally, religious leaders have an influential role
to play in combating the abuse of religion to justify
gender-based violence and discrimination. They must
be encouraged to speak out strongly against these
heinous crimes. In addition, local actors and community
leaders have their own crucial role to play, as they
can identify the warning signs of sexual violence,
create early-warning systems and propose appropriate
prevention strategies.
The Kingdom of Morocco strongly condemns all
forms of sexual violence, including in times of conflict,
and considers them to be barbaric, brutal and inhumane
methods and practices, with serious consequences
for the process of establishing lasting peace and
reconciliation. Convinced of women’s contribution
as crucial early-warning mechanisms, given their
awareness of threats to local security and their role in
mediation, Morocco actively participates in a number
of initiatives, including the promotion of mediation in
the Mediterranean, the Women, Peace and Security
Focal Points Network, and the Mediterranean Women
Mediators Network.
Furthermore, since the creation of the Royal Armed
Forces in 1956, and the early integration of female
personnel into it, the inclusion of women in the Moroccan
military has grown increasingly. Indeed, His Majesty
King Mohammed VI, Supreme Commander and Chief
of the General Staff of the Royal Armed Forces, has
granted high-level instructions that authorize female
personnel to take part in the competitive entrance
examination to the higher military academies under the
same conditions as their male counterparts. As a result,
Moroccan military women now serve in the National
Defence Administration and in all components of the

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

Royal Armed Forces, namely, the Air Force, the Navy
and the Royal Gendarmerie. Finally, women are also
present in the United Nations peacekeeping missions in
which Moroccan contingents are deployed, in particular
in the Democratic Republic of Congo and the Central
African Republic.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Yoseph (Ethiopia): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for her briefing
this morning.
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/413), we would like to convey our thanks to the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the participatory working methods and
consultations that allowed us to react to the draft report
prior to its finalization. However, it is regrettable that,
despite our engagement, the report does not incorporate
our inputs and serious concerns.
For that reason, I would like to put on record our
strong reservations about the scope and content of
the report where it deals with Ethiopia as well as its
reference to the International Commission of Human
Rights Experts on Ethiopia. We do not recognize this
Commission and any of its substandard work. We
therefore caution the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General from using such dubious sources.
In the last two years, Ethiopia was faced with
extraordinary security challenges. Despite these
challenges, the Government of Ethiopia has made
concerted efforts to ensure, respect and protect the
rights of women in vulnerable situations. Unhindered
humanitarian aid has been expedited to all people in
need of assistance. The implementation of the November
2022 peace agreement has enabled the further provision
of humanitarian aid, and the restoration of services and
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants are now under way.
We have also charted a clear path for accountability
for alleged human rights violations. On women’s rights,
we followed a four-tiered approach that encompasses
accountability and victim support. The first of these
tiers is the Inter-Ministerial Task Force (IMTF), which
is implementing the recommendations of the joint
investigation report of the Ethiopian Human Rights
Commission and the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights. The second tier involves the military

23-2079933/41

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

justice system, which ensures accountability through
its own mechanisms. In this process, we have pending
and closed prosecutions against suspected perpetrators
of alleged crimes against women. The third tier
consists of the regular law-enforcement mechanisms
that are coordinated with the IMTF on the prosecution
of suspects and the provision of remedies for victims.
The fourth tier involves the work of the Ethiopian
Ministry of Women and Social Affairs, which leads
cross-sectional initiatives to provide rehabilitation and
comprehensive support for victims.
All the foregoing processes will further be
consolidated in the mechanisms to be established
under the transitional justice policy. The options for
this transitional justice policy are being discussed
in nationwide consultations. It is expected that the
policy will take its final form in August and that
implementation will start in September. The Ethiopian
Human Rights Commission and the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights are providing
technical assistance to ensure these consultations
conform to international standards.
Our reconstruction and recovery programmes
have also given adequate place for such sectors such
as health, education, and the economy, and have a
special focus on women. We have also intensified our
efforts aimed at providing psychological support, legal
assistance and socioeconomic support.
Finally, I would like to reiterate that Ethiopia has
an unwavering commitment to the respect, protection
and fulfilment of all the human rights of women and
to women’s equal and meaningful participation in
all political processes. It is on this basis that we will
further scrutinize the report with a view to addressing
any relevant aspects of the recommendations contained
therein. While we commit to continuing our engagement
with her Office, we hope that the Special Representative
will sufficiently reflect on the inputs we provide and
operate within her defined scope.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Chindawongse (Thailand): At the outset,
Thailand wishes to express its appreciation to the
United Kingdom for convening today’s open debate
on the important issue of conflict-related sexual
violence. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
recent report (S/2023/413) as well as all the briefers for
their contributions.
34/41

14/07/2023

Despite all the efforts that we have made towards
the elimination of all acts of violence against civilians
in armed conflict, it is clear from the report of the
Secretary-General that conflict-related sexual violence
remains persistent and widespread. This sad reality is
also echoed in his annual report on children and armed
conflict (S/2023/363), which was distributed just last
month. Girls continue to be disproportionately affected
by sexual violence in conflicts. This cannot continue.
Thailand unequivocally condemns sexual violence,
both in times of conflict and in times of peace, as well
as the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war. The
growing trend of such criminal acts is indeed worrisome,
and more should be done to address this issue.
We strongly believe that the international
community and all parties involved in conflict must
strengthen their efforts to implement the relevant
Security Council resolutions adopted to ensure the
protection of civilians. In that regard, I wish to highlight
the following four points.
First, prevention is key. Thailand believes that
the protection and promotion of women’s rights, the
empowerment of women and the advancement of
gender equality are fundamental elements in combating
sexual violence. Therefore, it is essential to reduce
pre-existing structural inequalities, eradicate all
forms of discrimination and combat extreme poverty
among women and girls. We need to recognize that
their meaningful participation within our societies
as active agents of change is fundamental for our
prevention efforts.
Secondly, we must protect and guarantee the
rights of survivors of conflict-related sexual violence.
To avoid the marginalization and stigmatization of
victims, survivor-centred approaches need to be
employed to ensure their access to services and justice.
In parallel, effective investigation and prosecution of
sexual violence crimes need to be reinforced to hold
the perpetrators accountable, as well as to prevent the
recurrence of that human rights violation.
Thirdly, Thailand wishes to reiterate its full
support to the women and peace and security agenda
and continues to look for ways to strengthen its
commitment. We fully recognize the role of women as
security providers and peacebuilders, not just as victims.
Specific measures should be undertaken to ensure
women’s full, equal and meaningful participation at all
levels of peace and security dialogues and processes.
23-20799

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

In that connection, we support the recommendation
to increase the deployment of women peacekeepers in
line with the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy 20182028. We commend the work of women’s protection
advisers in all United Nations peacekeeping operations
and special political missions and encourage their
further deployment.
Fourth and lastly, as a troop- and police-contributing
country, Thailand adheres to the policy of zero
tolerance of sexual exploitation and abuse in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. In the meantime, we
are convinced that all military and police personnel
throughout the entire chain of command, regardless
of their gender, should receive adequate training to
effectively prevent and respond to sexual violence.
In that regard, Thailand supports the call to provide
technical support and capacity-building for troopand police-contributing countries through both
predeployment and in-mission training.
In conclusion, sexual violence against people of
any gender, whether in times of conflict or peace, has
no justification. We all must do our part and step up
our efforts to end the cycles of sexual violence in all
instances once and for all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Ms. Webster (Australia): Australia thanks the
United Kingdom for convening today’s open debate
and for its continued leadership on conflict-related
sexual violence.
Notwithstanding the many Security Council
resolutions and the comprehensive nature of States’
obligations under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, women and girls
continue to be subjected to sexual violence in conflictaffected settings, including in Afghanistan, Myanmar,
Ukraine and the Sudan.
Australia strongly condemns the harassment, the
use of force and rape as instruments of repression and
political intimidation against women peacebuilders and
human rights defenders. The targeting of public health
facilities, impeding access to services for survivors,
is unacceptable.
Australia’s commitment to eliminating sexual
violence in conflict is long-standing. We are committed
to addressing technology-facilitated gender-based

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

violence, delivering justice and holding perpetrators
to account.
We welcome the deployment of women’s protection
advisers in United Nations peacekeeping missions.
Australia’s Defence Force, Federal Police and
Department of Foreign Affairs train and deploy gender
advisers on military, police, humanitarian, relief and
recovery and crisis operations and missions. We also
prioritize efforts to create more diverse and inclusive
military and police institutions, through our support to
the Elsie Initiative Fund and UN-Women, to accelerate
the meaningful representation of uniformed women
across all levels of United Nations peace operations.
Australia is also a founding member of the Call to
Action on Protection from Gender-Based Violence
in Emergencies.
Survivors of conflict-related sexual violence
are not a homogenous group; hence, the need for
responding to intersecting forms of discrimination
and tailored, survivor-centred action. That includes
employing the Murad Code and ensuring that persons
subjected to sexual violence in conflict have access to
safe, comprehensive support and services.
We encourage Member States to promote
accountability for sexual and gender-based violence and
the Security Council to continue to counter impunity
with all the means at its disposal. We are particularly
concerned about the link between private military
security companies and reports of sexual violence.
Existing frameworks, such as the Montreux Document,
are important tools to help close the gap on attribution
and accountability.
Efforts to prevent and resolve conflict cannot be
separated from efforts to address sexual and genderbased violence. We must do more. We must implement
the Security Council resolutions that condemn conflictrelated sexual violence and fully implement the women
and peace and security agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the convening of this important open debate
and for the briefings by Special Representative Pramila
Patten and the representatives of civil society. We are
also grateful for the work undertaken by Ms. Patten.
Throughout history, rape and sexual violence
have been used as weapons of war and often as a

23-2079935/41

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

deliberate strategy in the conduct of hostilities. Since
the adoption of resolution 1820 (2008), there has been
a growing public awareness of those crimes and their
consequences. Sexual violence perpetuates conflict
and instability. Its long-term, destructive nature has
devastating effects, not only on the survivors of this
crime but on entire communities.
Despite numerous international instruments calling
for the protection of civilians from sexual assault in
armed conflict and recognizing that such acts can
constitute war crimes, conflict-related sexual violence
continues to prevail in a culture of near total impunity.
Conflict-related sexual violence may be exacerbated
in contexts where extreme gender inequality prevails,
contributing to its normalization. Gender inequality
is both an underlying cause of sexual crimes and an
obstacle to their prevention. Preventing systematic and
widespread sexual violence begins in peacetime with
the adoption of national laws that are sufficiently robust
in terms of criminalizing such behaviour. States must
have legislative mechanisms and judicial institutions
that are prepared to comprehensively address that issue.
Crimes associated with sexual violence have a
gendered impact. The discussions of those crimes
typically focus on violence perpetrated by men
against women and girls. However, we must expand
discussions to include the impacts of those criminal
acts when they are also directed against men, boys
and LGBTIQ+ persons. In such cases, there is a high
level of underreporting, which, coupled with reprisals,
discrimination and stigmatization, contributes to
widespread impunity for perpetrators.
Holding perpetrators of sexual violence to account
is vital to ensure justice for victims and as deterrence
for the perpetration of future crimes. Perpetrators of
such crimes can be individually prosecuted under
international law, and States have a primary obligation to
do so. When a State is unwilling or unable to investigate
and prosecute international crimes, including conflictrelated sexual violence, the international community
should take the necessary measures to refer the situation
to the International Criminal Court. The Rome Statute
clearly criminalizes rape and any other form of sexual
violence as war crimes and crimes against humanity.
One area where acts of sexual violence occur is in
schools or on routes to and from schools. Resolution
2601 (2021) on the protection of education during armed
conflict expresses concern about the consequences of
36/41

14/07/2023

attacks that women and girls may suffer, including rape
and other forms of sexual violence, which may prevent
them from continuing their education. In that regard, we
want to draw attention to the Safe Schools Declaration,
which is an intergovernmental political commitment to
ensuring safe education and preventing sexual violence
in conflict. We therefore encourage all States that have
not yet done so to subscribe to the Declaration, which
has already been endorsed by more than 100 countries.
In conclusion, we would like to remind the Council
that in 2015, at the initiative of Argentina and the United
Kingdom, the General Assembly adopted resolution
69/293, proclaiming 19 June the International Day for
the Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict, with a
view to raising awareness of the need to end conflictrelated sexual violence, honour the victims and
survivors of sexual violence and pay tribute to all who
have bravely dedicated their lives to the struggle to end
such crimes and have lost their lives in that endeavour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Ahmadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank the
briefers for their input.
Armed conflict has a devastating and
disproportionate impact on women and girls, making
them the primary victims of violence, displacement
and human rights violations. The use of sexual violence
as a tactic in such conflicts is an abhorrent crime that
disproportionately affects women and girls, who bear
the brunt of its horrific brutality. Iran strongly condemns
all forms of sexual violence perpetrated during armed
conflict and calls on all parties to armed conflicts to
comply with their obligations under international law.
Within our volatile region of the Middle East, the
threats posed by foreign occupation and interference
and terrorism put the rights and safety of women in
grave jeopardy and disregard their security needs.
Addressing such inhumane practices requires
a collaborative approach. The Security Council
resolutions relevant to armed conflict explicitly
underscore the imperative of combating conflictrelated sexual violence and emphasizing accountability
for those heinous acts. The primary goal is to foster
an environment that effectively prevents and responds
to such violence while safeguarding and empowering
victims. However, achieving success in prevention
hinges on addressing the root causes, and primarily
the conflicts themselves. Consequently, the ultimate
23-20799

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

solution for curbing such crimes lies in the complete
elimination of armed conflict. Unfortunately, as long
as terrorism, violent extremism and foreign occupation
and interference persist, that will continue to be elusive.
Meanwhile, we should concentrate our efforts on
advancing women’s empowerment initiatives, such as
enhancing access to education, economic opportunities
and health-care services.

to higher levels of sexual violence as a result of the
collapse of the rule of law and the escalation of conflict
following unconstitutional changes of Government.
Patterns of sexual violence have deepened, and sexual
violence has continued to be used as a deliberate tactic
of war. It has also been used in the context of political
violence to intimidate and punish opponents. Impunity
remains pervasive.

Besides that, specific measures such as strengthening
the rule of law, ensuring the effective functioning of
justice systems and providing comprehensive support
to victims are pivotal in protecting women and girls
from sexual violence during armed conflict. It is also
equally vital to promote accountability, which is a
crucial aspect in addressing conflict-related sexual
violence. It is critical for the international community
to respond decisively, particularly in cases where
those reprehensible crimes are perpetrated by foreign
occupying forces in conflict zones.

It has long been documented and is well known to
the United Nations that the Myanmar military has used
sexual violence, such as rape and gang rape, as a tactic
of war during conflict. The security and police forces
under the direct control of the illegitimate military
junta have been systematically using sexual violence as
a tactic of war, political oppression, intimidation and
retaliation since the illegal military coup in February
2021. Ms. Naw Hser Hser informed the Council
about the true and devastating situation in Myanmar,
especially the heartbreaking situation that women and
girls are facing. I want to take this opportunity to thank
and salute Ms. Naw Hser Hser and all women human
rights defenders for their tireless efforts and bravery
in protecting women and girls and promoting their
rights. Echoing what Ms. Naw Hser Hser said earlier
this morning, I appeal to the military junta and its
supporters not to kill or harm people.

In conclusion, we categorically refute the
groundless allegations and unjustified references made
about Iran in the Secretary-General’s recent report on
sexual violence in armed conflict (S/2023/413). The
allegations are absolutely false, made without solid
evidence and based solely on unreliable and distorted
information from media sources. Considering the
report’s specific focus on sexual violence in armed
conflict, it is deeply concerning that the Special
Representative has overstepped her mandate by making
unfounded claims about a Member State that have
nothing to do with armed conflict. We strongly object
to and condemn such irresponsible actions, which
undermine the integrity of the report and of the United
Nations in general.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Tun (Myanmar): At the outset, I would like to
thank the United Kingdom for organizing this annual
debate on the important issue of conflict-related sexual
violence. I also thank Special Representative Patten and
the civil-society representatives, including Ms. Naw
Hser Hser from Myanmar, for their insightful briefings
this morning.
This year’s report of the Secretary-General on
conflict-related sexual violence (S/2023/413) informs
us about the worrying trends in sexual violence across
the world. In many situations, including that of my
own country, Myanmar, civilians have been exposed

It is clear and certain that the people of
Myanmar, particularly women and girls, are facing
severe suffering caused by the military junta. I have
repeatedly informed the Council and the General
Assembly that the violence and atrocities that the junta
has committed since the coup are not isolated incidents.
They are so widespread, targeted and systematic that
the Independent Investigative Mechanism for Myanmar
concluded that they could amount to crimes against
humanity and war crimes. I appreciate the fact that the
Secretary-General and Special Representative Patten
have rightly included the Myanmar military, including
its border guard, on the list in this year’s report of
parties credibly suspected of committing or being
responsible for patterns of rape or other forms of sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict.
On the other hand, the National Unity Government
of Myanmar, in line with the Federal Democracy
Charter, has taken a people-centred approach to
advancing the women and peace and security agenda
through civic actors. The National Unity Government
has been doing its best in every way to make sure
that its People’s Defence Force adheres to the rules

23-2079937/41

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

of engagement and to international humanitarian and
human rights law.
Women and girls in Myanmar, particularly those
in conflict areas, need protection from the military’s
sexual violence. The survivors deserve justice. The
junta is unwilling to address the sexual violence being
committed by its personnel. Instead, it maintains a
culture of impunity among the rank and file. To put
an end to this heinous crime of sexual violence in
Myanmar, we must transform the military institution
from the main sexual violence perpetrator to a
professional and accountable institution that is subject
to the rule of law and democratic oversight, as well as
to federal democratic norms and principles. That is a
key goal of our ongoing revolution against the military
dictatorship in Myanmar.
I agree with and endorse the demands made earlier
today by civil society representative Ms. Naw Hser
Hser, for the further action of the Security Council. In
addition, I wish to make the following appeal.
It is important that the United Nations system
continue to work with and support women-led
organizations, women civil society organization
leaders and human rights defenders in monitoring and
documenting the sexual violence situation in Myanmar
and assisting survivors in every possible way. All
individual Member States should support Myanmar
women, among others, by giving protection to those
who fled the junta’s atrocities and by supporting
women-led organizations and initiatives. The Security
Council should give serious attention to the situation of
women and girls in Myanmar, especially in conflictaffected areas. It should demand an immediate end to
sexual violence being committed by the military. More
importantly, the Council should take concrete actions
to end military impunity.
Those specific demands should be included in an
enforceable follow-up resolution to resolution 2669
(2022). I therefore wish to urge the members of the
Security Council to start a negotiation process now to
adopt a timely and enforceable resolution on Myanmar.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cyprus.
Mr. Hadjichrysanthou (Cyprus): At the outset,
I would like to thank the British presidency of the
Security Council for the timely organization of today’s
meeting on the important issue of conflict-related
38/41

14/07/2023

sexual violence, as well as the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
for her insightful briefing. We reiterate our full support
for her mandate. We also congratulate the members of
civil society, who made invaluable contributions today.
My delegation fully subscribes to the statement
delivered by the representative of the European Union.
I would like to make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.
Cyprus strongly condemns gender-based violence
in all its forms and manifestations, online and offline,
including all acts of sexual violence against civilians
in armed conflict. Despite the progress made since
the unanimous adoption of resolution 1820 (2008) by
the Security Council in 2008, the abhorrent crime
of conflict-related sexual violence continues, and
impunity, regrettably, prevails in many cases. Victims
and survivors are often living ashamed in the shadows,
awaiting justice and redress.
We are deeply concerned about the growing use of
sexual violence as a tactic of war, torture and terrorism,
including the severity and brutality of such incidents.
Numbers cannot lie and are only the tip of the iceberg,
since many cases remain unreported. These heinous
crimes of conflict-related sexual violence can also
be facilitated and promoted online, utilizing digital
channels. We note with concern that women and girls,
constituting the majority of the victims of conflictrelated sexual violence, are disproportionately affected
by the gender digital divide.
Cyprus recalls that rape and other forms of sexual
violence can constitute a war crime, a crime against
humanity or a constitutive act with respect to genocide.
Conflict-related sexual violence is a peace and security
issue and an impediment to the restoration of peace,
requiring specific operational and policy responses.
These heinous crimes should not remain
unanswered and cannot be addressed in isolation.
Member States have obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
It is their responsibility to prevent and address such
violence, protect and support survivors and bring
perpetrators to justice. In that regard, Cyprus joins
others in calling all parties to armed conflict, including
non-State armed groups, to cease acts of sexual
violence against civilians immediately and completely
and to implement action plans to prevent and address
sexual violence, in accordance with their obligations
23-20799

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

under international humanitarian law and all relevant
Security Council resolutions.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.

Prosecution and accountability are key to ensuring
long-lasting peace. Therefore, we need to strengthen
legal procedures at the national, regional and
international levels, ensuring that all victims of sexual
violence, particularly women and girls, have equal
protection under the law and equal access to justice.

Mr. Marzooq (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My
country’s delegation would like to wish the United
Kingdom delegation every success in presiding over
the Council this month. We also express our thanks
to the sisterly United Arab Emirates for its successful
presidency of the Council last month. We thank as
well Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, for
her briefing.

Addressing the culture of impunity is our common
responsibility. The international community also has
an obligation to ensure accountability for such crimes
when national institutions are unable or unwilling to
do so. The Security Council must use all tools at its
disposal to support action against conflict-related
sexual violence as a tactic of war.
A survivor-centred approach must guide all our
actions and responses to conflict-related sexual violence.
We should always take into consideration that survivors
are not a homogenous group. They have different needs
and perspectives that we need to take into consideration
in addressing the trauma that victims, survivors and
their families are experiencing, including by ensuring
access to medical care and psychosocial support.
As a country that has experienced the atrocity of
conflict-related sexual violence first-hand, Cyprus
attaches great importance to the elimination of all forms
of gender-based violence and joins calls to accelerate
efforts towards their elimination. In that regard,
Cyprus has adopted action plans and strategies related
to gender equality, including legislative measures,
highlighting and promoting the positive role of women
as agents of change.
It is imperative to address the root causes of sexual
violence in conflict settings and of gender-based
violence, which is deeply rooted in historical inequalities
that perpetuate the problem. In that regard, the full,
equal and meaningful participation and involvement of
women in all efforts for the maintenance of peace and
security is a sine qua non for the full implementation of
the peace and security agenda, including in addressing
conflict-related sexual violence.
To conclude, Cyprus remains committed to
continuing to work with the international community to
strengthen the global response to conflict-related sexual
violence in order to protect and empower women, girls,
men and boys, in all their diversity.

Iraq was one of the first Arab countries to develop a
national plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) for the meaningful and effective participation
of women. My country’s delegation would like to
highlight several government measures that were taken
in that regard.
First, the 2021 electoral law allowed Iraqi women
to enter the elections as candidates. That led to 97
women being voted into Parliament, which exceeded
the women’s quota.
Secondly, the National Strategy for Iraqi Women
2023–2030 was launched. It includes participation,
protection, economic empowerment and social elements.
Thirdly, we have established centres for protection
from domestic violence, and work is under way to
develop standardized regulations to govern the work of
those centres.
Fourth, we are working to ensure the prosecution
of perpetrators of conflict-related sexual violence,
together with a zero-tolerance policy for their actions.
They are not entitled to any form of amnesty that has
been granted.
Fifth, in terms of the progress made in applying
the law on compensating Yazidi women survivors, the
Government of Iraq has begun setting up a database
of women and girls entitled to compensation under
the law. Moreover, since March, the Directorate for
Survivor Affairs has been disbursing the first round of
stipends awarded to women survivors. We are working
on listing all remaining survivors in the database.
Sixth, around 72,000 national identification
documents have been issued to women and children,
as well as internally displaced persons, in the
liberated areas.

23-2079939/41

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

Seventh, the Directorate for Survivor Affairs is
implementing a referral system, in collaboration with
10 specialized psychosocial support organizations, to
provide support services to women survivors for their
rehabilitation and reintegration into society.
Eighth, Iraq has continued to deal with the
aftermath of the actions of the terrorist organization
Da’esh, and we are striving to provide and uphold
justice for the victims and their families. We stress
the importance of delivering justice as quickly as
possible, as any protracted deferral would contribute
to impunity for the perpetrators and undermine justice.
In that regard, my delegation stresses the importance
and the need for the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant to provide
the Iraqi judiciary with all the evidence that it has
gathered pursuant to its mandate so that we can move
forward and immediately prosecute suspects fairly
and transparently.
In conclusion, while we condemn all the heinous
crimes perpetrated by Da’esh, we do not support
exploiting the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/413) by including inappropriate wording in it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Namibia.
Mrs. Kuzee (Namibia): Namibia thanks the
United Kingdom presidency for organizing this debate
on women and peace and security. As a champion of
the women and peace and security agenda, we are as
always encouraged by the overwhelming support for
this annual open debate.
Conflict-related sexual violence is a serious
and abhorrent crime that implies a collective moral
obligation and provokes a sense of urgency. It is
therefore worrying that despite the fact that the
Security Council has adopted resolutions recognizing
conflict-related sexual violence as a tactic of war and
terrorism, that violence persists and in some situations
has even increased, with impunity remaining the norm.
Conflict-related sexual violence occurs on a continuum
of interrelated and recurring forms of violence against
women and girls, and the consequences for victims and
their communities are both immediate and long-term. It
not only violates the human rights of its victims, it also
devastates families and communities, with the effects
of those crimes echoing across generations, manifested
through gender inequalities, trauma, stigma, poverty
40/41

14/07/2023

and poor health and well-being. In Africa that seriously
affects our potential to harness the demographic
dividend, as it impedes the potential of women and girls.
Impunity means that children and young adults
learn that sexual violence is acceptable and that
regressive and violent customs and practices reappear.
Resolution 2467 (2019) reminds us that it is the
responsibility of States to end impunity and to prosecute
those responsible for crimes of genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes perpetrated against
civilians, including conflict-related sexual violence.
In seeking to bridge the existing implementation gaps,
we must ensure gender mainstreaming in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding; sensitize forces participating in
peacekeeping missions on gender issues and ensure
that gender sensitization is part of the preparation of
troops and police who are participating in peacekeeping
missions; advocate for more women to be included in
peacekeeping missions at all levels of decision-making
and peacekeeping processes; ensure that personnel
deployed to conflict areas are aware of the causes of
the conflict and of effective strategies of conflict
management and that measures are in place to hold
members of peacekeeping forces accountable for the
commission of conflict-related sexual violence or other
violations, such as sexual exploitation, rape and other
forms of gender-based violence.
The women and peace and security agenda was
born out of the need to promote women’s participation
in efforts and processes aimed at pursuing peace
and security, the prevention of all forms of violence
against women and girls and the protection of women
in conflict and non-conflict situations, as well as the
need to position women not merely as victims but as
key actors in the development of gender-responsive
peace and security policies and programming. As we
continue to drive forward action on women and peace
and security and conflict-related sexual violence, we
must ensure that the rights and needs of the survivors
of sexual violence are at the heart of response efforts
and interventions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Abesadze (Georgia): I would like to express
our appreciation to the United Kingdom presidency
for its leadership in bringing this important issue to
the forefront of today’s discussions. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his latest report (S/2023/413).
23-20799

14/07/2023

Women and peace and security

Georgia aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union earlier today, and I would
like to add some comments in my national capacity.
Unfortunately, sexual violence continues to be used
as a strategy of warfare and a tactic of terror, shattering
lives and scarring communities. It is often present
in military conflicts and has an immense impact on
innocent civilians. It is a horrendous crime that affects
all people, although it disproportionately impacts
women and girls. We are concerned about the findings
of the Secretary-General’s report on violations in
several countries. We condemn the documented cases
of sexual violence and of its use as a method of torture
by Russian forces and Russian-affiliated armed groups
in Ukraine.
Research and experience have shown that conflictrelated sexual and gender-based violence is not an
inevitable by-product of war. It can be prevented.
Eliminating sexual violence during conflict must be
a priority for the international community. It can be
prevented by strengthening national and international
efforts, raising awareness and ensuring justice. The
Security Council’s resolutions on conflict-related
sexual violence have paved the way for States to
establish a firm normative framework that can address
such violence as an issue of peace and security. With
that in mind, the Government of Georgia joined more
than 50 States at the Preventing Sexual Violence in
Conflict Initiative Conference, held in London last
year, and endorsed its political declaration, aimed at
urgently accelerating action to end conflict-related
sexual violence, hold those responsible to account,
shatter the existing culture of impunity, provide more
comprehensive support to survivors and tackle stigma. I
would like take this opportunity to commend the United
Kingdom for the successful outcome of the Conference.
Furthermore, at the Conference Georgia undertook
national commitments outlining steps to address
conflict-related sexual violence by contributing
to a strengthened global response, implementing
policies and programmes to tackle the harmful gender
stereotypes that drive such violence, strengthening
justice for conflict-related sexual violence and

S/PV.9378 (Resumption 1)

supporting survivors and children born as a result of
that violence. Moreover, the promotion of women’s
rights and gender equality, including in the military,
remains among my Government’s top priorities. The
gender-equality strategy of the Ministry of Defence
of Georgia has established the conditions needed to
guarantee equal rights, freedoms and opportunities
for men and women, prevent and eradicate all forms
of discrimination, counter all forms of gender violence
and eradicate misconduct, sexual harassment and
physical and psychological mistreatment. The Georgian
Ministry of Defence is also continuing its efforts to
increase peacekeeping personnel’s capacity to prevent
and respond to sexual and gender-based violence,
including in conflict and post-conflict situations.
All personnel deployed to peacekeeping missions are
familiarized with the Security Council resolutions on
women and peace and security within the framework
of mandatory predeployment trainings. I would like to
add that in October 2022, the Georgian Government
adopted its most recent national action plan for the
period from 2022 to 2024 on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).
However, the illegal occupation of Georgia’s
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia regions by the
Russian Federation remains the main obstacle to the
Georgian Government’s implementation of the human
rights protection framework for the women and girls
who remain on the other side of the illegally erected
barbed-wire fences. They are systematically subjected
to human rights violations, including the denial of the
right to freedom of movement, threats to their physical
security for so-called illegal border crossings and
illegal detentions. Recently, there has been an extremely
worrisome pattern observed: an increased targeting of
Georgian women. The outrageous practice of illegal
detentions is being used as an instrument of terror
against one of the most vulnerable groups. International
engagement and monitoring of the situation inside the
conflict-affected regions, and the Russia-occupied
regions of Georgia in particular, is therefore paramount
for ensuring substantive gender equality and preventing
sexual violence against women.
The meeting rose at 6.40 p.m.

23-2079941/41
