ques sur des matieres relatives aux Territoires non
autonomes, aux conditions prevues aux paragraphes 2 et 3 ci-dessus;
5. Que, sans prejudice des renseignements
transmis en application de l' Article 73 e, les renseignements supplementaires mentionnes ci-dessus soient, par l'intermediaire du Secretaire general, communiques aux institutions specialisees
competentes;
6. Qu'a des fins de comparaison, le Secretaire
general soit egalement habilite a inserer, clans ses
resumes et analyses, en indiq uant les sources, tous
renseignements statistiques officiels disponibles
clans les services statistiques du Secretariat, et dont
le caractere permettrait d'etablir des comparaisons, sous reserve d'un accord a intervenir entre
le Secretaire general et le Membre interesse.
Cent-huitieme seance pleniere,
le 3 novembre 1947.

to Non-Self-Governing Territories, subject to the
provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3 above;
5. That, in addition to the information transmitted under Article 73 e, the above-mentioned
supplemental information shall be communicated
to the appropriate specialized agencies through
the intermediary of the Secretary-General;
6. That, for purposes of comparison, the Secretary-General shall be authorized, in addition, to
include in his summaries and analyses all relevant
and comparable official statistical information
which is available in the statistical services of the
Secretariat and which may be agreed upon between the Secretary-General and the Member
concerned, giving appropriate citation of sources.
Hundred and eighth plenary meeting,
3 November 1947.

144 (II). Voluntary transmission of information regarding the development of
self-governing institutions in the NonSelf-Governing Territories

144 (II). Transmission spontanee de renseignements relatifs au progres de la
participation des autochtones au fonctionnement des organes locaux de
gouvernement

The General Assembly,
L' Assemblee generale
Having noted that some Members responsible
Prend acte du fait que certains Membres qui
for the administration of Non-Self-Governing a.,~ument l'administration de Territoires non auTerritories already have Yoluntarily transmitted I tonomes ont de leur propre mouvement transmis
information on the <ln·clopment of ,df-governing des renseignements relatifs au progres de la parinstitutions in the Non-Sclf-Gun:rning Terri- ticipation des autochtones au fonctionnement des
tories,
organcs locaux de gouvernement clans les Territoires non autonomes;
Considers that the voluntary transm1ss10n of
Considere que la transmission spontanee de tels
such information and its summarizing by the renseignements et le resume qu'en fait le SecreSecretary-General arc entirely in conformity with taire general repondent entierement a l'esprit de
the spirit of Article 73 of the Charter, and should I' Article 73 de la Charte et doivent, en consebe therefore duly noted and encouraged.
quence, etre constatcs et encourages.
Hundred and eighth plenary meeting,
Cent-huitieme seance pleniere.
3 November 1947.
le 3 novembre 1947.
145 HI). Collaboration of the specialized
agencies in regard to Article 73 e of
the Charter
The General Assembly
Invites the Secretary-General to enter into relations with the secretariats of the specialized agencies in order to allow these agencies:
1. To assist the Secretary-General of the United
Nations in preparing analyses of the information
required under Article 73 c of the Charter on a
functional basis;
2. To make recommendations through the appropriate channels, to the General Assembly with
respect to the form and content of the information with a view to incorporating therein the informational needs of the specialized agencies, and
3. To bring to the notice nf the General Assembly through the appropri:,te channels, conclusions based on this information and supplemental
information as to the conditions, within their respective fields of interest, of Non-Self-Governing
Territories generally and particularly as to the

56

145 (II). Collaboration des institutions specialisees en ce qui concerne I' Article
73 e de la Charte
L'Assemblee generale
Invite le Secretaire general a prendre contact
avec les secretariats des institutions specialisees
pour permettre a celles-ci :
1. D'assister le Secretaire general des Nations
Unies clans la preparation d'analyses par sujet des
renseignements transmis en application de l' Article 73 e de la Charte;
2. De faire, par Jes voies appropriees, des recommandations a l'Assemblee generale en cc qui
concerne la forme et le contenu de ces renseignemcnts, pour qu'y soit incorporec la documentation
qui prcsente un interct particulier pour les institutions spccialisces, et
3. Dans le domaine de leurs attributions respectivcs, de porter a !'attention de I' Assemblee
gencrale, par les voies approprices, les conclusions
tirccs de l'etude de ces renseignements et des rcnseignements supplementaires; ces conclusions auront rapport d'une maniere generale aux condi-

services which the specialized agencies might
make available to the administering nations in
improving these conditions.

Hundred and eighth plenary meeting,
3 November 1947.

tions qui regnent clans les Territoires non autonomes et, d'une maniere speciale, indiqueront lcs
services que ces institutions pourraient rendrc aux
pays responsables de !'administration pour les
aider a ameliorer les c;onditions locales.
Cent-huitieme seance pleniere,
le 3 novembre 1947.

146 (II). Creation d'un comite special pour
l'examen des renseignements transmis en application de I' Article 73 e de
la Charte
L' Assemblee genlrale
1. Invite la Quatrieme Commission a creer un
comite special charge d'examiner les renseignements transmis en vertu de !'article 73 e de la
Charte sur les conditions economiques, sociales et
de !'instruction clans les Territoires non autonomes
et a etablir, sur la base de ces renseignements, des
rapports qui seront soumis a son examen. Le comite accompagnera ces rapports de recommandations sur la procedure jugee appropriee et de
telles suggestions qu'il estimera convenables, concernant les questions techniques en general, mais
non un territoire en particulier;
2. Autorise clans cette intention le comite
special:
a) A recourir aux conseils et a !'assistance des
institutions specialisces de la fac;on qu'il
juge necessaire et pratique;
b) A ctablir la liaison avec le Conseil economiq ue et social;
c) A inviter les Membres a foumir les renseignements supplementaires qui paraissent
desirables clans le cadre de l' Article 73 e, et
3. lndique que le comite special sera compose
des representants des Membres de }'Organisation
des Nations Unies qui transmettent des renseignements et d'un nombre egal de representants des
membres elus par la Quatrieme Commission au
nom de l'Assemblee generale sur une base geographique aussi large que possible, Jes sessions
ayant lieu ainsi qu'en decidera l'Assemblee generale.
Cent-huitieme seance pleniere,
le 3 novembre 1947.

146 DI). Creation of a special committee on
information transmitted under Article
73 e of the Charter
The General Assembly
1. Invites the Fourth Committee to constitute
a special committee to examine the information
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter
on the economic, social and educational conditions in the Non-Self-Governing Territories, and
to submit reports thereon for the consideration of
the General Assembly with such procedural recommendations as it may deem fit, and with such
substantive recommendations as it may deem
desirable relating to functional fields generally but
not with respect to individual territories;
2. Authorizes this special committee for this
purpose
(a) To avail itself of the counsel and assistance
of the specialized agencies in such manner
as it may consider necessary or expedient;
( b) To establish liaison with the Economic
and Social Council;
(c) To invite the Members to provide such
supplemental information as may be desired within the terms of Article 73 e, and
3. Considers that the special committee should
be composed of the Members of the United Nations transmitting information and an equal
number of Members elected by the Fourth Committee on behalf of the General Assembly on as
wide a geographical basis as possible, the Committee to meet as the General Assembly may
decide.

Hundred and Pighth plenary meeting,
3 November 1947.
At its forty-einhth meeting on 6 November
1947 the Faw,,. _.ommittee, in accordance with
the terms of the above resolution, elected eight
members of the Special Committee.
The composition of the Committee therefore
is as follows:
Members transmitting information uader Article 73 e of the Charter:

Au COUTS de sa quarante-huitieme seance,
tenue le 6 novembre 1947, et conformement aux
termes de la resolution ci-dessus, la Quatrieme
Commission a elu huit membres du Com:te
special.
La composition de ce Comite est, en consequence, la suivante:
M embres transmettant des renseignements en
vertu de l' Article 73 e de la Cha rte:

AUSTRALIA, BELGIUM, DENMARK, FRANCE,
NETHERLANDS, NEW ZEALAND, UNITED KINGDOM and UNITED STATES OF AMERICA;
Members elected by the Fourth Committee on
behalf of the General Assembly:
CHINA, COLOMBIA, CUBA, EGYPT, INDIA,
NICARAGUA, SWEDEN, and UNION OF SovrnT
SOCIALIST REPUBLICS.

AusTRALIE, BELGIQUE, DANEMARK, FRANCE,
PAYs-BAs, NouvELLE-ZELANDE, RoYAUME-U NI
et ETATS-UNis o'AMERIQUE;
Membres elus par la Quatrieme Commission
au nom de l' Assemblee generate:
CHINE, CoLoMBIE, CuBA, EGYPTE, INDE, N1cARAGUA, SUEDE et UNION DES Rt:PUBI.IQlJES
S0CIALISTES SOVIETIQUES.

57
