48

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

3. Reaffirms its determination to take all necessary
steps with a view to the complete and speedy eradication
of colonialism and to the faithful and strict observance by
all States of the relevant provisions of the Charter, the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples and the guiding principles of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
4. Affirms once again its recognition of the legitimacy
of the struggle of the peoples under colonial and alien
domination to exercise their right to self-determination
and independence by all the necessary means at their disposal;
5. Approves the report of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples covering its work during 1984, including
the programme of work envisaged for 1985; 115
6. Calls upon all States, in particular the administering
Powers, and the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to give effect to the recommendations contained in the report of the Special
Committee for the speedy implementation of the Declaration and the other relevant resolutions of the United
Nations;
7. Condemns the continuing activities of foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementation of the Declaration with respect to the colonial
Territories, particularly Namibia;
8. Strongly condemns all collaboration, particularly in
the nuclear and military fields, with the Government of
South Africa and calls upon the States concerned to cease
forthwith all such collaboration;
9. Requests all States, directly and through their action
in the specialized agencies and other organizations of the
United Nations system, to withhold assistance of any kind
from the Government of South Africa until the inalienable
right of the people of Namibia to self-determination and
independence within a united and integrated Namibia,
including Walvis Bay, has been restored, and to refrain
from taking any action which might imply recognition of
the legitimacy of the illegal occupation of Namibia by that
regime;
I 0. Calls upon the colonial Powers to withdraw immediately and unconditionally their military bases and installations from colonial Territories, to refrain from establishing new ones and not to involve those Territories in any
offensive acts or interference against other States;
11. Urges all States, directly and through their action
in the specialized agencies and other organizations of the
United Nations system, to provide all moral and material
assistance to the oppressed people of Namibia and, in
respect of the other Territories, requests the administering
Powers, in consultation with the Governments of the Territories under their administration, to take steps to enlist
and make effective use of all possible assistance, on both a
bilateral and a multilateral basis, in the strengthening of
the economies of those Territories;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek suitable means for the immediate and full implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) in all
Territories that have not yet attained independence and, in
particular:
(a) To formulate specific proposals for the elimination
of the remaining manifestations of colonialism and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its fortieth session;
115 Official Records of the General Assemblv. Thirtv-ninth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/39/23), chap. I, sect. S

(b) To make concrete suggestions which could assist
the Security Council in considering appropriate measures
under the Charter with regard to developments in colonial
Territories that are likely to threaten international peace
and security;
(c) To continue to examine the compliance of Member
States with the Declaration and with other relevant resolutions on decolonization, particularly those relating to
Namibia;
(d) To continue to pay particular attention to the small
Territories, including the sending of visiting missions to
them, as appropriate, and to recommend to the General
Assembly the most suitable steps to be taken to enable the
populations of those Territories to exercise their right to
self-determination, freedom and independence;
(e) To take all necessary steps to enlist world-wide support among Governments, as well as national and international organizations having a special interest in
decolonization, for the achievement of the objectives of
the Declaration and the implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations, particularly as concerns
the oppressed people of Namibia;
13. Calls upon the administering Powers to continue to
co-operate with the Special Committee in the discharge of
its mandate and, in particular, to permit the access of visiting missions to the Territories to secure first-hand information and ascertain the wishes and aspirations of their
inhabitants;
14. Requests the Secretary-General and the specialized
agencies and other organizations of the United Nations
system to provide or continue to provide to the newly
independent and emerging States all possible assistance in
the economic, social and other fields;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Committee with the facilities and services required for
the implementation of the present resolution, as well as of
the various resolutions and decisions on decolonization
adopted by the General Assembly and the Special Committee.
100th plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/92. Dissemination of information on decolonization
The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the dissemination of information on decolonization and publicity for
the work of the United Nations in the field of decolonization, 116
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations concerning the dissemination of information on decolonization, in
particular General Assembly resolution 38/55 of7 December 1983,
Reiterating the importance of publicity as an instrument
for furthering the aims and purposes of the Declaration
and mindful of the continuing pressing need to take all
possible steps to acquaint world public opinion with all
aspects of the problems of decolonization with a view to
1 l6 find .. chap. Ill.

49

II. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

assisting effectively the peoples of the colonial Territories
to achieve self-determination, freedom and independence,
Aware of the increasingly important role being played in
the widespread dissemination of relevant information by a
number of non-governmental organizations having a special interest in decolonization, and noting with satisfaction
the intensified efforts of the Special Committee in enlisting
the support of those organizations in that regard,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the dissemination of information on decolonization and publicity for
the work of the United Nations in the field of decolonization;

2. Reaffirms the importance of effecting the widest possible dissemination of information on the evils and dangers of colonialism, on the determined efforts of the colonial peoples to achieve self-determination, freedom and
independence and on the assistance being provided by the
international community towards the elimination of the
remaining vestiges of colonialism in all its forms;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, having regard to the
suggestions of the Special Committee, to continue to take
concrete measures through all the media at his disposal,
including publications, radio and television, to give widespread and continuous publicity to the work of the United
Nations in the field of decolonization, and, inter alia:
(a) To continue, in consultation with the Special Committee, to collect, prepare and disseminate basic material,
studies and articles relating to the problems of decolonization and, in particular, to continue to publish the periodical Objective: Justice and other publications, special articles and studies, including the Decolonization series, and
to select from them appropriate material for wider dissemination by means of reprints in various languages;
(b) To seek the full co-operation of the administering
Powers concerned in the discharge of the tasks referred to
above;

(~) To intensify the activities of all United Nations
information centres, particularly those located in Western
Europe and the Americas;
(d) To maintain a close working relationship with the
Organization of African Unity by holding periodic consultations and by systematically exchanging relevant information with that organization;
(e) To enlist, with the close co-operation of United
Nations information centres, the support of non-governmental organizations having a special interest in
decolonization in the dissemination of the relevant information;
(/) To ensure the availability of the necessary facilities
and services in this regard;
(g) To report to the Special Committee on the measures taken in implementation of the present resolution;
4. Requests all States, in particular the administering
Powers, the specialized agencies and other organizations of
the United Nations system and non-governmental organizations having a special interest in decolonization to
undertake or intensify, in co-operation with the SecretaryGeneral and within their respective spheres of compe117See also sect. X.8.1, decision 39/420.
118 Oflicia/ Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 2 3 (A/39/23), chap. II.

tence, the large-scale dissemination of the information
referred to in paragraph 2 above;
5. Requests the Special Committee to follow the implementation of the present resolution and report thereon to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session.
100th plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/93.

Programme of Activities in Observance of the
Twenty-fifth Anniversary of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples 117

The General Assembly,
Having considered the relevant chapter of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 118
Bearing in mind that the year 1985 will mark the fortieth anniversary of the establishment of the United
Nations, as well as the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, 119
Emphasizing the importance of the occasion to evaluate
the progress achieved during the period in the process of
decolonization, in particular in the implementation of the
Declaration during the past twenty-five years, as well as
the role played by the United Nations and its system of
organizations in that regard, and to formulate specific
measures for the elimination of the remaining vestiges of
colonialism in all its forms and manifestations in various
areas of the world,

1. Approves the relevant chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
endorses the Programme of Activities in Observance of
the Twenty-fifth Anniversary of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples set out in the annex to the present resolution;
2. Commends the Programme, for appropriate action,
to all States, the United Nations bodies concerned, the
specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations system and the non-governmental organizations
active in the field of decolonization;
3. Requests the Special Committee, in connection with
the observance of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration, to co-operate and work closely with the Preparatory Committee for the Fortieth Anniversary of the United
Nations; 120
4. Requests the Secretary-General to assist in the
implementation of the present resolution and, in particular, to make adequate resources available for undertaking
the measures envisaged in the Programme;
5. Requests the Special Committee to report to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
100th plenary meeting
I 4 December I 984
I I 9 Resolution I 5 14 (XV).

120 See resolution 39/ I 6 I B.
