30 septembre 1947

J

It

303

Quafre-vlngf-douzieme seance pfeniere

to elect the Chairman, 1 think it would be wiser to
do that the day after tomorrow.

tinienne et de proceder a l'election du President
de la Commission, je crois preferable que nous
le remettions a apres-demain.
.

The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

La seance est levee a 16 h. 30.

NINETY·SECOND PLENARY
MEETING

QUA'fRE-VINGT-DOUZIEME SEANCE

Held in the General Assembly Hall
at Flushing Meadow, New York,
on Tuesday, 30 September 1947, at 11 a.m.

T enue dans la salle de l'AssembUe generale,
Flushing Meadow, New-York, le mardi 30 septembre 1947, 11 heures.

President: Mr. O. ARANHA (Brazil).

President: M. O. ARANHA (Bresil).

PLENIERE

a

a

21. Installation of the Assistant Secretary- 21. Installation du Secretaire general adGeneral in charge of Administrative
joint charge des services administraand Financial Services
tifs et financiers
-;

:I

The PRESIDENT: According to the procedure
established by the General Assembly, the Assistant
Secretary-General takes the oath of office at a
public meeting of the General Assembly. The Secretary-General has made a new appointment in
the interval between the first and second sessions
of the Assembly, and 1 now call upon him to introduce the new Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of Administrative and Financial Services.
At the invitation of the President, the VicePresidents of the Assembly took their places on the
platform.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Se10n la
procedure etablie par l'Assemblee generale, les
Secretaires generaux adjoints pretent serment au
cours d'une seance publique de l'Assemblee generale. Dans le laps de temps qui s'est ecoule entre
la premiere et la deuxieme session de l'Assemblee,
le Secietaire general a procede a une nouvelle
nomination. Je l'invite maintenant a presenter a
l'Assemblee le nouveau Secretaire general adjoint
charge des services administratifs et financiers.
Sur l'invitation du President, les. Vice-Presidents de l'AssembUe prennent place a la tribune.

The PRESIDENT: 1wish to congratulate the Secretary-General on appointing Mr. Price as Assistant Secretary-General in charge of Administrative
and Financial Services.
.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Je tiens
a feIiciter le Secretaire general d'avoir designe

Mr. PRIOE, Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of Administrative and Financial Services,
(repeating the oath): "1 solemnly undertake to
exercise in all loyalty, discretion and conscience,
the functions entrusted to me as a member of the
United Nations, to
international service of
discharge those functions and regulate my conduct with the interests of the United Nations only
in view, and not to seek or accept instructions
in regard to the performance of my duties from
any Government or other authority external to
the Organization.",

M. PRICE, ,secretaire general adjoint charge des
services administratifs et financiers (repeta.nt en
anglais la formule de serment) ; "Je prends l'engagement solennel d'exercer en toute loyaute;
discretion et conscience, les fonctions qui m'ont
ete confiees en ma qualite de membre de l'administration internationale de l'Organisation des
Nations Unies, de m'acquitter de ces fonctions et
de regIer ma conduite en ayant exelusivement en
vue les interets de f'Organisation, sans solliciter
ni accepter, dans l'accomplissement de mon devoir, d'instructions d'aucun GouVernement ni
d'aucune autorite exterieurd.l'Organisation."

M. Price pour le poste de Secretaire general
adjoint charge des services administratifs et
financiers.
Au nom de l'Assemblee, j'adresse a M. Price
On behalf of the Assembly, 1 wish to extend to
Mr. Price our good wishes as he undertakes the nos meilleurs vccux de reussite dans l'accomplissedifficult and important duties of this post. 1 wish ment des fonctions difficiles et importantes qu'il
to express to him our confidence in his ability and assume. Je tiens a lui exprimer la confiance que
in his devotion to the cause of the United Nations. nous pla~ons en ses capacites, en son devouement
1 shall now call upon the Assistant Secretary-Gen- a la cause de l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
J'invite maintenant le Secretaire general adjoint
eral to repeat the oath which 1 shall now read.
avouIoir bien repeter la formule de serment dont
je vais donner lecture.
.

the

22. Introduction of representatives of spe- 22. Presentation des representants des incialized agencies and special guests
stitutions sptkialisees et de certains
invites
The PRESIDENT: 1 now have the honour to introduce to the General Assembly the distinguished
representatives of organizations whose work, in a

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais); J'ai
maintenant l'honneur de presenter a l' AssembIee
generale les distingues ~epresentants' d'organisa-

Ninety-second Plenary Meeting

30 September 1947

304

very real s~nse, is. an integral part o~ the great
variety of tasks whIch confront us here In the General Assembly.
The International Court of Justice is one of the
principal organs of the United Nations, but the
seat of the Court is located at such a distance from
us as to limit our contact with its officers to very
rare occasions. It is therefore all the more important for our common task that the President of
the Court honours us with his presence during the
regular annual session of the General Assembly.
The distinguished President of the Court, Dr.
Guen'ero, is with us today, and I have great pleasure in presenting him to you.

tions dont l'activite fait partie integrante, au sens
propre du terme, de la grande mosaique de taches
qui se presente a l'Assemblee generale.
La Cour internationale de Justice est l'un des
organes principaux des Nations Unies, mais son
siege est situe si loin de nous que nos contacts avec
ses hauts fonctionnaires se limitent de tres rares
occasions. 11 est done d'autant plus important
pour notre tache commune que le President de la
Cour ait bien voulu nous honorer de sa presence
pendant la session annuelle ordinaire de l'Assemblee generale.
.
M. Guerrero, le distingue President de la Cour,
est avec nous aujourd'hui et j'ai le grand plaisir
de vous le presenter.
.

At the invitation of the' President, Dr. Cuerrero, President of the International Gourt of Justice, took his place on the platform.

Sur l'invitation du President, M. Guerrero,
Presiden't de la Gour internationale de Justice,
prend place la tribune.

The PRESIDENT: Among the specialized agencies which have been brought into relation with
the United Nations under the terms of the Charter, the oldest in point of service to humanity is the
International Labour Organisation. The Governing Body of the International Labour Office has
been so thoughtful as to appoint its officers-the
Chairman, Sir Guildhaume Myrddin-Evans, the
Vice-Chairman, Mr. David Zellerbach and Mr.
Leon Jouhaux, together with its Director-General,
Mr. Phelan-as its delegation to the second session of the General Assembly. I wish to extend to
them our cordial welcome, and to pay tribute to
the work of the organization which they represent.
At the invitation of the President, Sir Guildhaume Myrddin-Evans, Mr. jouhaux and Mr.
Phelan took their places on the platform.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Parmi
les institutions specialisees qui ont ete reliees aux
Nations Unics, conformement aux termes de la
Charte, c'est 1'0rganisation internationale du
Travail qui a le plus d'anciennete au service de
l'humanite. Le Conseil d'administration du
Bureau international du Travail a bien voulu envoyer en delegation a la deuxieme session de
l'AssembIee generale son President, Sir Guildhaume Myrddin-Evans, ses Vice-Presidents, M.
David Zellerbach et M. Leon ]ouhaux, ainsi que
M. Phelan, Directeur general. Je tiens a leur souhaiter cordialement la bienvenue et a rendre hommage a l'ceuvre de l'organisation qu'ils representent.
Sur l'invitation du President, Sir Guildhaume
Myrddin-Evans, M. Jouhau,"r et M. Phelan prennent place ala tribune.

The PRESIDENT: In these days of world-wide
food scarcity ana threatened starvation, I need
not impress upon you the importance of the work
that is being done by the Food and Agriculture
Organization. We have the pleasure of having
with us this morning, Sir John Boyd 01'1', DirectorGeneral of that organization. In paying our compliments to him, we also express the hope that the
Food and Agriculture Organization may be increasingly effective in measuring up to the grave
responsibilities which world events place upon it.
I am glad to present to you, Sir]ohn Boyd Orr.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): En ces
jours Oll la disette qui sevit dans le monde menace
de tourner a la famine, il est inutile d'insister sur
l'importance que presente l'aetivite de I'Organisation pour l'alimel1tation et l'agriculture. Nous
avons le plaisir d'avoir parmi nous ce matin Sir
John Boyd 01'1', Dirccteur general de cette organisation. En le remerciant de l'honneur qu'il
nous fait, je veux exprimerl'espoir que l'Organisation pour l'alimentation et l'agriculture s'elevera
a la hauteur des graves responsabilites qui lui incombent du fait de la situation mondiale. I'ai le
plaisir de presenter a l'Assemblee Sir John Boyd
Orr.
Dans un autre domaine, celui de l'esprit, 1'01'ganisation des Nations Unies pour l'education, la
science et la culture se prepare a jouer un role
d'une importance croissante. Nous regrettons que
M. Julian Huxley, Directeur de cette organisation, n'ait pu venir se joindre a nous, mais j'ai le··
plaisir de' vous presenter le Directeur adjoint,
M: Walter Laves.

In another field, in the realm of the mind and
the spirit, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization is preparing to
play a role of increasing effectiveness. We regret
that Dr. Julian Huxley, the Director of the organization could not be present, but we are glad to
present Mr. WaIter Laves, its Deputy Director.

a

a

At the invitation of the President, Mr. WaIter
Laves took his place on the platform.

Sur l'invitation du President, M. WaIter Lave!
prend place ala tribune.

The PRESIDENT: In a world that has been made
small by rapid communications we appreciate the
importance of the efforts that are being made by
the International Civil Aviation Organization to
provide an orderly regulation of' the practice of

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais) : Dans un
mondc rendu petit par la rapidite des communications, l'importance des efforts que deploie 1'01'ganisation de l'aviation civile internationale pour
reglementer methodiquement la pratique de

30 septembre 1947

I

.1;
··1··.··,···

i

305

aviation. We are glad to have with us Mr. Edward
Warner, Chairman of the Council of the International Civil Aviation Organization, whom I
present to you.
I now have the special honour of presenting to
you the Director of the Pan American Union,
Mr. Alberto Camargo Lleras, who was so kind as
to invite the Secretary-General of the United
Nations to attend the Inter-American Conference
at Rio de Janeiro. This hospitality made a deep
impression on the Secretary-General. Mr. Trygve
Lie and I have joined in inviting Mr. Camargo
Lleras to attend the General Assembly as our
personal guest. We warmly welcome him here.
I now take pleasure in calling upon Sir Guildhaume Myrddin-Evans, Chairman of the Governing Body of the International Labour Office, who
will speak on behalf of all the specialized agencies.

1

)
1

I

Quatre-vingt.douzieme seance pleniere

l'aviation ne nous echappe pas. Nous sommes
heureux d'avoir parmi nous M. Edward Warner,
President du Conseil de 1'0rganisation de l'aviatioil civile internationale.
J'ai maintenant le grand honneur de presenter
al'AssembIee M. Alberto Camargo Lleras, Directeur general de l'Union panamericaine, qui a eu
l'amabilite d'inviter le Secretaire general des Nations Unies a assister a la conference interamericaine de Rio-de-Janeiro. Cette attention a vivement touche le Secretaire general. M. Trygve Lie
et moi-meme, nous avons cru devoir personnelle~
ment inviter M. Camargo Lleras a assister al'Assemblee generale. Je lui souhaite la bienvenue
parmi nous.
J'ai maintenant le plaisir d'inviter Sir Guildhaume Myrddin-Evans, President du Conseil
d'administration du Bureau international du Travail, qui va pader au nom de toutes les institutions specialisees, a prendre la parole.

Sir Guildhaume MYRDDIN-EvANs, Chairman
Sir Guildhaume MYRRDIN-EvANS, President du
of the Governing Body of the International La- Conseil d'adnlinistration du Bureau international
bour Office: It is a great honour to have the du Travail (traduit de l'anglais): C'est pour moi
privilege of addressing this Assembly of the un grand honneur de prendre la parole devant
United Nations, and especially to be allowed to l'Assemblee des Nations Dnies, et surtout d'etre
speak on behalf of all the specialized agencies,. admis a pader au nom de toutes les institutions
which are in relationship with the United Na· specialisees qui ont etabli des relations avec 1'01'tions, and to express on their behalf their grati. ganisation des Nations Dnies, cc q1,li me permet
tude and appreciation of the very gracious words de remercier en leur nom le President pour les
of welcome which the President has offered them tres aimables paroles de bienvenue qu'il leur a
adressees au nom de cette Assemblee.
on behalf of this Assembly.
This is the first regular session of the Assembly
Cette session ordinaire de l'AssembIee est la
since the agreements were ratified at the session premiere alaquelle nous assistions depuis la ratifiheld last December.
catiot1 des accords qui a eu lieu au cours de la
session de decembre dernier.
As the President has said, if I may for one moComme l'a dit le President de l'Assemblee, le
ment mention the ILO, the Governing Body has Conseil d'administration de l'OIT - si je puis
sought to mark the importance which it attaches me permettre de mentionner un instant cette orto this occasion by appointing as its delegation to ganisation - a tenu asouligner l'importance qu'il
this Assembly, in addition to the Director-General, attache a cet evenement en envoyant a cette
the officers of the Governing Body: the Vice- Assemblee une delegation qui comprend, outre
Chairmen, Mr. Zellerbach of the United States M. Phelan, Directeur general, M. Zellerbach
and Mr. Jouhaux of France, and myself.
(Etats-Unis d'Amerique) et M. Jouhaux
(France), Vice-Presidents, ainsi que moi-meme.
The keynote of all the agreements for the speL'idee qui a preside a la conclusion des accords
cialized agencies is co-operation. Co-operation is avec les institutions specialisees est la cooperation.
not a new tIling; for anyone who cares to look into La cooperation n'est pas chose nouvelle; quiconthe records, the story of the last ten months will que prend la peine de consulter les documents ou
show great achievements in the matter of co- se trouvent consign~s les travaux des dix derniers
operation between the United Nations and the mois peut se rendre compte que de grands prospecialized agencies. Bl;lt co-operation is never an gres ont ete accomplis dans la voie de la coopeeasy road to follow, and there will inevitably be ration par l'Organisation des Nations Unies et
times when the specialized agencies will feel that les institutions specialisees. Neanmoins, la voie de
the United Nations is encroaching upon their la cooperation n'est jamais aisee, et il y aura
fields, and there will likewise be times when the sl1remellt des moments ou les institutions speciaUnited Nations will feel that the specialized agen- lisees estimeront qu l'Organisation des Nations
cies are not paying sufficient regard to the recom- Unies empiete sur leur domaine, et aussi des momendations of the United Nations.
ments ou 1'0rganisatioll des Nations Unies estimera que les institutions specialisees ne tiennent
pas suffisamment compte de ses recommandations.
All those difficulties can be overcome with goodToutes ces difflcultes peuvent ctre surmontees
will, and if we constantly remind ourselves that grace a la bonne volonte et a la condition que
the United Nations and all the other inter- nous gardionstoujours pr~sente a l'esprit cette
governmental organizations exist for one pur- idee que l'Organisation des Nations Dnies, ainsi
pose only. They have no other reason for their que toutes les autres organisations intergouvemeexistence. That purpose is not personal aggran- mentales n'existent qu'a une seule fin, en dehors
dizement, and it is not in order to satisfy our de laquelle elles n'ont aucune raison d'etre. Cette

Ninety-second Plenary Meeting

306

desires, personal or corporate; to. exercise authority. That purpose, in a word, 18 to serve the
peoples of the world and, in the final reckoning,
that is how this Organization and the specialized
agencies will be judged.

In the final reckoning, the question that will be
put to us, to the United Nations and to the specialized agencies, is not: has the ILO done something which the World Health Organization
ought to have done?-or has the Food and Agriculture Organization failed to do something
which the Assembly wanted it to do? The questions that will be put to an the organizations are
these: have you banished war? Have you banished
fear? Have you banished poverty? Have you banished unemployment? And above all, have you
secured for the lowliest person in the most insignificant State in the world that personal freedom
which is the foundation of all other liberties, and
without which every other privilege is as naught?
Upon the answers to these questions, the United
Nations and the specialized agencies will be
judged when the day of reckoning comes.

To achieve those objectives, there is needed,
between the United Nations and the specialized
agencies, what the Director-General of the ILO
last year called a real and true partnership of
service. I think 1 can speak on behalf of all the
specialized agencies when I give this assurance
that the specialized agencies, for their part, will
make their full contribution in that partnership.

30 September 1947

fin, ce n'est pas notre satisfaction personnelle, ce
n'est pas la realisation d'un desir, individuel ou
collectif, d'exercer l'autoritc; cette fin - pour
l'enoncer brievement - c'est de se mettre au
service des peuples du monde, et c'est, en fin de
compte, la m:csure dans laquelle elles se seront
distinguees dans 1'accomplissement de cette tache
qui servira a juger l'Organisation des Nations
Unies et les institutions spccialisees.
Le jour du reglement des comptes, les questions qui seront posees a l'Organisation des Nations Unies et aux institutions specialisees ne seront pas: l'OIT a-t-elle fait quelque chose qui
relevait du domaine de l'Organisation mondiale
de la sante? L'Organisation pour l'alimentation
et l'agriculture a-t-elle omis de faire que1que chose
que l'Assemblee aurait voulu qu'elle fit? Les questions que 1'on posera a toutes les organisations
seront celles-ci: Avez-vous elimine la guerre?
Avez-vous banni la crainte? Avez-vous chasse la
misere? Avez-vous supprime le chOmage? Et surtout, avez-vous assure au citoyen le plus humble
de 1'Etat le moins puissant du monde cette liberte
individuelle sur laquelle repose toutes les autres
libertes et sans laquelle aucun autre privilege n'a
de valeur? De la reponse qu'elles seront en mesure
de faire a ces questions au jour du reglement des
comptes dependra le jugement qui sera porte
sur 1'Organisation des Nations Unies et les institutions specialisees.
Pour que ces objectifs puissent etre atteints, il
faut que s'etablisse entre l'Organisation des Nations Unies et les institutions specialisees, comme
le disait 1'annee derniere le Directeur general de
l'OIT, une veritable association dans le travail.
Je crois etre l'interprete de toutes les institutions
specialisees en donnant l'assurance qu'en ce qui
les concerne elles fourniront a une telle association une collaboration sans reserve.

The PRESIDENT: Dr. Guerrero, President of the
International Court of Justice, will now address
the General Assembly.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : M. Guerrera, President de la Cour internationale de Justice, va maintenant prendre la parole.

Mr. GUERRERO, President of the International
Court of Justice, (translated from French): I am
particularly happy to have the opportunity of giving you some information concerning the International Court of Justice.
The International Court of Justice was officially
inaugurated in April 1946. Since then the Court
has begun the work of reorganizing its services and
adapting its procedure to the new situation, although in the main it can be considered the successor to the Permanent Court of International
Justice.
Since completing this work of reorganization
and re-adaptation the Court has had before it only
one case-namely, the United Kingdom's complaint against Albania regarding the incidents in
the Corfu Channel. Proceedings in the case have
already begun. The written proceedings are in
progress, and the Court will meet in a few months'
time to give judgment.
1 should like to remind you, however, that the
Court's actlvity depends both on the Members of
the United· Nations Organization and on the
United Nations itself.

M. GUERRERO, President de la Cour internationale de Justice: J e suis particulierement heureux de pouvoir donner quelques renseignements
en ce qui concerne la Cour internationale de
Justice.
La Cour internationale de Justice a ete maugur& officiellement en avril 1946. Depuis ce moment, la Cour a commence a reorganiser ses
services et a adapter son reglement a la nouvelle
situation qui se presente, bien qu'on puisse, en
somme, considerer que la Cour succede ala Cour
permanente de Justice internationale.
C~ travail de reorganisation et de readaptation
termme, a Cour n'a ete saisie jusqu'ici que d'une
seule affaire, la plainte du Royaume-Uni contre
l'Albanie concernant les incidents survenus dans
le detroit de Corfou. La procedure relative a cette
affaire a ete entamee. La procedure ecrite est en
cours et, dans..quelques mois, la Cour se reunira
pour rendre son jugement.
. Je voudrais cependant vous rappeler que l'actlVlte de la Cour depend a la fois des Membres de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies et de 1'0rganisation elle-meme.

I

I

J'j
11

!

30 septembre 1947

307

Quatre-vingt-douzh?ime seance pleniere

<

J

As you are aware, the Court has a dual jurisdiction: it can decide disputes and give advisory
opinions. As regards the former, cases are brought
before it by States; in the latter, through the
organs of the United Nations. We therefore expect Members and organs of the United Nations to submit to the Court any disputes or·
advisory questions which may arise.

Comme vous le savez, la Cour a une juridiction contentieuse et une juridiction consultative.
Pour la premiere, ce sont les Etats qui doivent
saisir la Cour; pour la seconde, ce sont les organes
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Nous attendons donc des Etats Membres et des organes de
l'Organisation qu'ils veuillent bien soumettre ala
Cour toutes les affaires d'ordre contentieux ou
consultatif qui se presenteront.

The PRESIDENT: I call upon Dr. Alberto Camargo Lleras, Director-General of the Pan
American Union.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : J e donne
maintenant la parole a M. Alberto Camargo
Lleras, Directeur general de rUmon panamericaine.

Mr. CAMARGO LLERAS, Director-General of the
Pan American Union (translated from Spanish):
The Pan American Union deems it a special honour that its Director has been invited to the General Assembly of the United Nations by its very
distinguished President, Mr. Oswaldo Aranha,
and by the Secretary-General, Mr. Trygve Lie.
Not long ago, at Rio de Janeiro, the nations of
America, having met to consider a treaty of legitimate, collective self-defence as provided for in
Article 51 of the Charter, invited the eminent
statesman who is in charge of the Secretariat of
the United Natlons to attend the Conference and
had the pleasure of hearing him speak there.
When Mr. Trygve Lie had to return to his duties,
Mr. Cohen remained as United Nations observer.
The purpose of that invitation, unprecedented in
the American regional system, was to demonstrate
to world opinion and to the United Nations that
the American States fmm a regional association
within the framework of the United Nations Organization, pursuing the latter's aims and principles, and that no agreement made among the
American States may go beyond the limits of the
Charter.

M. CAMARGO LLERAS, Directeur general de
l'Union panamericaine (traduit de l'espagnol) :
C'est un honneur insigne pour l'Union panamericaine que son Directeur ait ete invite al'AssembIee
generale des Nations Unies par le tres distingue
President, M. Oswaldo Aranha, et par le Secretaire general, M. Trygve Lie. Hy a peu de temps,
a Rio-de-Janeiro, les nations d'Amerique reunies
en vue d'etudier un traite de legitime defense collective, comme il est prevu a l'Article 51 de la
Charte, inviterent l'eminent homme d'Etat qui
est charge du Secretariat des Nations Unies a se
rendre a la Conference ou elles eurent le plaisir
de l'entendre. Lorsque M. TrygveLie dut rentrer,
rappele par les devoirs de sa charge, M. Cohen
demeura en qualite d'observateur pour l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Le but de cette invitation, sans precedent dans le systeme regional americain, a ete de faire ressortir devant l'opinion
mondiale et devant les Nations Unies que les
Etats d'Amerique etaient associes sur une base
regionale dans le cadre de l'Organisation des Nations Unies, suivant les buts et les principes memes
de l'organisation mondiale, et qu'aucun accord
qu'ils pourraient conclure ne saurait empieter
sur les limites de la Charte.
Cependant, il se peut que certains des Mernbres
de cette Assemblee ne connaissent pas tres bien
cette organisation regionale americaine, qu'ils ne'
voient peut-etre pas clairement, puisque l'Organisation des Nations Unies existe, pourquoi il serait
necessaire et opportun d'avoir recours a deux
puissantes organisations distinctes pour atteindre
les mernes buts et defendre les memes principes
avec efficacite. Qu'il me soit permis de profiter du
genereux accueil de l'AssembIee pour faire connartre plus largement quelques-unes des bases
fondamentales d'un systeme regional qui, dans les
temps modernes, constitue l'essai le plus ancien
d'un regime international de droit et, sans aucun
doute,est un de ceux qui ont le mieux reussi.
Pour nous qui avons eu l'avantage d'assister a
la fondation de l'Organisation des Nations Unies
a San-Francisco, il ne nous semble pas anormal
d'affirrner que la Charte a dO. consacrer dans le
Chapitre sur les accords regionaux un etat de
choses ancien, qui a fait ses preuves et qui est
propice a la paix et a la securite du monde, et
que les dispositions relatives aces accords ont tenu
compte dans une large mesure de l'existence anterieure du systeme panamericain. En fait, vingt et
une nations sur les cinquante qui s'etaient reunies

1

I

However, perhaps some members of this General Assembly, unfamiliar with this American regional organization, may feel that, since the
United Nations exists, it is neither necessary nor
desirable to have two such powerful machines to
achieve the same purposes and defend the same
principles. I avail myself of the generous hospitality of this Assembly to explain to you more fully
some of the fundamental bases of a regional system which is the oldest example in modern
times of an international system of law and, unquestionably, one of the most successful.

{

l

Those of you who, like myself, had the privilege
of being present at the founding of the United
Nations at San Francisco, will not be surprised if
I say that in the Chapter on regional arrangements
the Charter had to sanction an achievement which
had proved itself and which fostered world peace
and security, and that the provisions concerning
such arrangements took the prior existence of the
pan-American system very much into account. As
a matter of fact, twenty-one of the fifty nations
which came to San Francisco could not have al-

Ninety-second Plenary Meeting

308

30 September 1947

a San-Francisco n'auraient pu admettre que 1'01'ganisation mondiale detruisit leur organisation
regionale. Pourquoi? Nombre de ceux qui
voyaient l'ardeur et l'energie avec lesqueUes les
Etats americains, et plus particulierement les Etats
latino-americains, defendaient leur systeme regional, n'arrivaient pas a comprendre comment le
panamericanisme, que l'on jugeait etre un instrument efficace de l'imperialisme et de l'asservisse-'
ment du continent a la plus grande des Puissances
qu'il comprend, les Etats-Unis, comment ce panamericanisme suscitait tant d'admiration, tant de
devouement et tant de zeIe chez des Etats que l'on
supposait lui etre soumis. L'explication va de soi:
le systeme americain, regime de droit qui repose
sur des principes d'une forte structure juridique
et d'une grande noblesse morale - bien qu'il ne
soit qu'une construction verbale nullement appuyee par la force - a reduit a neant la volonte
d'imperialisme sur le continent americain; ce systcme a, pour toujours, coupe court aux tendances
de certains dirigeants des Etats-Unis, qui en
etaient venus a croire que leur peuple etait manifestement destine a gouverner tout l'hemisphere
et a l'adapter a ses besoins .et a sa convenance.
C'est la seule explication possible du fait que,
veritable miracle de l'histoire, vingt et un pays
vivent cote a cote en toute independance et en
toute autonomie, alors que l'un d'eux est l'une
des plus grandes Puissances du monde et que que!ques autres pourraient figurer parmi les plus petites. C'est le systeme regional chaque jour plus
perfectionne qui 'a produit ce resultat, en agissant
principalement sur l'opinion des peuples du continent americain et aussi sur l'opinion publique
des Etats-Unis: Et maintenant, je vais citeI' un
exemple: a Rio-de-]aneiro, nous sommes alles
plus loin, nous avons assume l'obligation egale
pour tous d'adopter certaines mesures de defense
importantes par un vote de la majorite des deux
tiers des Etats americains - et cette obligation
s'etendra meme aux Etats qui n'auront pas vote
en faveur desdites mesures. Cc principe constitue
la base que les partisans de l'internationalisme ont
toujours recherchee pour fonder un gouvernement democratique du monde. Certes, cc principe
n'est pas facile a appliquer. Pourtant l'on n'arrivera a une paix durable, sans anxiete et sans
menaces, que lorsque toutes les nations auront accepte ce principe comme une consequence inevitable de l'egalite juridique des Etats.
The evolution of the American system and of
L'evolution du systeme americain et de l'Union
the Pan American Union, which embodies it, was panamericaine qui en est la representation n'a pas
not an easy process. In the fifty-seven years of its ete aisee. Au cours de ses cinquante-sept annees
existence, there have been wars between American d'existence, il y a eu des conflits armes entre les
States, as well as wars of conquest and imperial- Etats americains, ainsi que des guerres de conistic acts. But the system prevailed. Every five, quete, et des menees imperialistes. Mais le systeme
every ten years, some progress was made. The most a survecu. Tous les cinq ans, taus les dix ans, il
recent advances, those achieved since the procla- enregistrait un progrcs. Les derniers progres, acmation of the "good neighbour policy" in Monte- complis depuis la proclamation de la politique de
video in 1933, were spectacular. At San Fran- bon voisinage a Montevideo, en 1933, ont ete
cisco, therefore, no one was better prepared than vertigineux. C'est pour cette raison qu'a Santhe American States to accept in good faith the Francisco nul n'etait mieux prepare que les Etats
obligations of the Charter. They well know what it americains aaccepter de bonne foi les obligations
means for countries to be governed by a juridical de la Charte. lIs savent bien tout ce que vaut pour
system rather than by unbridled force. No Amer- les Etats un regime juridique qui sesubstitue aux
ican State would think of being isolated from in- debordements de la force. Aucun Etat americain
ternational life~ and all of them realize that na- ne concevrait la possibilite de vivre isole, au point
lowed the world organization to destroy their regional system. Why was this? Many who saw with
what enthusiasm and energy the American States,
especially those of Latin America, defended their
regional system, were at a loss to understand how
pan-Americanism-regarded by them as an effective tool of imperialism whereby the United States,
the strongest Power, was aiming to subjugate the
continent-could be the object of such admiration, such devotion and such zeal on the part of
the very States which were supposed to be shackled
by it. The reason is clear. The American system, a
system of law based upon the principles of a sound
legal structure and high standards of ethics-although merely a structure of words lacking coercive power-banished imperialistic tendencies
from the American continent and checked for
ever the inclination, shown by some United States
leaders, to think that their people was obviously
destined to govern the hemisphere and make it
conform to their needs and interests. This is the
only possible explanation for the fact, a miracle
in history, that twenty-one nations are living together, each enjoying full independence and autonomy, although one of them is one of the foremost world Powers and some of the others might
be counted among the smallest. This is the result
of the continual progress of the regional system
and its influence, primarily, upon the opinion of
the peoples of the American continent, including,
of course, public opinion in the United States.
Now, to take an example, at Rio de Janeiro we
have gone a step farther: we have assumed the
obligation, equally binding upon all, to adopt certain serious defence measures if two-thirds of the
American States vote in favour thereof-and this
obligation is binding even upon States which do
not agree with such measures. This principle is
what the internationalists have always desired as
the basis for a democratic world Government. It is
not easy to apply, admittedly. However, stable
peace, free from fears and anxieties, will not be
achieved until all nations accept this principle as
the inevitable consequence of the legal equality
of States.

30 septembre 1947

I

I
,

i
i

!

J

(

I

i
.!.

309

tions, like men, must live as a community if they
desire peace and security. What kind of community? A community in which all States are equal.
But amongst individuals there can be no peace if
black and white, rich and poor, worker and employer, are not equal before the law or if the law
accepts any discriminations dictated by hatred,
prejudice or economic interest as a fixed rule of
community life. Of course, inequality does not disappear merely because the law condemns it; but
if confirmed and approved by law, it will certainly persist longer, and the unfairness will become more invidious.

Our American system has always been, and will
continue to be, a system of peace. Since the United
Nations Charter requires its Member States always to seek peaceful means and bids them find
pacific settlements for their disputes, without, however, offering any procedure for them to follow,
the American regional system must exist for the
purpose of maintaining peace and providing
twenty-one republics with such procedure. Furthermore, since Article 51 establishes the inherent
right of self-defence, which may be used if, despite the international machinery, an armed attack should occur, the American system provides
for legitimate collective self-defence until the Security Council has taken the measures necessary
for the re-establishment of peace and security. If,
at San Francisco, the States, anticipating the
difficulties of the Council's voting system, had not
feared the possibiity of armed attacks which might
not be settled pacifically by the Council, Article
51 would not have been written, and naturally
we should not have signed the Treaty of Rio de
Janeiro. In practice, of course, that instrument
will never be invoked, and even in theory it will
disappear as soon as every State can be sure that
there will not be a single act of aggression which is
beyond the Council's powers to prevent, halt or
suppress, quite effectively. Since the signing of the
Treaty of Rio de Janeiro, we are in a position to
guarantee the United Nations that, at least in the
American hemisphere and amongst Ameriean
States, there will be no war. And this contribution
to peace is an adequate raison d'etre for our regional system.
All States and all nations fear there may be another world war. They are all agreed that the
United Nations is the only hope of preventing ithumanity'S last hope-and not just the present
United Nations, but a United Nations steadily
evolving towards an international world government. The San Francisco Charter is only a starting-point, created by circumstances as a pragmatic
instrument embracing everything that was feasible
at the time of its drafting. To claim that each State
should entrench itself behind the advantages
granted under the special circumstances which ex,isted in 1945, would be tantamount to saying that
there is no course open to history other than to
tear up the Charter. The problem is much simpler
than this: it is a choice between world government for the benefit of all States and an odious
governing of the world by a single nation after it

l~

Quatre-vingf-douzieme seance pleniere

de vue international, et tous comprennent que les
nations comme les hommes doivent vivre en societe si 1'on veut la paix et la securite. QueUe
societe? Une societe OU tous les Etats soient egaux.
Mais entre les hommes non plus la paix ne peut
exister lorsqu'il n'y a inegalite juridique entre le
noir et le blance, le riche et le pauvre, l'ouvrier et
le patron, et lorsque les discriminations que la
haine, les prejuges ou l'interet economique
tendent poser comme regles fixes de 1'etat social
sont inscrites dans la loi. 11 est evident que
l'inegalite ne disparatt pas du seul fait que la loi
la condamne, mais il est certain que si la loi la
confirme et l'approuve, elle durera davantage et
le desequilibre sera plus monstrueux.
Notre systeme americain a toujours ete pacifique et il continuera de l'etre. Etant donne que la
Charte des Nations Unies veut que les Etats Membres recherchent toujours des methodes pacifiques
et qu'elle les invite aregler leurs conflits pacifiquement - sans toutefois leur en indiquer la
methode _ le systeme regional americain doit
subsister pour maintenir la paix et pour fournir
cette methode aux vingt et une republiques. Mais
aussi, etant donne que'l'Article 51 reconnait le
droit de legitime defense dans le cas ou une agression armee se produirait en depit du mecanisme
international, le systeme americain pourvoit a la
dtfense legitime collective jusqu'a ce que le Conseil de securite ait pris les mesures necessaires pour
retablir la paix et la securite. Si, a San-Francisco,
les Etats qui apprehendaient les difficultes du systeme de vote au Conseil n'avaient craint que des
agressions armees ne se produisent sans que le
Conseil puisse imposer la paix, l'Article 51 n'aurait mcme pas ete redige et, naturellement, nous
n'auriol1s pas signe le Traite de Rio-de-Janeiro.
En pratique, il est certain que l'on n'invoguera
pas cet instrument et meme que, theoriquement,
ce Traite disparahra lorsque tout Etat pourra etre
assure qu'il ne se produira pas un seul acte d'agression que le Conseil ne pourrait empecher, arreter
ou reprimer en toute efficacite. Depuis la signature
du Traite de Rio-de-Janeiro, nous pouvons garantir aux Nations Unies que, tout au moins dans
l'hcmisphere americain et entre Etats ~eri~ain~,
il n'y aura pas de guerre. Et cette contnbutlOn a
la paix est un element suffisant pour que notre
systeme regional demeure.
Tous les Etats et tous les peuples craignent la
possibilite d'une autre 'guerre mondiale. Et tous .
conviennent que l'Organisati~n .des Nations .Unies
represente le seul espoir de 1eVlter, le dermer espoir de l'humanite. 11 ne s'agit pas seulement ~e
l'Organisation des Nations .Vmes ,~ctuelle, ~aIs
d'une Organisation des NatIOns Umes en VOle de
constante evolution et qui tende vel'S un gouvernement international du monde. La Charte de SanFrancisco n'est qu'un point pe depart; elle a ete .
creee pour repondre aux circonstances, en tant
qu'instrument pratique representant tout ce que
l'on pouvait faire au moment ou elle a ete elaboree. Pretendre que chaque Etat se retranche
derriere les avantages accordes a ce moment-la;
dans la conjoncture speciale 'de 1945, reviendrait
a declarer qu'il n'est pas d'autre issue pour l'histoire quc de dechirer la Charte. Le probleme qui

I

'I·.·. :

pre-

~

------------ ---- ---------Ninety-second Plenary Meeting

310

has destroyed all opposition. It is the selfsame
problem as that faced' by prehistoric man, and one
which he solved in the course of thousands of years
by establishing rules of justice and creating systems of government. The individual transfers his
prerogatives to the government in exchange for
the privilege of not having merely and simply to
submit to anyone who can strike a better and a
harder blow. He requires, however, that the
stronger should not be allowed to keep on striking
with impunity: that is, there should not be anyone stronger from the legal point of view.

From the First World War many strong Powers
emerged; from the Second, only two, while the
others lost ground or struggled through serious
crises. After a third, only one nation would prevail. Whichever it was, it :would be a world government of the most arbitrary, the most intolerant, the most oppressive power humanity has ever
known. But there is an alternative-that world
government should be in the hands of all Statesand this alternative spells peace. It cannot be right
for anyone nation to place its own particular interests above that supreme need of the human
race.

The American States represented in the regional system have succeeded in living worthily
and in peace by offsetting the disproportionate
might of one of their number against the independence of the others. Great and small nations can,
therefore, live together in peace, security and freedom, under a system of law. The United Nations
is put to a harder test because it remains to be seen
if the great Powers themselves can live together in
peace. To achieve the goal, there is only one formula: the great Powers must agree to live as if
they were small nations or else as if every nation,
by the mere fact of being a nation, were great.
That ought to be the final goal of this eminent
body, if it aspires to govern the world. However,
the San Francisco Charter, which limited itself to
uniting the nations, is not designed for that purpose alone. It must continue to be perfected; it
will never be too late to complete that process.

I

Please accept my sincere thanks, Mr. President,
for your generosity in making it possible for this
world Assembly to hear the humble voice of one
who merely happens to be the representative of a
system of peace which serves t4e same purposes as
the United Nations and aspires daily to become a
better regional agreement, in the service of the
United Nations and of humanity. On pehalf of
the Pan American Union I wish to express to all
of you our appreciation, and assure you that we
are eagerly following your discussions, in the conviction that they will be a decisive factor in the
achievement of world peace and security.

30 September '1947

se pose est beaucoup plus simple: ou bien un gouvernement mondial pour tous les Etats, ou bien
l'abominable gouvernement du monde par une
seule nation, apres que cette nation aurait detruit
toutes les forces qui s'opposent a dIe. Ce probleme
s'est pose al'humanite des l'epoque de la prehistoire et elle l'a resolu au cours des millenaires au
moyen de regles de droit et de la creation de systemes de gouvernement. L'individu confie ses
droits a un gouvernement, en echange de quoi il
n'est pas tenu de se soumettre purement et simplement a quiconque frappe le mieux et le plus fort.
Mais l'individu exige que le plus fort ne puisse
continueI' de porter ses coups sans etre soumis a
la reglc commune: c'est dire que, juridiquement,
personne ne doit etre le plus fort.
De la premiere guerre mondiale sont sorties de
nombreuses Puissances dominantes. De la deuxieme, il n'en est sorti que deux, au fur et a mesure
que les autres perdaient du terrain ou se debattaient dans des crises profondes. De la troisieme,
il n'en sortirait qu'une seule. QueUe qu'eUe soit,
c'est cette Puissance qui serait le gouvernement
du monde, le g'ouvernement le plus arbitraire, le
plus intolerant, qui ferait regner l'oppression la
plus lourde qu'aurait connue l'humanite. L'autre
terme de l'alternative qui s'offre, c'est que le gouvernement du monde soit exerce par tous les Etats
et cette alternative, c'est la paix. Il ne peut etre
licite qu'une nation, n'importe laquelle, pretende
placer son interet particulier alJ-dessus de cette
necessite supreme du genre humain.
Les Etats americains representes dans le systeme regional ont reussi a vivre en paix en toute
dignite et a etablir l'equilibre entre la force demesuree de l'un d'entre eux et l'independance des
autres. L'on peut done vivre en paix, en securite
et aussi eri toute liberte, lorsque le droit regit
g:andes et petites nations. La preuve est plus difficile en ce qui concerne les Nations Unies, car il
s'agit de savoir si les grandes Puissances, elIes
aussi, peuvent vivre en paix. Pour y arriveI', il
n'existe qu'une formule: que les grandes Puissances acceptent de vivre comme si dIes etaient
petites ou comme si, du seul fait qu'elle existe,
toute nation etait grande. TeUe doit ctre l'ambition supreme de votre eminente Assemblee si elIe
aspire a gouverner le monde. Mais la Charte de
San-Francisco, qui s'est bornee a unir les nations,
n'a pas ete congue a cette seule fin. I1 faudra
continueI' de la perfectionner; il ne sera jamais
trop tard pour le faire.
Je vous remercie vivement, Monsieur le Pre.
sident, d'avoir bien voulu permettre que se fasse
entendre, dans cette Assemblee mondiale, la voix
modeste de celui qui se trouve representer aujourd'hui un systeme de, paix dont les buts sont les
memes que ceux de l'Organisation des Nations
Unies, systeme qui aspire a constituer chaque jour
un exemplc meilleur d'accord regional, au service
des Nations U nies et de l'humanite. Au nom de
l'Union panamericaine, j'ai l'honneur de presenter a cette AssemblCe l'hommage de sa reconnaissance et l'assurance qu'elle suit anxieusement vos
debats, avec la conviction qu'ils seront decisifs
pour la paix et la securite du monde.

..
30 septembre 1947

311

. The PRESIDENT: On behalf of the General
Assembly, I thank the representatives of the spe.cialized agencies and our special guests for their
remarks, and I express to them our pleasure at
having them among us during our deliberations.

Le PRf.SIDENT (traduit de f anglais) : Au nom
de l'Assemblee generale, je remercie les representants des institutions specialisees et nos hates distingues des paroles qu'ils ont prononcees; je leur
exprime le plaisir que nous ressentons ales avoir
parmi nous au cours de nos deliberations.

23. Admission of Pakistan and Yemen to
membership in the United Nations:
report of the First Committee (document A/399)

23. Admission du Pakistan Qt du Yemen
dons I'Organisation des Nations
Unies: rapport de la Premiere Commission (document A/399l

The PRESIDEN'l': I call upon the representative of Denmark, Rapporteur of the First Committee.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l' anglais): Je donne
la parole au representant de Danernerk, Rapporteur de la Premiere Commission.

Mr. FEDERSPIEL (Denmark): The General

M. FEDERSPIEL (Danemark) (traduit de l'anglais): L'AssembMe generale a decide, le 23 septembre, de renvoyer ala Premiere Commission la
resolution du Conseil de securite sur l'admission
de nouveaux Membres a l'Organisation des Nations Unies (document A/350).
La Premiere Commission a examine, le 24 septembre 1947, la recommandation du Conseil de
securite relative a l'admission du Pakistan et du
Yemen. Le representant de l'Australie a presente •
une resolution recommandant al'Assemblee generale d'admettre le Yemen et le Pakistan comme
Membres des Nations Unies (document A/C.
1/188), et la Commission a adopte cette resolution a l'unanimite.
En consequence, la Premiere Commission recommande l'AssembIee generale d'adopter la
resolution suivante:
((1' AssembUe generale,

Asse~bly on 23 September decided to refer to

the First Committee the resolution of the Se~
curity Council on the admission of new Members to the United Nations (document A/350)~

,.,.
!

'The First Committee considered the recommendation of the Security Council on the admission of Pakistan and Yemen on 24 September
1947. The representative of Australia proposed a
resolution recommending that the General Assembly admit Yemen and Pakistan to membership in
the United Nations (documentA/C.1/188), and
this resolution was unanimously approved by the
Committee.
The First Committee therefore recommends to
the General Assembly the adoption of the following resolution:
((The General Assembly.•
"Taking note of the application for membership submitted to the United Nations by Pakistan
and Yemen, and of the recommendation of the
Security Council that the Assembly admit Pakistan and Yemen to membership;

1
I

I

~

J
;j

Quotre-vingt-douzieme seance preniere

"Determines that Pakistan and Yemen are, in
its judgment, peace-loving States, within the
meaning of Article 4 of the Charter, and are able
. and willing to carry out their obligations under
the Charter, and consequently
«Decides to admit Pakistan and Yemen as
Members of the United Nations.'~
In connexion with the admission of Pakistan,
certain legal questions were raised by the representative of Argentina and discussed by the Committee. It was decided, on the motion of the representative of Australia, "that the legal problem
raised by the representative of Argentina be referred to the Legal Committee for consideration
and report".
On the suggestion of the representative of
Chile, it was further agreed that, in the view of the
Committee, the opinion eventually delivered by
the Sixth Committee would have no bearing
whatever on the recommendation of the First
Committee concerning the admission of Pakistan,
but was for future reference only. :

a

((Prenant acte des demandes cl'admission a
l'Organisation des Nations Unies presentees par
le Pakistan et le Yemen, et de la decision prise
par le Conseil de securite de recommander a l'Assemblee generale d'admettre le Pakistan et le
Yemen comme Membres de l'Organisation des
Nations Unies,
]uge que le Pakistan et le Yemen sont des Etats
pacifiques au sens de l'Article 4 de la Charte,
qu'ils sont capables de remplir les obligations de
la Chartc et disposes ala faire et, pour ces motifs,
Decide d'admettre le Pakistan et le Yemen en
qualite de Membres des Nations Unies."
En ce qui concerne l'admission du Pakistan, le
representant de l'Argentine a souleve certaines
questions juridiques que la Commission a examinees. Sur la proposition du representant de l'Australie, eUe a decide "de renvoyer ala Commission
des questions juridiques, pour examen et rapport,
le probleme juridique souleve par le representant
de l'Argentine".
Sur la suggestion du representant du Chili, la
Commission a en outre decide que l'opinion que
la Sixieme Commission pourrait exprimer n'influerait en rien sur la recommandation de la
Premiere Commission relative a l'admission du
Pakistan, et qu'elle constituerait seulement une
reference pour l'avenir.

The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative ;1 Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l' anglais) : Je donne
:jmaintenant la parole au representant du
of the United Kingdom.
',~Royaume-Uni.
. .

L~

----------t_>

i

~

Ninety-second Plenary Meeting

312

Mr. McNEIL (United Kingdom): I am most
grateful for this opportunity of moving the adoption of the report of the First Committee. I have
no doubt that the report will be accepted by acclamation, but I am now afforded the opportunity
of saying not only that my delegation is glad that
these two applications are now about to receive
final approval, and is confident that both these
countries will make decisive contributions to our
deliberations, but I am also given the opportunity
of saying that my delegation, of course, is particularly interested in the admission of Pakistan.
Although Pakistan has attained its present
status only very recently, it has already shown
great vitality. If its delegation has not been inside
the General Assembly until now, it has not been
very far from us and many of us have already
enjoyed the benefit of its advice. The head of the
delegation, Sir Mohammad Zafrullah Khan, is
well known to many of us. He will be a great asset
in all the work of the General Assembly and its
Committees.
Therefore, while I, on behalf of my delegation,
formally move the adoption of the report of the
First Committee, I add the congratulations and
best wishes of my Government to Yemen and
Pakistan.

30 September 1947

M. McNEIL (Royaume-Uni) (traduit de l'anglair) : le suis tres heureux de l'occasion qui m'est
offerte de proposer l'adoption du rapport de la
Premiere Commission. le ne doute pas que ce rapport soit adopte par acclamations, mais je ne veux
pas manquer de declarer que, non seulement ma
delegation est heureuse que les deux demandes
d'admission dont il s'agit soient sur le point d'etre
adoptees, erqu'elle est convaincue que le Yemen
et le Pakistan prendront a nos travaux une part
tres importante, mais aussi qu'elle prend, il va sans
dire, un interet particulier a l'adrnission du
Pakistan.
Bien que le Pakistan ne jouisse de son statut
actuel que depuis peu de temps, il a deja fait
preuve d'une grande vitalite. Si sa delegation ne
s'est pas trouvee jusqu'a present au sein de l'Assemblee, elle n'en a jamais ete tres eloignee, et
beaucoup d'entre nous ont deja eu l'occasion de
profiter de ses avis. Sir Mohammad Zafrullah
Khan, chef de cette delegation, nous est bien
connu; il sera d'une aide precieuse dans les travaux de l'Assemblee generale et de ses Commissions.
le propose done formellement, au nom de ma
delegation, l'adoption du rapport de la Premiere
Commission et j'accompagne cette proposition des
felicitations et des meilleurs vceux que le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni forme pour le Yemen
et le Pakistan.

The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative
of Egypt.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : le donne
la parole au representant de l'Egypte.

HEYKAL Pasha (Egypt) (translated from
French,): On behalf of the Egyptian delegation,
I very warmly support the applications for membership of the United Nations from the States of
Pakistan and Yemen, who come to offer the community of the United Nations a co-operation that
I am sure will be fruitful. Their admission will
give the Middle and the Far East two more representatives, and marks a new stage in the progress
of our organization towards universality. The two
new Members will bring with them the fruits of
their culture, their wisdom and their traditions.
Both are peoples of goodwill. All who have had
the advantage of knowing them closely will unhesitatingly bear witness to their innate regard for
the principles of our Charter and their resolution
to co-operate to the full in the pursuit of our purposes. They are peace-loving peoples as anxious as
the best among us for international peace and
security. They are fraternal and are believers in
equality, and they wish to develop among the nations friendly relations based upon respect for the
principle of equality of peoples. They are progressive, and share our desire to solve international
economic, social and humanitarian problems and
raise the peoples' standard of living. .

HEYKAL Pacha (Egypte) : Au nom de la delegation egyptienne, j'appuie tres chaleureusement
la demande d'admission comme Membres de
l'Organisation, des Etats du Pakistan et du Yemen
qui viennent apporter a la communaute des Nations Unies une collaboration qui, yen suis sur,
sera fructueuse. Le Moyen-Orient et l'ExtremeOrient auront ainsi parmi nous deux representants de plus. C'est une etape nouvelle que
franchit notre Organisation dans la voie de l'umver~alite. Les deux nouveaux Etats Membres nous
apporteront le prix de leur culture, de leur sagacite, de leurs traditions. Ce sont la deux peuples
de bonne volonte. Tous ceux qui ont eu l'avantage
de les connaitre de pres vous apporteront sans
hesiter le temoignage de leur attachement inne
aux principes de notre Charte et de leur resolution
de cooperer, dans la pleine mesure de leurs
~oyens, a la poursuite de nos buts. Pacifiques, ils
veulent, comme les meilleurs d'entre nous, la paix
et la securite internationales. Fraternels et egalitaires, ils veulent le developpement, entre les nations, des relations amicales fondees sur le respect
du principe de l'egalite des peuples. Progressistes,
ils veulent avec nous la solution des problemes in~
ternationaux, economiques, sociaux et humanitaires qui permettra de relever le niveau d'existence des peuples.
le souhaite donc, an nom de l'Egypte, la bienvenue au Pakistan et au Yemen, Etats pacifiques
et disposes a remplir cordialement les obligations
de la Charte.
Le PRESIDENT. (traduit de l'anglais) : le donne
la parole au representant des Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

On behalf of Egypt I therefore welcome Pakistan and Yemen, peace-loving States ready to
fulfil with enthusiasm the obligations of the
Charter.
The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative
of the United States of America.

----ea

30 septembre 1947

,

313

Mr. MARsHALL (United States of America) :
The United States delegation is happy to give its
full support to the admission of Pakistan to the
United Nations. Pakistan has just begun its career
as a member of the community of nations, but we
have every reason to believe and expect that its
role and its contributions in the United Nations
will be of much importance. The Government and
people of the United States look forward to collaborating with Pakistan in the United Nations.

r,

The United States delegation also heartily supports the admission of Yemen to membership in
the United Nations. Yemen clearly qualifies for
admission. It is an independent State, able and
willing to carry out the obligations contained in
the Charter. Its relations with other countries, we
believe, have led naturally to its presence here as
a Member of the Organization. We welcome the
opportunity to collaborate with Yemen in the Organization as we have already done in our mutual
diplomatic relations.

The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative
of Iran.

1:,
4

'"
J

'!, '

Quatre-vlngt-douzleme seance pleniere

M. MARSHALL (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais::): La delegation des Etats-Unis
est heureuse d.e donner son plein appui ala resolution tendant a admettre le Pakistan comme Membre de l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Le
Pakistan vient seulement de commencer sa car·
riere de membre de la communaute des nations,
mais nous avoilS toutes raisons de croire que son
role et son apport, dans l'Organisation des Nations Unies, seront d'une grande importance. Le
Gouvernement et le peuple des Etats-Unis envisagent avec plaisir la perspective de collaborer avec
le Pakistan au sein de l'Organisation des Nations
Unies.
La delegation des Etats-Unis appuie non moins
chaleureusement l'admission du Yemen comme
Membre de l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Le
Yemen a tous les titres requis pour cette admission.
C'est un Etat independant, capable de remplir les
obligations de la Charte et dispose ale faire. Sea
relations avec les autres pays ont amene tout
naturellement, croyons-nous, sa venue parmi lea
Membres de l'Organisation. Nous nous felicitons
de l'occasion qui nous est donnee de collaborer
avec le Yemen au sein de l'Organisation, tout
comme nous l'avons deja fait dans le cours des
relations diplomatiques que nous entretenons avet
ce pays.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): ]e donne
la parole au representant de l'Iran.

Mr. AnL (Iran) (translated from French.):
M. AnL (Iran): Van dernier, lors de l'adLast year, when three new States were admitted to mission de trois nouveaux Etats au sein de notre
our Organization, the representative of Iran ex- Organisation, le representant de l'Iran exprima la
pressed his Government's satisfaction, and added satisfaction de son Gouvemement, ajoutant que
that every step towards universality-which in the chaque pas fait vers l'universalite - qui, de l'avis
opinion of the Iranian Government is one of the du Gouvernement iranien, est l'une des conditions
conditions essential to the success of the United essentielles du succes de l'Organisation des
Nations-would be warmly welcomed by the Nations Unies - serait salue avec joie par le
Government of Iran.
Gouvernement de l'Iran.
The Iranian delegation is very happy today to
La .delegation de l'Iran est tres heureuse de
welcome two more States, Pakistan and Yemen, saluer aujourd'hui l'entree de deux autres Etats,
to membership in the United Nations;
le Pakistan et le Yemen, dans l'Organisation.
My Government is all the more pleased to supMon Gouvernement est d'autant plus heureux
port the recommendation of the First Committee, d'appuyer le rapport de la Premiere Commission
since these are two Middle East States, both age- qu'il s'agit de deux Etats du Moyen-Orient, tous
long friends of Iran. Ancient ties bind our coun- deux amis seculaircs de l'Iran. Des liens milletry to Pakistan, and it is for me a very pleasant naires unissent notre pays au Pakistan et ce sera
duty to express to the Government and people of ,pour moi un tres agreable devoir que d'adresser
Pakistan the friendly greetings of the Government au Gouvernement et au peuple du Pakistan le
and people of Iran, to welcome most cordially salut fraternel du Gouvernement et du peuple
their admission to the United Nations and to con- iraniens, en souhaitant de tout creur leur admisgratulate them on the independence they have so sion dans cctte Organisation et en les felicitant
nobly won.
pour l'independance si noblement acquise.
The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative
of Afghanistan.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Je donne
la parole au representant de l'Afghanistan.

Mr. HOSAYN AZIZ (Afghanistan): Afghanistan heartily shares in the rejoicing of the peoples
of Pakistan in their freedom. We have profound
respect for Pakistan. May Pakistan prosper.

M. HOSAYN AZIZ (Afghanistan) (traduit de
l'anglais): L'Afghanistan s'associe de tout cceur
a l'allegresse que l'independance a fait naltre au
creur des populations du Pakistan. Nous portons
au Pakistan un profond respect. Puisse la fortune
lui etre favorable.

The Afghanistan delegation does not wish to
oppose the membership of Pakistan in this great
Organization, but it is with the deepest regret

La delegation de l'Afghanistan ne desire pas
s'opposer al'admission du Pakistan comme Membre de cette grande Organisation, mais declare,

i_ _~ ~__~rr""""

Ninety-second Plenary Meeting

314

that we are unable at this time to vote for
Pakistan. This unhappy circumstance is due to
the fact that we cannot recognize the N orth~ West
Frontier as part of Pakistan so long as the people
of the North-West Frontier h~ve not been given
an opportunity free from any kind of influenceand I repeat, free from any kind of influenceto determine for themselves whether they wish to
be independent or to become a part of Pakistan.

The reasons which compel our present action

will be given in a statement which I shall make at
a later date to the GeneralABsembly.
As the position of my delegation is different
with respect to Yemen and to Pakistan, I propose
that the application of each be voted upon separately.

30 September 1947

avec le plus profond regret, ne pouvoir, dans les
circonstances actuelles, voter en faveur de cette
admission. Ccs circonstances facheuses resultent
du fait qu'il nous est impossible d'admettre que la
region frontaliere du nord-ouest fasse partie du
territoire du Pakistan, tant que la population de
cette region, degagee de toute espece d'influence
- je dis bien: de toute espece d'influence n'aura pas eu la possibilite de decider elle-meme
si elle desire etre independante ou incorporee an
Pakistan.
J'exposerai les raisons qui nous obligent a agir
ainsi actuellement dans une declaration que je
ferai ulterieurement a l'Assemblee generale.
Etant donne que l'attitude de ma delegation
n'est pas la meme a l'egard du Yemen et a l'egard
du Pakistan, je propose que les demandes d'admission de ces deux Etats fassent chacune l'objet
d'un vote distinct.

The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative
of Iraq.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais) : Je donne
la parole au representant de l'Irak.

Mr. JAMALI (Iraq): On behalf of the delegation of Iraq, I wish to express great pleasure in
supporting the United Kingdom proposal for the
admission of Pakistan and Yemen into our midst.

M. JAMALI (Irak) (trqduit de l'anglais) : Au
nom de la delegation de l'Irak, je declare appuyer
avec plaisir la proposition du Royaume-Uni tendant a admettre le Pakistan et le Yemen au sein
de l'Organisation.
Le Pakistan, de meme que l'Inde, entretient
avec l'Irak des relations de longue date. Ces relations sont veritablement fondees sur la politique
de bon voisinage. Nous avons ete tres heureux de
voir le Pakistan et l'lnde obtenir leur independance, et nous nous rejouissons particulierement
aujourd'hui de la proposition tendant a admettre
le Pakistan comme Membre de l'Organisation des
Nations Unies. Nous esperons que le nouvel Etat
du Pakistan jouera un grand role dans le maintien
de la bonne entente et de la cooperation internationales. Nous sommes convaincus que les principes de la Charte des Nations Unies auront en
lui un champion resolu.
Nous sommes particulierement heureux d'appuyer l'admission du Yemen, nation sreur, membre de la Ligue des Etats arabes. La grande contribution apportee dans le passe par le Yemen a
la civilisation et a la culture humaines est hien
connue. Nous esperOl1S que l'admission du Yemen
au sein de l'Organisationdes Nations UI].ies marquera dans l'histoire de ce pays le debut d'une ere
nouvelle, une ere de progres, de developpement,
et de cooperation internationale.
Tandis que je me rejouis de la proposition
d'admettre le Yemen, nation sreur, membre de la
Ligue arabe, je veux esperer que le jour n'est pas
eloigne ou un autre membre de cette Ligue, la
Transjordanie, sera egalement parmi nous. Le
souverain et le peuple de la Transjordanie ont
servi la cause des Allies au cours de deux guerres
mondiales, et ce pays, en tant qu'Etat pacifique
acceptant les obligations contenues dans l'Article
4 de' la Charte, a certainement le droit d'etre
parmi nous. J'espere sincerement que le jour
viendra bientot ou le veto ne sera plus employe
contre l'admission de tous les Etats pacifiques et
amis du progres, comme ill'a ete contrela Transjordanie, dont l'admission comme Mcmbre de

Pakistan, like India, has a standing historical
relationship with my country. Our relations are
truly based on the "good neighbour policy." We
were delighted that both Pakistan and India
achieved their freedom, and today we are especially happy to see Pakistan proposed for admission to membership in the United Nations. We
hope that the new State of Pakistan will be a great
pillar in preserving international goodwill and
co-operation. We are sure that Pakistan is a great
champion of the principles of the United Nations
Charter.

We are especially happy to support the entry of
Yemen, a sister State in the League of Arab States.
Yemen's great contribution to human civilization
and culture in the past is a well-known fact. We
hope that Yemen's admission to the United Nations will inaugurate a new era in the history of
Yemen, an era of progress, development, and
international co-operation.

While rejoicing at the proposal for admitting
Yemen as an Arab League sister State, I hope that
the day will not be far off when another member
of Our League, Transjordan, will be amongst us.
Transjordan's ruler and people served the Allied
cause in two world wars, and she is certainly entitled to be amongst us as a peace-loving State
accepting the obligations contained in Article 4
of the Charter. I sincerely hope that the day is not
far off when the veto will not be used against the
admission of all peace-loving and progressive
countries as it was used against Transjordan,
whose admission to membership has been vetoed.
While wishing for the entry of all peace-loving
States into the United Nations, I wish to support

30 septembre 1947

I
,J

(

~

i
J

1

J

l

315

Quatre-vingt-dou%leme seance pleniere

and welcome the admission of Pakistan and
Yemen to thic; high and sovereign Organization.

l'Organisation s'est heurtee a un veto. En souhaitant que tous les Etats pacifiques puisscnt entrer dans l'Organisation des Nations Unies, je
desire appuycr chaleureusement la resolution tendant a admettre le Palcistan et le Yemen au sein
de cette noble et souveraine Orga:oisation.

The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative
of India.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Je donne
la parole au representant de l'Inde.

Mrs. PANDIT (India): It gives me pleasure to
join in the welcome which this Assembly of the
United Nations extends to Pakistan. It is a matter of gratification to us from India that our
sister nation should take its legitimate place in
the international community here, and make a
contribution to the solution of the problems which
face the world.

Mme PANDIT (Inde) (traduit de l'anglais) :
C'est avec plaisir que je m'associe aux paroles de
bienvenue prononcees au sein de l'AssembIee des
Nations Unies a l'adresse du Pakistan. Nous
avons, nous, Hindous, patticulicrement lieu de
nous rejouir qu'une nation sreur prenne la place
qui lui revient ici, dans la communaute internationale, et puisse contribuer a la solution des problcmes quise posent au monde.
En ce qui concerne le Pakistan, sa demande
d'admission comme Membre des Nations Unies
n'a donne lieu a aucune contestation, et nous ne
doutons pas que, par la part positive qu'il prendra
a nos deliberations et par sa fidelite a~ principes
de la Charte, il n'acquiere parmi les nations respect et distinction.
En tant qu'eIement de l'ancien Empire de
l'Inde, le Pakistan s'est deja trouvc associe a
l'reuvre de l'Organisation des Nations Unies, et,
a cet egard, il n'est pas un nouveau venu parmi
nous. Nous savons taus quelle situation le Pakistan
occupe, par suite de son etendue, de sa population
et de ses ressources, parmi les nations de l'Asie, et
nous devrions par consequent retirer de la force
de sa presence a nos cl)tes. La delegation de l'Inde
accueillera avcc plaisir le Pakistan, et fOlme des
vreux pour l'heureux accomplissement de la 110Uvelle tache qui l'attend.

In the case of Pakistan, there was no dispute
about its claim to membership in the United Nations, and we have no doubt that, by its positive
contribution to our deliberations and by its loyal
adherence to the principles of the Charter, it will
earn respect and honour among nations.
'"

As part of the former Indian Empire, Pakistan
has already been associated with the work of the
United Nations, and in that sense Pakistan is not
et newcomer among us. Wc are all aware of the
position it holds in area, population and resources
among the nations of Asia, and its association
must therefore be a source of strength to us. We
of the Indian delegation welcome Pakistan and
wish it all success in its new responsibiliti«:,.s.

We also welcome to the United Nations the
ancient State of Yemen, whose relations with my
country have always been cordial and are of long
standing. We wish it success in the new sphere it
is entering, and extend, on behalf of India, our
very good wishes.

'Nous serons egalement heureux d'accueillir
dans l'Organisation des Nations Unies le Yemen,
Etat ancien avec lequell'Inde entretient de longue
date des relations qui ont toujours ete cordiales.
Nous souhaitons au Yemen de rcussir dans le
nouveau domaine ou il va avail' acces, et lui
adressons, au nom de l'Inde, 110S meilleurs vreux.

The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative
of Turkey.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l' anglais) : J e donne
la parole au representant de la Turquie.

M. SARPER (Turquie) (traduit de l'anglais) :
Mr. SARPER (Turkey): The Turkish delegation supports the motion of the United Kingdom .La delegation de la Turquic appuie la motion
delegation concerning the admission of Yemen presentee par la delegation du Royaume-Uni
and Pakistan to the United Nations, to which I concernant l'admission du Yemen et du Pakistan
am sure they will bring very valuable contribu- comme Membres de l'Organisation des Nations
tions. On this occasion, I take pleasure in con- Unies, a laquelle, j'en suis persuade, ils apporteveying to those two friendly countries the best ront une contribution tres precieuse. A cette occawishes of my country and of my delegation.
sion, rai grand plaisir a transmettre a ces deux
pays amis, les mei1leurs vreux de mon pays et de
ma delegation.
The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative
of Lebanon.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : J e donne
la parole au representant du Liban.

Mr. MALIK (Lebanon): In the name of my
Government and my delegation, I wish to welcome to our midst our two new friends, Pakistan
arid Yemen. We are certain of their positive contribution to our work.

M. MALIK (Liban) (traduit de l'anglais) : Au
nom de mon Gouvernement et de ma delegation,
je serai heureux d'accueillir parmi nOllS nos deux
nouveau amis, le Pakistan et le Yemen. Nous
sommes convaincus qu'ils apporteront nos travaux une contribution positive.

a

&

·Ninety-second Plenary Meeting

316

30 September 1947

I t is evident that the East is waking up and
desires to play its constructive role in the world
community. The East wants to bring its culture,
its tradition and its ancient wisdom to the common pool of world deliberation. Both these ancient States are peace-loving, venerable and willing to abide by the obligations of the Charter.
Only good can come of their joining us; good to
bo th East and West alike.

11 est evident que l'Orient s'eveille et desire
jouer un role constructif dans la communaute des
nations. L'Orient desire apporter au fonds commun des deliberations. intemationales sa culture,
ses traditions et sa sagesse seculaire. Les deux anciens Etats dont il s'agit sont pacifiques, dignes
d'un grand respect et disposes a respecter les obligations de la Charte. Leur venue parmi nous ne
peut etre que profitable, tant pour 1'Orient que
pour l'Occident.

The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative
of Brazil.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de r anglais) : J e donne
la parole au representant du Bresil.

Mr. MUNIZ (Brazil) : The Brazilian delegation
gives its heartiest support to the admission of
Pakistan and Yemen to the United Nations. We
are sure that these two States will bring to the
United Nations a contribution of their culture,
their way of life and their civilization, thus completing the work of the United Nations and making it more universal.

M. MUNIZ (Bresil) (traduit de l'anglais) : La
delegation bresilienne appuie chaleureusement la
proposition tendant a admettre le Pakistan et le
Yemen dans l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
Nous sommes convaincus que ces deux Etats, en
faisant a cette Organisation l'apport de leur culture, de leur mode de vie et de leur civilisation,
contribueront a parachever l'reuvre des Nations
Unies et a lui donner un caractere plus universel.
Le Pakistan et le Yemen representent une
forme distincte de civilisation: la civilisation
orientale, civilisation qui s'appuie sur la religion
et sur des idees qui contribueront a rapprocher
l'Orient et l'Occident au sein de l'Organisation
des Nations Unies.

Pakistan and Yemen represent a typical form
of civilization, the Eastern civilization, a civilization given to religion and ideas which will contribute in bringing to the United Nations a meeting of the East and the West.
The PRESIDENT: I have no more speakers on
my list. I believe the Assembly wishes to approve
the First Committee's report and to adopt the
resolution which is before it. The only objection
I have is from Mghanistan. The recommendations of the report relating to Yemen were unanimously adopted by the First Committee and I
submit them to the Assembly.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de r anglais): n n'y a
plus d'orateurs inscrits. Je crois que l'Assemblee
est desireuse d'approuver le rapport de la Premiere Commission et d'adopter la resolution dont
elle est saisie. Seul l'Afghanistan a formuIe une
objection. Les recommandations du rapport relatives au Yemen ont ete adoptees al'unanimite par
la Premiere Commission. Je les soumets a1'approbation de l'Assemblee. En ce qui concerne les
recommandations relatives au Pakistan, nous
devrons proceder au vote, conformement a l'artide 74 du reglement.

Yemen was admitted to membership in the
United Nations Organization.

Le Yemen est admis en qualite de M embre de
rOrganisation des Nation.s Unies.

The PRESIDENT: We shall have to take a vote,
in accordance with rule 74, on the recommendations relating to Pakistan.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de r anglais): Conformement a l'article 74 du reglement interieur,
nous alIons proceder· a un vote sur les recommandations ayant trait a1'admission du Pakistan.

A vote was taken by a show of hands, as a:
result of which Pakistan was elected to membership in the United Nations Organitation by 53
votes to 1, with no abstentions.

A la suite d'un vote main levee le Pakistan
est elu M embre de I'Organisation des Nations
Unies par 53 voix contre 1; il n'y a pas
d'abstention.

a

The PRESIDENT: Rule 116 of the provisional
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): L'arrules of procedure of the General Assembly re- tide 116 du reglement interieur provisoire de
quires that a State, whose application has been I l'Assemblee generale stipule qu'un Etat dont la
approved by the General Assembly, ~hall submit demande d'admission a re~u 1'agrement de 1'Asan instrument of adherence. I now call upon the semblee generale doit presenter un instrument
representatives of these two States whose admis- d'adhesion. J'invite done les representants des
sion has been approved by the General Assem- deux Etats dont l'admission vient de recevoir l'apbly, to come forward to the speaker's rostrum and probation de 1'Assemblee generale a monter a la
to submit to the Secretary-General their instru- tribune et a presenter au Secretaire generalleurs
ments of adherence.
instruments d'adhesion.

I

At the invitation of the President, Sir M ohammad Zafrullah Khan, representative of Pakistan,
and Prince Seif el Islam Abdullah, representative
of Yemen, took their places on the platform.

Sur l'invitation du President, Sir. M ohammad
Zafrtl11ah Khan, representant du Pakistan, et le
Prince Seif el Islam Abdullah, representant du
Yemen, prennent place la tribune.

a

30 septembre 1947

1
,

I;

,

317

Quatre-vingt-douzieme seance pfeniere

The PRESIDENT: The membership of Pakistan
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais) : En vertu
and Yemen, in accordance with rule 116, dates de 1'Article 116, le Pakistan et le Yemen sont des·
from this moment, and on behalf of the General maintenant Membres de 1'0rganisation des Na~
Assembly, I wish to welcome these two States. tions Unies et, au nom de l'Assemblee generale, je
I express to them the deep satisfaction, which I desire leur souhaiter la bienvenue. Je leur exprime
am sure is felt by all members of the Assembly, "le profond contentement que partagent, j'en suis
and look forward to the collaboration of Yemen persuade, tous les Membres de l'Assemblee, et
and Pakistan in the deliberations of the General j'envisage avec plaisir la perspective de collaborer
Assembly during this and future sessions. I am avec le Yemen et le Pakistan dans les deliberations
sure that we all value greatly the contributions de 1'Assemblee ,generale, au cours de la presente
they will make as Members of the United Na- session et de celles qui suivront. Je suis convaincu
tions and the support that their peoples will bring que nous attacherons, tous, un grand prix a la
to the work of our Organization.
contribution qu'ils apporteront en tant que Membres de 1'0rganisation des Nations Unies et a.
l'appui que leurs populations donneront a l'ceuvre
de notre Organisation.
I call upon the representative of Pakistan.
Je donne la parole au representant du Pakistan.
Sir Mohammad ZAFRULLAH Khan (Pakistan)
Sir Mohammad ZAFRULLAH Khan (Pakistan):
I should like to thank the President and the dele- (traduit de l'anglais): Je desire tout d'abord regations of the United Kingdom, Egypt, the mercier" le President et les delegations du RoyUnited States of America, Iran, Iraq, India, Tur- aume-Uni, de l'Egypte, des Etats-Unis d'Amerikey, Lebanon and Brazil for the kind words of que, de l'Iran, de l'Irak, de l'Inde, de la Turquie,
welcome with which the admission of Pakistan to du Liban et du Bresil pour les aimables paroles de
the United Nations has been greeted.
bienvenue qu'ils ont prononcees apropos de l'admission du Pakistan dans l'Organisation des
Nations Unies.
I also desire to thank the General Assembly, on
Je desire egalement remercier l'Assemblee, au
behalf of the Government of Pakistan and the nom du Gouvemement du Pakistan et des memmembers of the Pakistan delegation, for the ad- bres de la delegation de ce pays, d'avoir admis le
mission of Pakistan to membership in the United Pakistan comme Membre de l'Organisation des
Nations Unies.
Nations.
In one sense, the admission of Pakistan to the
En un sens, 1'admission du Pakistan comme
United Nations is not the admission of a new Membre de l'Organisation n'estpas celle d'un
Member. Until 15 August of this year, Pakistan nouveau Membre. Jusqu'au 15 aout de cette
and India constituted one State. On 15 August annee, le Pakistan et l'Inde constituaient lID seul
they agreed to constitute themselves into two sepa- Etat. Le 15 aout, il se sont, d'un commun accord,
rate sovereign States. One chose to continue to separes en deux Etats souverains. L'un a prefere
call itself by the old name of India, which had continuer a porter 1'ancien nom d'Inde, qui s'apapplied to the whole of the country, and the other pliquait al'ensemble du pays, tandis que l'autre a
elected to call itself by the name of Pakistan.
choisi celui de Pakistan.
Inasmuch as Pakistan had been a part of India,
Sous le nom de l'Inde, en effet, le Pakistan, en
it was, in effect, under the latter name, a signa- tant que partie de ce pays, a figureparmi les
tory to the Treaty of Versailles and an original signataires du Traite de Versailles et parmi les
Member of the League of Nations. I recall that I Membres de la Societe des Nations, des l'origine
had the honour of being the head of the Indian de celle-ci. Je rappelle que j'ai eu l'honneur d'etre
delegation at the last session of the Assembly of a la tete de la delegation de l'Inde a la derniere
the League of Nations held at Geneva in Decem- session de l'Assemblee de la Societe des Nations,
ber 1939. In the same sense, Pakistan, as a part tenue a Geneve en decembre 1939. Toujours en
of India, participated in the San Francisco Oon- tant que partie de l'Inde, le Pakistan a participe a
ference in 1945 and became a signatory to the la Conference de San-Francisco en 1945, et a
United Nations Charter. Therefore, Pakistan is signe la Charte des Nations Unies. Le Pakistan
not a new Member of the United Nations, but a n'est donc pas un nouveau Membre de 1'0rganico-successor to a Member State which was one of sation des Nations Unies, mais un co-successeur
the founders of the Organization.
d'un Etat Membre qui fut l'un des fondateurs de
l' Organisation.
Though Pakistan's admission to the United
Bien que l'admission du Pakistan dans 1'OrNations is only a formal proceeding, Pakistan in- ganisation des Nations Unies ne soitqu'une simple
terprets it as an expression of confidence in the formalite, le Pakistan y voit une marque de condevotion of Pakistan to the ideals of the United fiance dans son devouement aux ideals des NaNations, of which it hopes it will continue to give tions Unies, devouement dont il espere continuer
ample proof on every occasion and in every a donner de nombreuses preuves en toutes circondirection.
stances et dans tous les domaines.
It is more than two years since the Second
La deuxieme guerre mondiale est censee avoir
World War is supposed to have come to an end; pris fin depuis plus de deux ans et, cependant, le
yet the world is still groping for peace, which monde continue de tatonner, a la recherche d'une
seems continuously to elude its grasp. The great paix qui semble continuellement lui echapper. Les
nations, which were able to pool their resources grandes nations, qui. ont ete capables de mettre

L
' - - ">

--------~~"-

---..."

Nlnetyasecond Plenary Meeting

318

and their statesmanship for the winning of the
war, appear to be afflicted with the incapacity to
come to a frank and whole-hearted agreement on
the line..'lupon which the foundations of peace
should be laid. On behalf of my Government, I
beg to convey to the United Nations the assurance
that Pakistan will do all that lies within its power
to bring about a better understanding among
nations and to make the utmost contribution of
which it is capable towards securing and maintaining lasting peace. It will also be ever ready,
and indeed anxious, to make its due contribution
towards the alleviation of all forms of human suf
fering and distress, and the promotion of beneficent co-operation among the nations for the general raising of standards of living and the fostering of liberty and tolerance throughout the world.
a

In the past, armed conflict hasresuIted mainly
from false notions of racial superiority, the desire
for economic exploitation of the weak by the
strong, and intolerance of ideas that were not in
accord with those that one nation preferred for
itself and desired to impose upon others. Pakistan
will always endeavour to promote that which
tends towards the widening of liberty and equality, beneficent co-operation, and the ';Videst and
deepest tolerance, as it is convinced that it is only
through these means that peace can be assured
and humanity speeded on· towards the achievement of true prosperity.
It would, I conceive, not be open to me at this
stage to submit any observations on what the
United Nations has so far achieved and what it
has been unable to accomplish. Permit me, however, to say that we of the Pakistan delegation,
while fully appreciating the ideals of the United
Nations, are equally conscious of its handicaps
and shortcomings. As has been said, however, this
is an imperfect world, and it is precisely for this
reason that a world organization of the character
of the United Nations is indispensable if mankind
is to have a reasonable chance of escaping calamities and dis,asters out of all comparison with
those which it has had to endure in the recent
past. We are convinced that the United Nations
offers to mankind its last chance of salvation in
the political, economic and social fields, and that
our united efforts ought to be directed towards
~trengthening the Organization, discovering
means of making it work in the spirit in which it
was founded, and achieving the ideals which-have
been set as its goal. Pakistan will always make its
fullest contribution towards that end.

30 September 1947

leura ressources en commun et de realiser la cooperation de leurs hommes d'Etat en vue de la
victoire, semblent affligees d'incapacite lorsqu'il
s'agit de se mettre d'accord, franchement et sans
reserve, sur les fondements a donner a I'edifice de
la paix. Au nom de mon Gouvernement, j'ai
l'honneur de transmettre aux Nations Unies I'assurance que le Pakistan fera tout ce-qui est en
son pouvoir pour amener une meilleure entente
entre les nations et pour contribuer, dans toute la
mcsure de ses possibilites, a assurer et a maintenir
une paix durable. Le Pakistan sera egalement toujours pret, et il aura cette tache a cceur, a apporter
la contribution qui lui revient, au soulagement de
la souffrance et de la detresse humaine sous toutes
leurs formes, ainsi qu'a la realisation d'une cooperation profitable entre toutes les nations, en
vue d'elever partout les niveaux de ,:,ie et de faire
regner la liberte et la tolerance dans le monde
entier.
Dans le passe, les conilits armes ant surtout resuIte de fausses notions sur la superiorite raciale,
d'un desir d'exploitation economique du faible
par le fort et de l'intolerance al'egard d'idees qui
differaient de celles auxquelles une nation se
ralliait et qu'elle desirait imposer aux autres.
Le Pakistan s'efIorcera toujours cl'encourager
tout ce qui est propre a etendre la liberte et
l'egalite, la cooperation bienfaisante et la toll~r­
ance la plus large, etant convaincu que c'est
seulement par ces moyens que l'on pourra assurer
la paix et accelerer les progres de I'humanite dans
la voie de la prosperite veritable.

11 ne conviendrait pas, je le con~ois, que la
delegation du Pakistan formule, a l'heure actuelle,
des observations sur les resultats que 1'0rganisation des Nations Unies a obtenus jusqu'ici, et sur
ce qu'elle n'a pas ete capable d'accomplir. Qu'il
lui soit cependant permis de declarer qu'elle a
pleinement conscience, a la fois, des ideals de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies et des imperfections de celle-ci, ainsi que des obstacles qu'elle
rencontre. Toutefois, comme on l'a dit, le monde
n'est pas parfait, et c'est precisement la raison
pour laquelle une organisation mondiale comme
celle des Nations Unies est indispensable, si 1'0n
veut donner a l'humanite une chance d'cviter des
calamites et des desastres hors de toute comparaison avec ceux qu'elle adu subir dans un passe
recent. Nous sommes convaincus que 1'0rganisa.
tion des Nations Unies represente pour I'humanite
une derniere chance de salut dans les domaines
politique, economique et social, et que nos efforts
conjugues doivent tendre a renforcer 1'0rganisation et a trouver les moyens de lui permettrc de
fonctionner scIon l'esprit qui a preside a sa creation, et de realiser les ideals qui constituent ses
objectifs. Le Pakistan contribuera toujours de tout
son pouvoir a la realisation de ces objectifs.

. The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative
of Yemen.

. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Je donne
la parole au representant du Yemen.

Prince SElF EL ISLAM ABDULLAH (Yemen)
(translated from the French version of the Arab
text) : Mr. President, gentlemen, in greeting you
in the name of the most clement and merciful
God~ it gives me special pleasure to express on

Le Prince SElF EL ISLAM ABnuLLAH (Yemen)
(traduit de l'arabe,) : Au nom de Dieu clement et
misericordieux, Monsieur le President, honorables
representants, en vous saluant de la far;:on la plus
cordiale, il m'est particulierement agreable cl'ex-

~----- - -

..

_----------------------------------------------

30 septembre 1947

319

behalf of His Majesty the Imam Yahya, King of
Yemen, and on behalf of his Government, the
deepest gratitude for this demonstration of candid
sympathy which your Organization has extended
to Yemen, both in the Security Council and at the
present meeting of the General Assembly.
It also gives me great pleasure to thank the
honourable representatives who h;lVe been kind
enough to extend a welcome and offer their best
wishes to this little country whose population does
not exceed five million, and to recall its centuryold struggle for the defence and affirmation of
her liberty and independence.

1

...,
1

I

In paying tribute to their kindness, Yemen
wishes to stress how deeply it is interested in
achieving the purposes of the new Organization.
Its faith in the value of these purposes explains
and justifies its great desire to co-operate with
the other States in building a lasting peace, and
in creating better conditions for the development
of international life.

Quatre-vingt-douzieme seance plenifne

primer, au nom de Sa Majeste le roi du Yemen,
l'Imam Yahya, et au nom de son Gouvemement,
la reconnaissance la plus profonde pour cettc
manifestation de franche sympathie que votre Organisation a bien voulu reserver au Yemen, tant
au sein du Conseil de securite qu'au cours de la
presente seance de l'AssembIee generale.
]'ai egalement un grand plaisir a adresser roes
remerciements aux honorables representants qui
ont bien vowu. souhaiter lit bienvenue et offrir
leurs meilleurs vreux a ce petit pays dont la population ne depasse pas cinq millions d'habitants, et
retracer sa lutte a travel'S les siecles pour la defense et l'affirmation de sa libertc et de son independance.
En renclant hommage a leur bienveillante appreciation, le Yemen tient a mettre en relief l'interet qu'il attache a la realisation des buts de
l'Organisation nouvelle. Sa foi dans la va1eur de
ccs buts explique et justifie son vif desir de co"
opa-er avec les autres Etats a l'edification d'unc
paix durable et a la creation de meilleures conditions pour le developpement de la vie internationale.
A cet egard, on ne saurait perdre de vue que le,
Yemen apprccie a leur juste valeur les efforts
deployes pour consolider les assises d'une paix
acquise au prix d'une serie de souffrances et de
miseres. En effet, toute menace contre la paix ne
se borne plus a comporter la repetition eventuelle
de ces souffrances et de ces miseres ou l'interruption d'une periode de prosperite salutaire et bien
faisante; elle pourrait dCpasser ces linrites traditionnelles pour mettre en jeu l'avenir de la civi1i~
sation actuelle, sinon l'existence de l'humanite.
I1 est donc nature! que la solidarite internationale, ou pIutot universelle, se presente. a l'heure
actuelle comme un devoir imperieux, qui s'impose
tant par sa valeur ideologique que par une force
rcelle puisee plus particulierement dans l'experience recente de l'emploi d'instruments de guerre
clans leur forme la plus evoluee.
Aussi a-t-il ete judicieux de Creel' cet organe
regulateur qui doit commander a la conscience
internationale pour faire prevaloir, sur le particularisme du passe, la volonte commune de vivre
en paix et favoriser le progres social dans une
ambiance de cooperation fraternelle.
Certes, la tache n'est pas aisee, mais les heurts
et les difficultes ne sauraient en aucune fac;on
decourager les esprits, mais doivent les inciter, all
contraire, a accroitre leur 'contribution et ·leur
loyaute ala realisation des aspirations humaines.
Pleinement conscient des difficultes de la situation, le Yemen vient s'atteler ala noble tache que
les Nations Unies se sont assignee, affirmant par
Hl. meme sa confiance dans les principes poses par
la Charte et les bonnes intentions qui ont preside
a leur elaboration. Il est persuade que ces intentions devront guider l'Organisation clans la recherche des solutions les plus equitables aux differents problemes qui divisent les opinions a l'heure
actuelle.

In this connexion, we should not forget that
Yemen appreciates at their true value the efforts
which have been made to consolidate the foundations of a peace bought at the price of so much
suffering and misery. Any threat to the peace now
would not only. involve a possible repetition of
these sufferings and misery, or the interruption of
a period of salutary and beneficent prosperity; it
might go beyond these traditional limits and
jeopardize the future of the present civilization,
if not the existence of mankind. .
It is therefore natural that international, or
rather universal, solidarity should appear at the
present time as an imperative duty on account not
only of its ideological value, but of a genuine urge
derived more particularly from our recent experience of the use of war weapons in their most
advanced form.
Hence, it was wise to set up this regulatory
Organization which is to control the international
conscience and ensure that the common will to
live at peace will prevail over the particularism of
the past, at the same time promoting social progress in an atmosphere of brotherly co-operation.
Granted this task is not an easy one, but we
should not be discouraged by setbacks and difficulties. On the contrary, they should incite us to
added efforts and loyalty with a view to achieving the aspirations of mankind.
Fully conscious of the difficulties of the situation, Yemen comes to give its support to the noble
task which the United Nations has undertaken,
thus affirming its confidence in the principles
laid down by the Charter and in the good intentions which governed theIr formulation. Yemen is
convinced that the Organization must be guided
by these intentions in seeking the most equitable
solutions for the various problems upon which
opinion is divided at the moment.
Yemen, the country of Sheba and of Mareb,
Le Yemen, pays de Saba et de Mareb, berceau
. the cradle of an ancient civilization, was called . d'une vieille civilisation, fut denomme Arabia
Arabia Felix because it held virtue in high Felix parce qu'il preconisait le bien et s'evertuait
M

,
"

1

i

L

." 'is'

I

Ninety-second Plenary Meeting

320

esteem and strove to ensure peace, liberty and cooperation. The keystone of Yemen's foreign policy
is the maintenance of the most friendly relations
with all States, as may be seen from the treaties
of friendship which it has concluded with several members of this Organization and particularly with all the major Powers. Yemen is already
a member of the Arab League, and within that
regional organization helps to consolidate the
foundations of security and international collaboration.
If I have to make a confession of faith on this
solemn occasion, I should like to say that Yemen
will always stand for peace, justice and cooperation; it will stand for virtue and for freedom;
it will stand for the spirit which has inspired the
provisions of the Charter'and for the ideal which
it attempts to realize.
May God grant us all the success for which we
hope!

30 September 1947

a assurer la paix, la liberte et la cooperation. La
clef de voo.te de la politique exterieure du Yemen
est d'entretenir les meilleures relations' avec tous
les Etats, ainsi qu'il ressort des traites d'amitie
que le Yemen a conclus avec plusieurs Membres
de cette Organisation et surtout avec toutes les
grandes Puissances. Le Yemen fait deja partie de
la Ligue des Etats Arabes et contribue, au sein de
cet organisme regional, a consolider les assises de
la securite et la collaboration intemationale.
S'il s'agit de faire une profession de foi en cette
occasion solennelle, je dirai que le Yemen sera
toujours pour la paix, la justice et la cooperation;
il sera pour le bien, la liberte; il sera pour l'esprit
qui a inspire les dispositions de la Charte et pour
l'ideal qu'elle tend a realiseI'.
Que Dieu nous assure a tous le succes souhaite !

24. Election of non-permanent members
to the Security Council

24. Election de membres non permanents
au Conseil de securite

The PRESIDENT: According to its rules of procedure, the General Assembly, in the course of
each regular session, elects three non-permanent
members of the Security Council. The term of
each of these members is two years. The General
Assembly is therefore called upon now to elect
three members to the places occupied at present
by Australia, Brazil and Poland, whose terms will
expire on 31 December 1947. The terms of the
members now to be elected will begin on 1 January 1948.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Conformement a son reglement interieur, l'Assemblee
generale, au cours de chaque session ordinaire,
elit trois membres non permanents du Conseil de
securite. Le mandat de ces membres est de deux
ans. L'AssemblCe generale est donc appeIee maintenant a elire trois membres, afin de pourvoir aux
sieges actuellement occupes par l'Australie, le
Bresil et la Pologne, dont le mandat vient a expiration le 31 decembre 1947. Le mandat des membres qui seront elus entrera en vigueur le 1er
janvier 1948.
Conformement au paragraphe 2 de l'Article 23
de la Charte, les trois membres dont le mandat
vient a expiration a la fin de cette annee ne sont
pas immediatement reeligibles. Tous les Membres
de l'AssembIee gened\le sont donc eligibles aux
sieges auxquels l'election a pour but de pourvoir,
a l'exception des onze Etats Membres actuellement representes au Conseil de securite. Ces onze
Etats Membres sont les suivants: ~JAustralie, la
Belgique, le Bresil, la Chine, la Colombie, la
France, la Pologne, la Syrie, l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques, la Royaume-Uni,
les Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

According to Article 23, paragraph 2, of the
Charter, the three members whose terms will expire at the end of this year are not eligible for
immediate re-election. Thus, in the election which
is about to take place, all Members of the General
Assembly are eligible with the exception of the
eleven Member States at present represented on
the Security Council. These eleven States are as
follows: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China, Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom and United
, States of America.
In accordance with rule 86 of the General Assembly's rules of procedure, the election will take
place by secret ballot. The three members receiving the votes of a two-thirds majority of the members present and voting will be declared elected.
Ballot fOTIns are now being distributed, and members are requested to write the names of three
eligible members on those forms. Ballots containing more than three names will be declared
invalid.

Conformement a l'article 86 du reglement interieur de l'AssembIee generale, l'election aura lieu
au scrutin secret. Les trois membres qui auront
recueilli la majorite des deux tiers des voix des
Membres presents et votants seront declares elus.
On procede en ce moment a la distribution des
bulletins de vote, sur lesquels les Membres de
l'Assemblee sont pries d'inscrire les noms de trois
Membres eligibles. Les bulletins contenant plus de
trois noms seront declares nuls.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Entezam
(Iran) and Mr. lIagglof (Sweden) acted as
tellers.

Sur l'invitation du President, M. Entezam
(Iran) et M. Hagglof (Suede) assurent les fonctions de scrutateurs.

A vote was then taken by secret ballot on the
basis of 57 M embers voting, 57 valid votes and a
two-thirds majority of 38 votes required for

On procede au vote au scrutin secret. Cinquante-sept Membres y prennent part. Il y a 57
suffrages exprimes. La majorite des deux tiers requise est de 38 voix.

~lection.

...-- p

30 septembre 1947

321

The remlt of the voting was as follows:

Quatre-vingt-treizieme seanCl' pleniera

Les resultats sont les suivants:

Number

Nombre
de voix

of votes

Argentina
Canada
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic

i

I

fl

1

.
.
.

41
41

India
Czechoslovakia .............•....
Uruguay
Chile
Ethiopia
'"
,
,.
Greece
,. "
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

29

33
8
8

2
1
1
1
1

Argentine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..
Canada
Republique socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraine
Inde
..
T checoslovaquie
Uruguay
Chili ... , . . .
. .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .
Ethiopie
,...
..
Grece
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . • . . . • . . . . . • .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . .

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Le prochain tour de scrutin, comme vous le savez, sera
limite a la Republique socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraine et l'Inde. Taus les bulletins portant
le nom d'autres pays seront declares nuls.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Entezam
(Iran) and Mr. Hagglof (Sweden) acted as
tellers.

Sur l'invitation du President, M. Entezam
(Iran) et M. H agglof (Suede) assurent les fonctions de scrutateurs.

A vote was then taken by secret ballot on the
basis of 56 Members voting, 53 valid votes, 3
invalid ballots and a two-thirds majority of 36
votes required for election.

On procede au vote au scrutin secret. Cinquante-six M embres y prennent part. Il y a 53
sufJrages exprimes; 3 sont declares nuls. La
majorite des deux tiers requise est de 36 voix.

a

Les resultats sont les suivants:

Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic..

29

India

24

'. . . . .. . . ..

,

r
I

fI

1
1
1
1

The PRESIDENT: The next ballot, as you know,
will be confined to the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic and India. All votes cast for other countries will be invalid.

Nombre
de voi;.:

of votes

I

2

L'Argentine et le Canada sont elus membres
du Conseil de securite.

Number

I

33
29
8
8

Argentina and Canada were elected members
of the Security Council.

The result· of the voting was as follows:

~'

41
41

Republique socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraine
Inde

..

29
24

The PRESIDENT: We shall have to vote again.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I' anglais) : Il faudra
que nous procedions aun nouveau tour de scrutin.

The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

La seance est levee a13 h. 25.

NINETY·THIRD PLENARY
MEETING

QUATRE·VINGT·TREIZIEME SEANCE
PLENIERE

Held in the General Assembly Hall
at Flushing Meadow, New York,
on Tuesday, 30 September 1947, at 3 p.m.

Tenue dans la salle de l'Assemblee generalt:
aFlushing Meadow, New-York,
le mardi 30 septembre 1947, a15 heures.

President: Mr. O. ARANHA (Brazil).

President: M. O. AMNHA (Bresil).

25. Continuation of the election of nonpermanent members to the Security'
Council

25. Suite de I'election de membres non
permanents au Conseil de securite

The PRESIDENT: AB you know, we have to vote
again. There are only two candidates: the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic and India.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I' anglaiSi) : Comme
vous le savez, nous devons proceder aun nouveau
vote. Il y a deux candidats seulement: la Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine et l'Inde.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Entezam
(Iran) and Mr. Hagglof (Sweden) acted as
tellers.
A vote was then taken by secret ballot on the
basis of 56 M embers voting, 54 valid votes, 1 in-

Sur la proposition du President M. Entezam
(Iran) et M. Hagglof (Suede) sont designes
comme scrutateurs.
On procede au vote au scrutin secret. Cinquante-six M embres y prennent part. II y a 54
