THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

rd
MEETING:

23 MAY

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2363) , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ) . . . . . . . . . . , . . . .

I

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , O.. . . . . . . . .

I

Question concerning the situation in the region of the Falkland Islands (Islas
Malvinas):
(a) Letter dated 4 May 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Ireland to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
cs/ 15037);

(h) Letter dated 20 May 1982 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/1.5099);
(r) Letter dated 21 May 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Panama
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(s/lsroo)..........................................................

I

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Srrppl~tnents of the ilfikial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions md
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2363rd MEETING
Held in New York on Sunday, 23 May 1982, at 10.30 a.m.
Pre.sidP/?t: Mr. LING

Qing (China).

Antigua and Barbuda,
Australia,
Bolivia.
Brazil,
Canada, Colombia,
Cuba, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea. Guatemala,
Honduras. Mexico,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Peru. Uruguay
and Venezuela to take the places reserved for them
at the side of the Council Chamber.

Pwwnt:
The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda. Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britian and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.

Provisional
I.

Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2363)

of the agenda

2. Question concerning the situation in the region
of the Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
((1) Letter dated 4 May 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/ 15037);
(6) Letter dated 20 May 1982 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security Council CS/ 15099);
((.) Letter dated 21 May 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Panama to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/ 15 100)

2. The PRESIDENT
(intc~rp~c~t(ltion ,fiwm
C‘hiIIPW): I wish to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives
of
Belgium and Indonesia requesting to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice. I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite them to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Adoption of the agenda

Question concerning the situation in the region of the
Falkland Islands (Islas ‘Malvinas):
(n) Letter dated 4 May 1982 from the Permaneut
Representative of Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15037);
(h) Letter dated 20 May 1982 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15099);
(c) Letter dated 21 May 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Panama to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15100)

3.

Mr.

de La BARRE

de NANTEUIL

(France)

Frod~):
I have already expressed
my views, on 2 April [2349th mwting],
on the subject

fintc/pl,cJtrrtion.fi.onr

of the initial responsibility
for the hostilities, which
belongs, clearly to the one who was first to use force
in violation of the provisions of Article 2, paragraph 4,
of the Charter of the United Nations. My Government gave its whole-hearted support to resolution 502
(1982). voted upon the following day by the Council,
whereby Argentine armed forces must withdraw from
the islands, called in French Les Malouines. In the
absence of such a withdrawal, the breach of the peace
notod in that resolution could lead only to military
confrontation.

I. The PRESIDENT
(intclpsctrrtioi?
,fiom C’hinc~sc~):In accordance with the decisions taken at the
previous meetings [2360th rind
236211d mootiIr,q.s],
I invite the representative of Argentina to take a place
at the Council table: I invite the representatives of
I

4. After the initial serious military
incidents, the
French Government expressed its desire to see everything possible done to bring about a cessation of
hostilities and the separation of the forces confronting
each other. On 5 May. therefore, the French Government, without taking a stand on the substance of
the problem, that is. the dispute between Argentina
and the United Kingdom, repeated its conviction that
it was imperative for resolution SO2 ( 1982) to be strictly
applied. On that occasion we expressed the hope
that the Secretary-General would succeed rapidly in
indicating
ways which would make it possible to
resume peace negotiations
after the cessation of
hostilities,

been watching with increasing concern the developments in the area and. in particular. the sharp aggravation of tension resulting from the escalation of military activities by the United Kingdom. an aggravation
which. in our view. if left unchecked is likely to endanger international
peace and security.
II.
Likewise, we are deeply concerned at the ‘tragic
loss of life and mounting non-fatal casualties on both
sides caused by a colonial war so obviously anachronistic at the end of the twentieth century.
12. The Council will recall that on 3 April [235&/r
mc~lingj.
when we spoke in explanation of our vote
on resolution 502 (1982), we. began by pointing out
that we had joined the President and other members
of the Council in calling on the two Governments
concerned to exercise the utmost restraint and, in
particular, to refrain from the use or threat of force
in the region and to continue the search for a diplomatic solution.

5. My Government has been unstinting in its support for the efforts undertaken
to this end by the
Secretary-General.
We deeply regret that these
efforts have not so far proved successful. We wish
to express our most serious concern at the exacerbation of a conflict which has already caused considerable loss of human life. We are also aware of the
emotion which this situation has aroused in Latin
America, a region where France maintains historic
and close ties of friendship and co-operation.
We
know that this emotion deepens with the prolongation
of the conflict.

13. We also pointed out the decolonization
aspect
of the dispute concerning the Falkland Islands/lslas
Malvinas. We stated, inter- t&r, that we had takeln into
account the fact that:
“as long ago as 16 December
1965, the General
Assembly, in resolution 2065 (XX), recognized that
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, containled in
resolution IS14 (XV),

6. France therefore believes that every possible
effort should be made, as a matter of urgency, to bring
about a cessation of hostilities.
We are aware that
the efforts already undertaken
by the SecretaryGeneral have made it possible to discern certain
positive features mentioned in the report he presented
to us 12360th /nrrti,tg].
However that may be, we
must preserve what has been achieved.

” ‘was prompted by the cherished aim of bringing
to an end everywhere colonialism in all its forms,
one of which governs the case of the Falkland
Islands (Malvinas)’
” [ibid., partr. 2641.

7. My Government feels that the Secretary-General has thus shown that he is particularly well placed
to carry out this work successfully. It considers that
the Council should recognize this and give the Secretary-General
the whole-hearted
support that he
needs.

14. We also recalled that since that time the matter
has been considered by the General Assembly and the
Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples
and that this fact had been reflected in the report Iof the
Special Committee
to the thirty-sixth
session of the
General Assembly.’ We added as a conclusion that we
deplored the fact that this aspect of the problem was
totally missing from resolution SO2 (1982).

8. Mr. WYZNER (Poland): Allow me at the very
outset, Mr. President, to congratulate
you on yout
assumption and discharge of the functions of the presidency of the Council for the month of May, We are
confident that you will guide our work during what is
certainly a very difficult and busy month with yout
well-known
wisdom, impartiality
and diplomatic
skill.

15. Those observations
of ours have lost none of
their validity today. We continue to believe that
neither the use of force nor gunboat diplomacy is the
right way to solve international
disputes. Nor, for
that matter, is the legally unfounded and morally
suspect policy of sanctions applied outside the system
prescribed in the Charter of the United Nations,
particularly
when, ironically,
it is being pursued by
some of those countries of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) which on so many occasions in
the past have been vehemently
opposed to the application by the Security Council of sanctions against,
for instance, South Africa. arguing that sanctions

9. I wish also to express our sincere gratitude to
Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda for the admirable way in
which he led us through the month of April, which was
equally beset with difficulties.
IO. The Council has had to resume its consideration of the situation in the South Atlantic in dramatically changed circumstances. During the weeks that
followed our last meeting on this subject, we have
2

were unwise, counter-productive,
not a proper instrument of foreign policy and so on. No wonder that so
many speakers who have preceded me in this debatc
have referred to the application of sanctions against
Argentina as an act of economic aggression and an
attempt to apply a policy of diktat towards that dcveloping Latin American country.

19. Mr. LOB0
(Honduras)
fi,ztP/pr,L~trrtior1
.fion?
Sptrnish): I should like to express my most grateful
thanks, Mr. President, for the opportunity
given to
the Honduran delegation to participate in this important meeting of the Council. I should like to take this
opportunity
to congratulate you, Sir, on the nssumption of your important
post and to say that we are
confident that you will be most successful in yout
work. because of your political tact and your widely
recognized ability.

16. My country has consistently
favoured the
peaceful settlement of international
disputes. whatever their nature and geopolitical setting. That is why
we do not give up hope for the peaceful settlement
of the dispute between the two parties concerned
through the process of diplomatic negotiations. The
same approach has been very ably expressed by many,
both within and outside the Council. Allow me to
quote at this .juncture only one, but a pertinent, sentence from the telegram dated 4 May addressed by
the President of Colombia to the Secretary-General,
which seems to summarize so aptly the feelings prevailing in this chamber: “peace can be achieved more
easily through dialogue than by resorting to the bloodshed of war” [.src S//5045].

20. With regard to the hostilities now taking place
in the Malvinas Islands between Argentina and the
United Kingdom, I should like to state that the Government and people of Honduras have feelings of
friendship and profound respect for both countries.
21, Our Government
wishes to express its solidarity with the claim of the Government and people
of Argentina to the Malvinas Islands. What we deplore
are the acts of aggression which are causing loss of
human life. Faced with the existing situation, one of
war, we urge the Governments
of Argentina and the
United Kingdom finally to find common ground which
would constitute the essential basis for a peaceful and
just solution in accordance with the principles and
norms laid down by the Charter of the United Nations
and by international
public law.

17. We wish to reiterate here our full support and
admiration
for the Secretary-General,
as well as
gratitude for his selfless efforts to bring about a peaceful settlement of the conflict. We regret very much
that those efforts have up to now failed to achieve
their objective. certainly through no fault of his. As
we know today, the urgent pleas for the exercise of
maximum restraint by both sides which have echoed
throughout the world in recent days have failed to
convince the Government
of the United Kingdom
that it should not resort to force, that the solution of the
problem should be arrived at in a peaceful manner.
We cannot but strongly deplore this failure and the
unilateral escalation of hostilities on a large scale,
culminating in the recent massive military operations,
but we still believe it is not too late for a peaceful
approach to prevail. The Council must act urgently
and forcefully in this regard. First of all, in our view,
it should order an immediate cessation of all hostilities. The utmost need to prevent any further loss of
young lives, to which the Secretary-General referred
earlier, requires no argumentation
and brooks no
delay. Further steps to follow on could include the
gradual withdrawal of the military forces of both
sides from the area and the lifting of sanctions. It
should also become possible to resume shortly concrete and meaningful negotiations,
held under the
auspices of the United Nations and properly mandated
by the Council, with a view to reaching a lasting political settlement in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, the elements of which have already
emerged through the previous efforts of the SecretaryGeneral. My delegation stands ready to assist in
endeavours leading in that direction.

22. The firm and unswerving aim of the constitutional Government
headed by Mr. Roberto Suazo
Cdrdova is to internationalize
peace, and that goal
is mentioned in the statement of our foreign policy
made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Edgardo
Paz Barnica, in the Permanent Council of the Organization of American States (GAS), in which he proposed a concrete plan for bringing peace to Central
America.
23. We believe that this much-desired aim is equally
relevant to the hostilities
going on in the southern
zone. In accordance with that conviction,
we hope
that Argentina and the United Kingdom will begin a
constructive dialogue to bring peace to this region.
24. Finally, I should like to state that the people
and Government of Honduras are sincerely anxious to
promote and support any action or initiative
which
would lcad to the restoration of international
peace
and security.
25. The PRESIDENT
(intc~~~p,r~totio,7
fkw~
C‘Iri/z[~.sv): The next speaker is the representntivc of Nica ragu a. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statcmcnt.
26.

CHAMORRO
MORA (Nicaragua) finrcr$.r>))l .Yprrni.vh):
Mr. President.
I should
like to congnrtulntc
you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I am sure
that with YOUI-cxpcricncc as a diplomat and with your
political skill you wilt conduct the dclibcr:rtions
of
the Council wisely and successfully.
Mr.

pwtntion

18. The PRESIDENT
(int~~/p/.c~tc/lion ,fi*onz C’lrincj.vt~):The next speaker is the representative of Honduras. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
3

“Nicaragua
expresses its vigorous repudiation
of the colonialist
military aggression of which the
sister Argentine Republic is a victim today at the
hands of Great Britain. In addition to being an
absolute violation
of Security Council resolution
502 (1982) and a violation of the recent resolution
of the Twentieth Meeting of Consultation of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Organization
of
American States of 28 April [S(V S//5008, (III!I~JS),
it is an attempt by that extra-continental
Power to
bring back to a Latin American region its past policy
of territorial
usurpation by force. The unjustified
British attack is a direct attack on the sovereignty
of the Latin American peoples.

27. I also wish to congratulate Mr. Kamanda wa
Kamanda. a representative of the Movement of NonAligned Countries. who with his well-known political
qualities successfully conducted the offnirs of the
Council in April.
28. I should also like to thank the Secretary-General, on behalf of my Government, for the efforts that
he made to being peace and tranquillity
to the Malvinas area.
29. We believe that his dedication, wisdom, equanimity and political skill have been fully demonstrated. We are sure that the results of his action
would have been totally successful had it not been
for the intransigence of an extra-continental
Power
which wished to keep Latin America in a colonial
status, and had it not been for the fact that the negotiations were taking place at a stage where success
was very difficult. At an earlier stage efforts had
failed. and then another Power, this time from our
continent, tried to intervene and act in an allegedly
neutral and impartial manner.

“Nicaragua,
as a country that has cordial relations
with Great Britain, urges that nation immediately
to cease hostilities and to abide by the procedures
for the peaceful settlement of disputes laid down in
the Charter of the United Nations and the Charter of
the Organization
of American States.
“At the present time the attitude assumed by the
Government of the United States cannot be ignored.
By its open support for the extra-continental
Powel
which is the aggressor against an American country,
it has revealed its lack of neutrality in this conflict.”

30. Mr. President, we should like to thank you
and the other members of the Council for giving us
an opportunity to intervene in this matter, which is of
great importance to Latin America in general and
Nicaragua in particular.

34. My Government,
in saying this, is abiding by
anti-imperialist
principles and the principles of nonalignment of our revolution,
and we do not hesitate
in denouncing colonialism and neo-colonialism,
which
regrettably continue to exist today in the world and,
in this particular case, in our continent. In addition,
we believe that the maintenance
of anachronistic
colonial enclaves, such as those represented by the
Malvinas
Islands and their dependencies. disturbs
international
peace and conflicts with the fundamental
principles of contemporary
international law.

31. It is difficult for my Government to understand
how at an advanced stage of the twentieth century we
should have to meet to discuss such a problem as that
before us, which not only endangers international
peace and security but constitutes an absurd colonial
situation.
32. The situation in one of our Latin American
countries, the sister Argentine Republic,
is truly
alarming, At the present time, the military forces of
a colonial Power from outside our continent are using
force to establish alleged sovereignty over an archipelago which they illegally occupied in the past as a
result of acts of force, thereby depriving Argentina
of territory which, from the legal and geographical
point of view, belongs to it. Argentina’s claim is
just, for it succeeds Spain’s rights, according to the
Latin American doctrine of uti possidctis juris, and
because the Malvinas Islands are on its continental
shelf. International
law and American
law fully
support the right of the Argentine Republic to the
Malvinas Islands.

35. It is important to make quite clear to the Council and to the international
community the position of
the United States on this problem. We would only
refer to the words of the representative of the sister
Argentine Republic,
Mr. Eduardo Rota, when he
spoke to the Co-ordinating
Bureau of the Movement of
Non-Aligned
Countries:
“But there is also another fact which, because of
its singular importance,
its seriousness and its
treacherousness,
deserves to be highlighted as a
precedent.
I am referring to the attitude of the
United States Government,
which gained for the
United Kingdom the time needed for the punitive
fleet to reach its destination. It then went back on
its own promises of impartiality,
lied with regard
to our proposal, deceived its own public opinion
and is now providing economic and military support
to the colonialist aggressor.

33. In this context we cannot ignore the attitude
assumed by another Power, one from our continent,
Abandoning its alleged position as a mediator, it has
openly allied itself against a Latin American nation,
making it quite clear that its interests are quite different from those of our peoples. In that connection,
1 should like to read out an official communiquti
issued
by our Government on S May in regard to this conflict:
/

“The facts make it perfectly clear that the United
Kingdom did not wish to shoot without first having
4

the consent.
support
and direct complicity
of the
North
American
Government,
and for that reason
huth arc equally
responsible.
That is the intcrpretation of the peoples of Latin America.”
36. That. then, is the interpretation
of the peoples
of Latin America.
and there can be no doubt about it.
They believe that the Pan-Americanism
brandished
by
the United
States applies in only one direction:
it is
invoked
when favourable
to its interests.
but is considcred
invalid
when it is a question
of giving real
which do not bring to the
SUpport to our countries,
United States the same advantages
that it receives
from its European
ally, a “first-class”
ally of a kind
that the United States seems not to have found on OUI
continent.
We must make it clear that this colonialist
aggression,
which
reminds
us unequivocally
of the
brutality
of the piraticnl
adventures
of the past, but
with the added refinement
of British
war nrrrtc;r.ic)/,
is an aggression
against all the Latin American
peoples.
running
counter
to the decision
of the modern
world
to eliminate
colonialism,
neo-colonialism.
hegcmonism
and imperialism.
scourges that can he maintained
only
through
the use of force, as trpwrthrid, racism and
Zionism are maintained.
37. The Latin American
community
is experiencing
a whole
gamut of feelings.
Suddenly
it is both spectator and victim
of the stand taken by the United
States. Today it is clearer than ever before that the
crisis it has inflicted
on the inter-American
system is
probably
irreversible,
Today it is clearer
than evet
before that it regards
the Inter-American
Treaty
of
Reciprocal
Assistance
as an instrument
to be used only
for its own benefit and defence and the protection
of
its own interests.
We do not understand
how it can
reconcile
that attitude
with the Monroe
Doctrine.
Are we now to say that America
is for the Americans
-and
for the British?
Nothing
the United States Government
can do will surprise us now.
38. The right of the sister Argentine
Republic
to
sovereignty
over the Malvinas
Islands and its dependencies
is unquestionable.
The Movement
of NonAligned
Countries.
of which
my Government
is
honoured
to be a member
and which
we consider
to
be a natural forum for the expression
of the views of
the countries
of the third
world,
where
common
answers
to common
problems can be found, has given
a clear response,
At various
ministerial
meetings
of
the Movement,
we have unequivocally
supported
Argentina’s
just claims of sovereignty.
and we have
urged the United Kingdom
to engage in active negotiations with :I view to returning
that territory
to Argcntine sovereignty.
39. For our part. since IY7Y, when Nicaragua
took
the path of freedom
and political
indepcndcncc
and
joined
the Movement
of Non-Aligned
Countries.
wc
have actively
supported
the just claims of the sistcl
Argentine
Republic
to ;I part of its territory
which was
taken from it by force in 1833. It should .pc.rhaps Hc

mcntioncd
heI-c that the fact that the occupation
has
until recently
been maintained
by force does not give
the ljritish
any Icgal right to the sovc‘reignty
they
claim,
We are fully convinced
that the doctrine
of
acquisitive
prescription
cannot
bc supported.
even
though the territory
has been occupied
for SUCK a long
time. bec:iuse Argentina
has never ceased to lay claim
to it and to defend its rights.
40.
The Government
of Nica~~ngua understands
how
distressing
theso situations
are becai~s~
it is not only
the sister Argentine
Republic
that is suffering.
AS the
representative
of Ecuador
said (22601/r
/~lc~<~/in,~1q
the mere occupation
of territories
that legitimntcly
belong to our countries
does not become valid with the
passage of time, no matter
how much time passes.
since it is a simple UsLlrpi~tiOn of territory.
On the basis of General
Assembly
resolution
41.
I5 14 (XV) of 1960, containing
the Declaration
on the
Granting
of Independence
to Colonial
Countries
and
Peoples,
which has been invoked by Argentina
to prcserve the unity and territorial
integrity
of the country.
the United
Nations
has maintained
a constant
intcrest in this matter and has urged the partics to engage
in peaceful
negotiations.
and subsequently
expressed
its concern,
as for example
in Assembly
resolutions
2065 (XX).
3160 (XXVIII)
and 31/4Y. Those
rcsolutions.
infc~/. ulirr. call on the parties
to engage in
peaceful
negotiations,
and they express
concern
i\t
the lack of substantial
progress
in negotiations.
At
the same time. they urge the parties
to undertnkc
negotiations
without
delay.
42.
tion

More
recently.
the Council
adopted
resoluSO2 ( lY82), which was introduced
and sponsored
by the United Kingdom
and which. inrc~r. c!/i(~. appeals
to the partics not to engage in actions that will incrensc
hostilities
and to begin negotiations
immediately.
It
also calls for the withdrawal
of all Argcntinc
forces.

43.
My Government
found
it surprising
that that
same country,
a permanent
member
of the Security
Council
and, thercforc.
i\ country
with the power of
the veto. in clear disregard
of the authority
of the
Council and the resolution
that it had itself prcscntcd.
W:IS at the same time setting
its war machinery.
including
its nuclear
submarines,
in motion.
The
United
Kingdom
thus disregarded
the Treaty for the
Prohibition
of Nuclear
Weapons
in Latin
America
(Tlatelolco
Trcuty)J
in order initially
to rccovcr
the
South
Georgia
and South
Sandwich
Islands
and to
rct:tkc by force the territory
it had initially
usurped
in the same way in 1833. thus maintaining
ii ct,loniaIist
cnclavc
in the Americas
for which there is no logic:\1
reason. nor any Icgi\l, still less ~tIOl’i\l. jtlstificiltion.
44.
W/c iI1.c quite convinced
thi\t this \\,:lrlikc
;ltlitudc, which
is unprecedented
in the history
ol’ Latin
America.
h:ls m:ldc it impossible
for 111~’ hi\tc\r n;ltion
of 4rgcntin;r
to irbidc by the resolution.
It c\;prcs\cd
its willinpncs%
to ;Ibidc hy that rc\olution
ill ;I lc(tctr

_-

__

._-.-

Government
of Nicaragua with the sister nation of
Argentina. We confirm the full meaning of the words
of the Foreign Minister of Nicaragua at the Twentieth
Meeting of Consultation
of Ministers of Foreign
Affllirs of the OAS: “Brother Argentinians, it is now
your turn”, That message is one of active solidarity.
We reiterate here the solidarity of our people and
Government.
Our people, devoted to the defence
of our revolutionary gains. share the feelings of Latin
America, nnd we are preparccl. as required. to defend
the right of the Argentine put~pl!r to its sovereignty.

from the rcprescntative of Argentina to the President
of the Council on 12 April (S114Y681. in which he
csprcsscd his country’s intention to abide by each and
cvcry one of its paragraphs. More recently, a couple
of days ago. we heard the Argentine Vice-Minister,
Mr. t)nrique Ros, reiterate that willingness :IS follows:
“But, in spite of the serious shortcomings
of
resolution 502 (1982) imd the serious reservations
it deserved because it did not note the fact that
this is an anachronistic colonial case, Argentina
unequivocally stated its readiness to comply with
its provisions, so long as the British Government
adopted a corresponding attitude.” [2360th m~rting,
ptrw. 3s. J

49. The PKESIDENT
(i/rtc~, ,;~,lrrfion fi.c~l C’hincj.vr~): The next speaker is the I-e, ~.esentat’ive of New
Zealand. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

45.

Today. more than ever before, the cessation of
is necessary. and we would appeal to the
Covcrnment of the United Kingdom
to cease its
aggressive attitude and to show ;I willingness to negotiate seriously and to arrive through dialogue al :I *just
and lasti& solution to this problem.

SO. Mr. FRANCIS
(New Zealand): May I thank
you. Mr. President, and your colleagues for allowing
me to speak before the Council on behalf of the New
Zealand Government.
May I say. too. how glad we
are that you are guiding the Council’s deliberations.
We know that you and the great country that you
represent have the patience, experience and wisdom
needed at this critical time.

all hostilities

46. We would also issue an appeal to the member
countries of the European Community to put an end
to their unjust economic sanctions against a Latin
American country that is a victim of aggression. for
those sanctions certainly do not contribute
to the
cause of peace and a negotiated settlement of the conflict. On the contrary, they strengthen the warlike
attitude that the most conservative sectors in England
halve encouraged. We would most sincerely congratulate the Governments of Ireland. Italy and Denmark
on the positions they took when the sanctions were
extended for one week. Recognizing their contribution to the betterment of mankind and the maintenance
of international peace and security, we would urge the
other member countries to dissociate themselves from
the untenable position of the United Kingdom and
rather to urge that country to participate in the search
for a solution that is desired by the inter-American
community.

51.

Seven weeks ago. before the Council [.?.WYth
I. my delegation expressed New Zealand’s
grave concern over the situation that had arisen as a
result of Argentina’s invasion of the Falkland Islands.
The concern of the Council was expressed in resolution SO2 (19821, adopted on 3 April. That resolution
provided the basis on which settlement of the dispute
could be pursued by peaceful means.
/uwtilIg

52. Since 3 April. however, the Argentine Government has ignored the essential elements of that
resolution and has defied the Council. It has intcrpreted the resolution in a manner contrary to both its
spirit and its letter. It has sought to shift responsibility for the fighting to the United Kingdom and. in
II curious inversion of fact and logic. to deny that the
United Kingdom was justified in exercising its legitimate rights to self-defence under Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations. Instead of withdrawing
its forces. it reinforced them. It set unacceptable
pre-conditions
for its implementation
of resolution
SO2 l1982). pre-conditions
which frustrated the most
determined efforts of the United States and of Peru to
pave the way to a peaceful solution.

47. Nicaragua believes that it is the obligation
of
the Council immediately to take the action necessary
to bring about an immediate cessation of hostilities
and the undertaking of the negotiations that the situ+
tion demands. The present situation, with the loss of
life and the material losses and, what is worse, thei]
continuation and worsening because of Great Britain’s
obstinacy, make it necessary for the Council to take
prompt and specific action in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
Today. more than ever before, we must make it perfectly clear. especially fol those ofus who are searching
for Pete and fighting for it. that it is in the Council.
in this political forum of the United Nntions, that we
must find the answer to OUT anxictics und concorns
and seek solutions to our problems.

53. Not long ago it looked as if an agreement was
within reach that would satisfy the requirements of
resolution SO2 ( 1982) i\nd pave the wny to an accoptable settlement.
But the Secretary-General’s
efforts
foundered on the rock of Argentine obduracy and
rigidity, and it is that which has, in the mean time,
brought his patient and dedicated search for a peaceful
settlement of the conflict to a close. New Zealand has
the greatest admiration and respect for the impartial
and determined
way in which the Secretary-General
has exercised the responsibilities
which the Qrganization has bestowed on him.

48. ln conclusion, I should like ta remind the Council of the unconditional solidarity of the pcr)plc ~lnd
6

54. Though the matter is in dispute, there is, in the
view of the New Zealand Government, no doubt as
to where sovereignty over the Falkland Islands lies.
Nor is there any doubt as to the wishes of the people
of the Falklands. When all the facts are assessed, one
thing is plain: the two aggrieved parties in this crisis
are Britain and the people of the Falkland Islands,
whose lives have been so violently disrupted.

61. I should also like to thank you, Mr. President,
for permitting me to speak before this high body.
62. The delegation of Equatorial Guinea believes
that the actions taken over the past few days in connection with the thorny problem of the Malvinas Islands
have created a situation that threatens international
peace and security and have moved us closer to an
escalation of the war, which could lead to a conflagration with unpredictable effects. The consequences of
that would be lamentable and sad for both the United
Kingdom and Argentina and for all humanity.

55.

Argentina’s invasion of the Falkland Islands
entirely unprovoked. It was a violation of international law and of those norms that govern relations
between States. It was undertaken in complete disregard of two cardinal principles of the United Nations which must be upheld: the principle that force
shall not be used to settle territorial disputes and the
principle that all people have the right to self-determination, in accordance with Article 73 of the Charter.
It is inescapable that Argentina’s defiance of a mandatory resolution of the Security Council demonstrates
disdain for the principles for which the United Nations
stands.
was

63. At the present time, when there is a desire to
put an end forever to all colonial vestiges, the delegation of Equatorial Guinea believes that the question
of the Malvinas Islands is a purely colonial matter,
clearly demonstrating hegemonistic desires to impose
the will and the desire of one State on another, or, to
put it differently, to restore the colonial yoke.
64. The delegation of Equatorial Guinea supports
Argentina’s sovereignty over the Mulvinas Islands as a
piece of land that belongs to it. It is well known by
everyone that a good part of decolonization has been
realized thanks to the doctrine of a great American
statesman, whose philosophy is known by the famous
historical term “the Monroe Doctrine”.

56. With the breakdown in negotiations, the matter
has properly returned to the Council. The clear duty
of the Council now is to call for Argentina to end its
aggression against the Falklands and to demonstrate
its readiness to negotiate a peaceful settlement of the
dispute without prejudging the outcome. We would
certainly see an important continuing role for the
Secretary-General in the negotiating process.

65, In the name of the Government of the Supreme
Military Council of Equatorial Guinea, led by Colonel
Obiang Nguema Mbasogo. and in my own name.
I should like to state that the people of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea are in full solidarity with the
people of Argentina, our brothers, to whom we are
bound by historical ties of culture, language and religion within the Hispanic community of nations. during
this difficult time in their history as they try to find a
just and lasting solution to the problem of the Malvinas.

57. The actions taken in recent weeks by the British
Government, and those now being taken, are a direct
consequence of Argentina’s unlawful and unprovoked
aggression against the Falkland Islands. They are a
demonstration
of British determination
to resist
aggression and to uphold the right of the islanders
to decide their future. The United Nations stands for
the principle of self-determination.
The right to
decide their own destiny belongs to the Falkland
islanders no less than to any other people. It is a
right of which they have been forcibly deprived; it is
a right which must be returned to them.

66. The delegation of Equatorial Guinea likewise
believes that the good offices of the Secretary-General
in the negotiations just conducted must be continued,
and here we would call on the Council and the international community to support his efforts. My delegation believes that this supreme body must take all
possible measures and give the Secretary-General
a
new mandate to continue negotiations with all the
parties by means of a dialogue aimed at bringing about
a peaceful settlement and an immediate cease-fire
in the hostilities taking place in the South Atlantic.

58. The PRESIDENT
(i,ltclp,‘ctrrtioil
.fiom c’lzi~CJSC)):
The next speaker is the representative of Equatorial Guinea. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
59.

Mr.

MAYE ELA (Equatorial
Guinea) fintc+
fionr Sprrnish): Mr. President, I should like
to join all those who have congratulated you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of May. Your outstanding diplomatic qualities
and your experience in international matters guarantee
the success of our deliberations.

prctotiotr

67. The PRESIDENT
finfr,lpr.c,tr,ficj,~ .fionr <‘hiI~(>.Y(J):The next speaker is the representative of Pnraguay. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

60. We wish also to congratulate
the representative of Zaire, Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda, on his
work as outgoing President. He conducted the affairs
of the Council with dignity and ability.

68.

Mr.

GONZALEZ
ARIAS (Paraguay) (interJ.om Sptruisk): 1 should like to express my
gratitude for this opportunity to address the Council
on the serious matter which has brought us together.

pwttrtio/l

7

75. Our primary concern right now, however. is the
escalation of hostilities occurring in the Malvinas.
Before this stage of confrontation
was reached. the
Foreign Minister of my country said in the OAS:

First of Hlla 1 should like to welcome the Foreign
Ministers from Latin America who are present here:
Mr, Nicanor Costa Mendez, of Argentina. Mr. Jorge
lllurca. of Panama, and Mr. Josd Alberta Zambrano
velasco, of Venezuela, who ~21s present yesterday
[23621ld mwlitw 11

**What is of primary importance is to put out the
fire which has broken out in the destiny of America
and calmly to find a formula to preserve peace and
security on our continent. in the conviction that by
so doing we would be rendering an inestimable
historic service not only to America but also to the
very future of mankind.”

69. My delegation Iearncd with great concern of
the most recent news reporting a worsening of the
conflict over the Malvinas Islands, a conflict between
two Western nations with which we have cordial
relations.

He also said:

70, The painful experience of my own country,
which in slightly more than 100 years of independent
life has twice suffered the horrors of war, with a ferocity
perhaps unequalled in the American continent, makes
it clear that our concern is genuine and justified.

“No other country in America more than my own
hns an interest in averting the serious crisis which
has arisen in the South Atlantic, which, as time
goes by, becomes ever more threatening and dangerous.”

With regard to this conflict, and in the course
of commenting on the relations between Paraguay and
Argentina. the Foreign Minister of my country,
Mr. Albcrto Nogues, stated the foflowing before the
OAS:

71,

76. Therefore, the Council should first find a formula for bringing about a cessation of hostilities and
then engage in a search for machinery to bring about
a peaceful and lasting solution to the conflict.

“It is not necessary for me now, in this exceptional forum, to give you an inventory of the feelings
which are well known to Argentina, nor to mention
the hopes shared by Paraguay and Argentina which
make for sincere and mutual co-operation.
The
most eloquent testimony to this today is the Yacyretrj
undertaking, a monumental project whereby we
offer to succeeding generations a standing testimony
to authentic integration.”

77. My delegation is convinced that there does exist
an appropriate framework, both in the Security Council resolution and in certain relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly on the subject of decolonizution adopted in 1965, 1973 and 1976, which recommended negotiations
between the parties and which
wet-c co-sponsored by my country.
78. Efforts to find a peaceful solution, which were
given a notable boost in 1965 by the United Nations.
should continue. We believe that the irreparable loss
of life and enormous material damage suffered by
both parties are painful proof precisely of how beneficial a negotiated solution to the conflict would have
been, if there had been any concrete result from the
last I7 years of contacts between Argentina and Great
Britain.

72. We listened with the greatest interest to the
words which the Secretary-General used to report to
the Council on his efforts to promote a negotiated and
PeXefUl settlement to the conflict [236&/l n?rcrill,y].
It is to be regretted that the desired result was not
attained and that recourse has once again been had to
force. Nevertheless, the efforts undertaken and the
statements made by the Secretary-General still stand.
We believe in his ability, as well as in the maturity of
the two parties to the conflict. Perhaps it is a question
of evaluating the situation. of calming passions, of
relinquishing extreme attitudes and of seeking a
genuine solution which would satisfy the rights invoked
by both parties.

79. New acts of bloodshed, which are still going
on and the full magnitude and gravity of which we
do not know, prompt LIS to confirm our conviction that
any effort made to bring about R cessation of hostilities
would be beneficial. The Council has the unavoidable
and urgent responsibility
of adopting the measures
necessary to bring about such a result. We therefore
support the idea initially put forward that the SecretaryGeneral be given a formal mandate to continue his
efforts to bring about a negotiated solution and that
there be an immediate cessation of hostilities.

73. Paraguay has from the very beginning of the
conflict stated that it supports a negotiated solution
and has been watching with interest and with hope
all the efforts to bring the parties together undertaken
by both the United States Secretary of State and the
Secretary-General, as well as the initiatives of certain
Latin American countries.

80. Any delay on the part of the Council in fulfilling
the obligations laid down by the Charter of the United
Nations could lead to an even worse escalation of the
situation. which could threaten the peace of our whole
region :md have. in both the long and the short term.
political
and economic repercussions which would
bc difficult to predict.

74. MY country’s position on the substance of
the matter is well known and has already been set
forth in the Council in a statement made last month
[2350t/? ~~rti/~,q~], and I do not think it necessary to
repeat ir.
8

8 I. The PRESIDENT
(itltc~l’pr’ctcltioll
~%m
c’hiJ?P.vc): The next speaker is the representative of
Colombia. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
82.

88. Acts of violence have, unfortunately, intensified.
and hostilities have continued, although the Council
had demanded that they cease, and this has led to the
irreparable loss of many innocent lives. The dangel
of an escalation of the conflict should not be underestimated, especially if one bears in mind the relationship between the tensions among the major Powers,
on the one hand. and regional conflicts that occur in
various parts of the world, on the other.

Mr.

SANZ
de SANTAMARIA
(Colombia)
.fiom Sprrnidl):
I should like to extend
very cordial and fraternal greetings to Mr. Costa M&dez, the Foreign Minister of Argentina, and express my
best wishes to my distinguished friend, Mr. Illueca,
the Foreign Minister of Panama. I should also like to
express, through the representative of Venezuela,
hlr. Martini Urdaneta, my best wishes to the Foreign
Minister of Venezuela, Mr. Zambrano Velasco. who
Yesterday honoured us with his presence.

(intrlp,,ctntion

89. One of the greatest potential threats to international peace at the present time is the possibility
that some regional conflict might unexpectedly directly
involve the complex and fragile relations between the
nuclear Powers, forcing them to move incautiously and
uncontrollably to a dangerous point.

83. As I have had the pleasure of telling you,
hlr. President, I have had occasion to admire your
human qualities and your statesmanship. For that
reason, in these very difficult circumstances in which
the Council finds itself, it is indeed fortunate that we
have someone with so much experience presiding
Over these meetings. I thank you, Mr. President,
and all the members of the Council for this opportunity
to participate in this debate.

90. This concern is, in turn, linked to the problem
of intervention or non-intervention
in certain events
in the world and to the difficult and highly controversial
situation resulting from military pacts, requests fol
military assistance and the massive supply of weapons and technical assistance to opposing sides in
regional conflicts.
91. Two countries which have traditionally
been
friends are in conflict over what both of them considel
to be their territorial rights. Each is seeking to defend
what it considers to be its exclusive interests. In the
pursuit of its goals, each calls on the alliances and
solidarity pacts which make it possible to defend itself
and to penalize offences.

84. I am confident that the Council will take the
necessary action speedily to bring about a cease-fire
and compliance with resolution 502 (1982), in its
entirety, by the United Kingdom and Argentina so as
to put an end to this absurd loss of valuable young lives
and resources that those nations need to develop and
improve the well-being of their societies,

92. The cessation of hostilities, the withdrawal of
military forces and the carrying out of diplomatic
negotiations are fundamental to a peaceful settlement.
If the parties concerned accept that, then a very important step will have been taken towards the necessary
solution.

85. For the United Nations the preservation of
peace is not only its principal purpose but its daily
challenge. Efforts are made daily to solve problems
besetting the community of nations and to resolve
conflicts which have not been settled by other means.
When conflicts occur, as in the case of the South
Atlantic,
the responsibility
of the Council for preventing an aggravation of the conflict that already
exists is immense.

93. All the peoples of the Americas and of the
West have inextricable links to certain common legal,
political and moral principles. Ever since the beginning of its independent life, Colombia has been determined to bow to the rule of law. Our status as a
“State of law” makes it an obligation on the part of
my country to bow to solutions of law and not solutions based on force. This fundamental position is
also that of the Argentine people, which, in such difficult times, have the support of the people and Government of Colombia in their claims to sovereignty
during the relevant negotiations.
Argentina and all
the Members of the United Nations know that here
and in other forums we have unhesitatingly opposed
colonialism.
This is a pillar of our international
policy.

86. This is a very difficult time for the United
Nations, To demonstrate inability to impose an international order of law, to fail to stop the use of force
to settle a conflict, to fail to prevent war between these
two nations, would make the Organization appear to
be powerless to preserve international
peace and
security.
The Organization
would emerge greatly
weakened if it were unable to achieve its purposes.
87. My country is well aware of the seriousness of
the crisis in the South Atlantic and of its great repercussions for peace and security in the hemisphere and
in the entire world. We are convinced that a peace
&tlement
is possible by means of a solution that is
ssttisfactory to both sides. A great deal of progress
*as made through the efforts of the Secretary-Gen,ral.
Regrettably, his mission was not entirely successful.

94. For any man or woman of the past IO or 15 generations in Colombia, a reference to slavery is reatly
a reference to history, which prompts us to think of
our forefathers who ended that slavery in our country
in I85 I. I imagine that the young people in other Latin
9

American countries have similar thoughts. This was
a time in the history of mankind when people, trafficking in human lives, were really not very far from
the Stone Age, and it was thought that modern civilization, education and culture should have completely
eliminated such inhuman procedures of the past.

100. Yesterday,
once again,
President
Turbay
expressed himself in similar terms in support of a
proposal of the President of Peru, in a message to the
President of Argentina, to the Prime Minister of the
United Kingdom and to the Secretary-General
of the
United Nations.

95, Other kinds of injustices-the
bondage of
poverty,
unemployment,
ignorance,
malnutrition,
ill health-concern
the present generation, and the
ambition for development
is really only a desire to
eliminate, by intelligent means, these new forms of
human bondage.

101. The delegation of Colombia
wishes to repent
the appeal it has already made, jointly with Costa Rica
and Ecuador, for a peaceful, practical and effective
solution.
102. In the present conflagration
in the South
Atlantic, the circumstances are so serious and the IOSS
of innocent young lives so tragic that we must act
swiftly. Our delegation would like to refer to two
specific points: first, a proposal to the Council that it
impose an immediate
cease-fire; and, secondly, n
reaffirmation of confidence in the work that the Sccretary-General has been doing and a request that 11~
continue, with an official mandate from the Council.
his efforts to bring about a suitable settlement of the
present serious situation. His devotion to the CBUSL’
of peace, his prudence and his ability to offer valuable
advice are the best means of halting the armed #conflict
and bringing both Governments back to dialogue and
negotiations.

96. For the present generation on our continent,
the concept of colonialism, which long formed part of
the relationships between the powerful countries and
the smatl and weak countries, is also as anachronistic
and as alien to the thinking of Latin American youth
as the traffic in human beings. No one can accept it
or tolerate it. All nations in our hemisphere share this
anti-colonialist
position.
97. Nevertheless, it is only fair to recognize that the
policy of decolonization
of the United Kingdom has
allowed both great and small countries to become
independent by means of negotiations, dialogue and
political agreements.

103. The PRESIDENT
(intr~~~~~~frrfi(,,l ~f;.~~!n C’kinr.vt>): The next speaker is the representative
of El
Salvador. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

98. Hecause of those historical
experiences,
our
delegation believes that the continuation of diplomatic
and political negotiations may lead to a settlement of
this dispute. If the United Kingdom
has so often
shown flexibility in the past in granting freedom to its
former colonies, it is reasonable to expect that, in this
particular case also, it can do so in the light of the
policy of decolonization
accepted by the United
Nations.

104.

Mr.

ROSALES
RIVERA
(El
SalvadorI
,fiom Spanish):
Sir, the prudence. skill
and diplomatic experience which have characterized
your actions within the United Nations are sure guarantees of the success with which you will conduct the
proceedings of the Council during your presidency.

firrtrrplcttrtion

99. The President of Colombia, Julio Cesar Turbay
Ayala, on 14 April in a reply to a communication
from
President Galtieri of Argentina, stated, infrr dlitr, the
following:

105. My delegation would like to extend its best
wishes to Foreign Minister Costa Mendez. of Argentina, and to Foreign Minister Illueca, of Panama. who
are present in this chamber.

“Colombia
attaches great importance
to the
situation in which Argentina and the United Kingdom at present find themselves.
Our reaction
to that situation was, together with Costa Rica and
Ecuador, to submit to the Permanent
Council of
the OAS a draft resolution
whereby the interAmerican system offers mediation
to prevent the
tragic consequences of an armed confrontation
and
the disturbing effects of a military and economic
blockade.”

106. My first words are to thank the Council fol
permitting me to address it at such a difficult time, in
which two friendly countries. one extra-continental
and the other belonging to Latin America, find themselves in open conflict within the framework of the
American continent over the Malvinas Islands.
107. We should like to state that El Salvador’s position has been and still is that the Malvinas Islands
belong within the territorial jurisdiction
of the Argentine Republic and that. consequently, Argentina should
exercise sovereignty over them. This position
has
been reiterated by El Salvador both in the region:rl
body, GAS, and in this world Organization, the United
Nations.

He further stated:
“Colombia
defends the cause of Argentina in
its claim against the United Kingdom
and has no
hesitation in declaring this support in the United
Nations.”

108. Thus for US it is a problem that comes under
the heading of decolonizntion,
and we therefore conIO

sider that the colonial redoubt in the American hemisphere should cease to exist.

his work, which began so promisingly, and to continue
to offer his good offices. El Salvador is convinced
that thanks to the skilful work of the Secretary-General,
it should be possible to find common ground between
the positions of the parties.

109. From this standpoint, the dc .ji/c’tc~ occupation
carried out by the Argentine Republic on 2 April is
in accordance with its dr,ir/,-0 title. We cannot accept
the idea that an occupation resulting from a usurpation carried out in 1833 by the United Kingdom in the
Malvinas Islands should give rise to any lawful claim
to them. Indeed, the claim of the Argentine Republic
to the Malvinas Islands is an intrinsic right inherent in
Argentina’s act of gaining independence from the
metropolitan
country.
Therefore,
Argentina
has
inherent rights and it is not legally possible for any
Power to deny those sovereign rights, which are essentially imprescriptible.

116. My country believes that it is indispensable
that we put into operation, within the competence of
the United Nations, the machinery laid down by the
Charter for the maintenance
of international
peace
and security. It is necessary, too, for Council resolution 502 (1982) to be complied with in full. In this
regard, neither of the parties involved in the conflict
can legitimately
claim that it is the only executant of
that resolution and that the other is not, because the
development of events is equally applicable to both.

I IO. Chronologically,
we are in the presence of
two dr ,firtsto events: the first taking place in the last
century when Great Britain forcibly occupied the Malvinas Islands, and the second on 2 April of this year.

117. We should like to draw attention to the resolution adopted in Washington
on 28 April by the
Twentieth Meeting of Consultation
of Ministers of
Foreign Affairs of the OAS, convened in accordance
with the provisions of the Inter-American
Treaty of
Reciprocal Assistance, in which an appeal is made
for an immediate cessation of hostilities and for the
Governments of Argentina and the United Kingdom to
call a truce that would make it possible to resume work
towards a peaceful settlement of the conflict, taking
into account the sovereign rights of Argentina over
the Malvinas Islands, as well as the interests of the
people living there.

I1 1. It is in the light of these circumstances that
we must consider if it is relevant to invoke the concepts
of aggression and of self-defence-the
latter being
exercised rationally and with a sense of proportionto justify punitive expeditions when we come to
analyse the Articles of the Charter of the United
Nations.
112. There is a true connection between these facts,
and, on the basis of the terminology of penal law, we
can appropriately say that there is a causal relation
between these two events.

118. The text of that resolution can be found in
document S/ ISOO8, and I do not want to discuss it in
detail. However, it is worth looking at what was said
at that meeting about the economic sanctions against
Argentina undertaken by the European Community.
We believe that those sanctions have the character
of economic aggression against the Argentine people
and are therefore to be rejected. We condemn equally
vigorously the acts and statements of those other
countries which have joined in this scheme against the
Argentine Republic.

I 13. The development of military actions in connection with the Malvinas Islands has been escalating
the conflict. The Council has been convened precisely
at a time when bloodshed and hostile actions are
taking place with great intensity, according to press
reports coming from both London and Buenos Aires.
114. Our statement here, which is motivated by
concern over these serious events in the South Atlantic that have been reported, is an opportunity to appeal
to the parties to return to the negotiating table. Within
this context, the Council unquestionably
has the
responsibility to promote a cessation of hostilities and
a resumption of dialogue.

119. In conclusion, I wish to state that, in the interests of international peace and harmony, El Salvador
hopes that the approaches that have been made to
the Governments of Argentina and the United Kingdom to resume negotiations with a view to finding a
just, peaceful. honourable and lasting solution to this
conflict in the South Atlantic will bear fruit.

115. For my country, the finding of a solution acceptable to both sides, a solution which would respect the
rights and interests of both, would, of course, be the
ideal result, and in this regard El Salvador gives its
utmost support to the efforts of the Secretary-General
in the search for such a solution. We believe that
if more time had been available, time which the Government of Argentina appeared ready to give, the Secretary-General could have been successful in his
mediation efforts. In this regard, we believe that it
would be right for the Council at this meeting to give
a formal mandate to the Secretary-General to resume

120. The PRESIDENT
(i/lfrrp,‘c’t[rtir,rl
,fi.o/rr <‘hiI~O.YC):The next speaker is the representatrve of Belgium. I invite her to take a place at the Council table
and to make her statement.
I2 I.

Miss DEVER

(Belgium) fintopr~~fotio,l
jhm
I would like to express my
satisfaction at seeing you presiding over the proceedings of the Council at such an important time.

Frcvwh): Mr. President,

II

122. May I thank you for having acceded to my
delegation’s request to speak in this debate on behalf
of the Government of Belgium.
123. I should first of all like to pay a warm tribute
to the Secretary-General for the work he has done with
such tenacity, perseverance and conviction over the
last few weeks in an attempt to bring about a peaceful
and just solution to the conflict with which we are
concerned. It is regrettable that his tireless efforts
were not successful. We should like to hope that by
making it possible more clearly to identify the problems at issue and to outline possible solutions, those
efforts may serve as a basis for a new attempt on his
part, for which we all hope.
124. We have asked to participate
in the debate
because Belgium is particularly sensitive to violations
of international law and of the fundamental principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. My country,
very logically, is particularly devoted to the provisions
relating to the peaceful settlement of disputes and the
non-use of force.
125. These principles were violated by Argentina
when it invaded the Falkland islands in spite of the
appeal issued by the Council on 1 April that force not
be used [2345th nwting, pcrlvr. 741.
126. Too often, in the statements we have heard so
far, it has seemed to me that sight has been lost of
the fact that it was that action on the part of Argentina
which was at the origin of the tragic situation that the
Council is now facing,
127. FolIowing
the appeal of the Council, resolution 502 (1982) was adopted on 3 April, without objection in the Council. It called for the withdrawal of
troops, but it continues to be ignored by Argentina.
128. It would seem that for some the reaction to the
Argentine action was disproportionate
to what was at
stake.
129. But what is at stake is not negligible.
It is
nothing more or less than the need to make it absolutely
and unambiguously
clear that the use of force is inadmissible and cannot be a means of settling conflicts.
If the use of force were to be rewarded, this would
encourage any State with territorial ambitions to follow
suit.
130. Peace in the world would become even more
precarious and many countries, no matter what group
they belonged to, would feel threatened. The reaction
of many small countries in the world to the Argentine
invasion demonstrates, furthermore, that this danger
has been understood.
13 I, In many statements we have heard attacks on the
economic sanctions decided upon by the countries of
the European Community.
An entirely new idea, it

seems, was even invoked, whereby this decision was
said to be a violation of Article 41 of the Charter,
which it was claimed would give the Security Council a monopoly on deciding on sanctions.
132. In -joining in these sanctions, Belgium intended,
like its partners, to give specific form to the grave
view it takes of violations of the Charter, which have
been condemned by a resolution of the Council, on the
one hand, and above all to support the diplomatic
efforts under way to find a negotiated solution, on
the other hand.
133. I do not wish here to go into an analysis of the
different aspects of the problem, or to take a stand on
the question of sovereignty, which should be settled
by negotiations,
the outcome of which cannot be
prejudged.
134, We would have hoped that the situation would
not reach its present scale. In spite of the tragic development of events, we hope that reason will prevail and
that Argentina will agree to abide by the terms of resolution 502 (1982), which it has so far ignored.
135. We earnestly hope also that efforts to finId a
peaceful settlement can be resumed very rapidly. on
the basis of the principles of that resolution and in the
light of the elements which have emerged from previous negotiations.
We should not forget the commitment entered into by all States Members when they
signed the Charter to do everything possible to bring
about a peaceful settlement of disputes. The Chartel
itself makes available to us procedures which promote
that end. Furthermore,
territorial
claims should not
be allowed to override the interests of peoples in
choosing democratically
their own destinies.
136. We express the heartfelt hope that these
efforts will be successful and that it will be possible
to conclude a just and honourable peace, in keeping
with law.
137. The PRESIDENT
firzro.p~ptrrtiorz
~fiom c’lziIZ~JS~):The next speaker is the representative of Indonesia. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
138. Mr, KAMIL
(Indonesia):
At the outset, Sir,
I should like, on behalf of my delegation, to express
to you my congratulations
on your assumption of :the
presidency of the Council for the month of May. Your
vast experience and the outstanding
qualities tlhat
you have exhibited assure us all in the Council of youl
ability to guide the deliberations
of the Council in
dealing with this most difficult and challenging task.
139. I should like also to take this opportunity
to
express my high appreciation
to Mr. Kamanda wa
Kamanda for his skilful and dedicated performance as
President of the Council last month.

140. I wish to thank you, Mr. President, and the
members of the Council for giving me the opportunity
to participate in this debate upon the specific instructions of my Government, My delegation, representing
a country in another part of the world, geographically,
continents away from the arena of war and the parties to this dispute, namely, South-East Asia, joins
previous speakers in expressing our utmost concern
over developments in the South Atlantic and in conveying to the Council our urgent appeal for prompt
action to silence the guns of destruction now being
employed on land, in the air and at sea in and around
the Malvinas Islands.

various proposals to contain the conflict and prevent it
from erupting into open war, my delegation was
reminded of a somewhat similar situation involving my
country over the West Irian dispute. In that conflict,
when the initial phases of a full-scale military engagement had already begun, it was proposals quite similar
to those presented by the Secretary-General,
which
he reported to the Council. which changed the war
into a cease-fire and an eventual settlement of the
West Irian dispute. This came about thanks to the
goodwill expressed all round, the initiative of the then
Secretary-General.
U Thant, and the full participation of the United Nations in the implementation
of
a framework of agreement.

141. The Council is meeting in an atmosphere of
crisis and at a moment when the ongoing war between
Argentina and the United Kingdom is not only causing
destruction and death but also poisoning relations
between countries and regions. That this is a moment
of veritable crisis is thus very evident.

145. The present situation may not bc exactly the
same and such a procedure might perhaps meet with
objection in the present crisis, but 1 feel, speaking fol
my delegation, that it might be timely to recall, for
whatever it is worth, that episode of two decades ago.
That settlement epitomizes the spirit of accommodation displayed by both parties to the dispute and their
close co-operation
with the United Nations as the
Organization entrusted with the responsibility to maintain international peace and security.

142. My delegation
pays the highest tribute to
the Secretary-General,
who endeavoured indefatigably over the past weeks to seek to establish a ceasefire and a framework for a negotiated settlement,
with the active participation of the two parties directly
involved. There is no doubt that he made good progress, thanks to the desire all round to achieve a peaceful solution and to implement resolution SO2 (lY82). as
stated by both countries to the Council. The Secretary-General presented a draft text, during his efforts,
which, combined with further suggestions and elaborations on the basis of his consultations with both
parties, could, as he said, restore peace and herald the
beginning of an enduring solution to the conflict. However, even the extent of agreement to these proposals,
which was, in the Secretary-General’s
words, “substantial and important”
[236&h mceti,lg, parrr. 191,
was not enough to lead the way from a warlike situation towards the negotiating table, for as the SecretaryGeneral stated, “the necessary accommodations
had
not been made” [ihid., ptrrrr. 211. Today a full-scale
war, in all its fury, is raging in and around the Malvinas Islands. Furthermore, it is a war between two
countries which, until a few weeks ago, had cordial
and very friendly relations.

.

146. Today, with the war situation worsening in and
around the Malvinas, the first urgent and prompt thing
the Council should do is to call for an end to this war
and for a cessation of hostilities.
No one knows
whether this war might not be the beginning of a wider
conflagration involving not only the present two combatants. War, as all members know, has its own
unpredictable dynamics. The representative of Ireland
said in that connection last Friday that war “may start
through calculation. But once started, it soon escapes
all calculation.”
[lhid., ptr,vr. fSY.1
147. Furthermore,
the Secretary-General,
who so
admirably accomplished
so much in the days before
full-scale warfare began. should be fully authorized to
continue his efforts, building on the tentative and
informal agreement already reached for the purpose
of: first, implementing
an immediate
cessation of
hostilities:
secondly,
reaching agreement
on the
modalities for the implementation
of resolution SO2
(1982); and thirdly, setting up a framework for negotiations, which will be held with his participation.

143. Although situated in South-East Asia, which
is so far away from the scene of conflict, the Government of Indonesia is no less gravely concerned with
the developments arising out of the Malvinas dispute.
On IO April last, my Government, through its Foreign
Ministry, underlined this concern in a press statement.
It expressed the sincere hope that the two parties to
the dispute, with both of which Indonesia maintains
the best of relations, could settle their differences
peacefully and not take any action which could exacerbate the already difficult situation and cause a
widening of the conflict.

148. This is the least that the Council
that is what the international
community

should do and
expects of it.

149. The PRESIDENT
(intcrp~rttrtion
jvm
Chirtc~scj):The next speaker is the representative of Peru.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
150. Mr. CALLE y CALLE
(Peru) fintcJ,p~cttrtion
,fi.r~/n Spccnish): My delegation is pleased to extend
congratulations
to you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council. We are sure that your
diplomatic
skill, calm impartiality
and acknowledged

144. Listening to the Secretary-General
on 21 May
[2.76&h mectirlgl,
when he reported to this body his
I3

cess, which is not far from completion.
As this is
recent history, it is perhaps fitting to recall that that
process certainly did not move forward through the
goodwill and willing co-operation
of the colonial
Powers. The application of various labels to peoples
and territories sub.ject to the domination of the colonial
Powers does not change the substance of the problem.
It is also fitting to recall that several colonial situations
were ended by long and bloody wars of liberation.

wisdom will ensure that the serious and urgent problem
before us will be tackled in a just manner and that a
mutually agreeable way will be found to restore peace
in the South Atlantic, thus fulfilling the loftiest purpose of the United Nations.
too, to Mr. Ka151. I extend our congratulations,
manda wa Kamanda, of Zaire, on the skilful and wise
way in which he conducted the affairs of the Council
last month.

157. Peru has been very active in this matter for
essential and unalterable
reasons: we support the
Argentine Republic,
a sister nation since independence, and we support its just claim to regain the exercise of sovereignty over the Malvinas Islands and the
dependent archipelagos, South Georgia and the South
Sandwich Islands; we ardently desire a peaceful settlement which will be a credit to both countries in
the conflict, prevent further bloodshed and put an end
to a dispute between parties which have so much in
common.

152. I also wish to offer the cordial and respectful
greetings of the delegation of Peru to the Foreign Ministers who are honouring us with their presence:
Mr. Nicanor Costa Mindez, of Argentina, Mr. Jorge
Illuecn, of Panama, and Mr. Jo& Albert0 Zambrano
Velasco, of Venezuela, who participated in yesterday’s
meeting.
153. I have express instructions from the Foreign
of Peru, Mr. Javier Arias Stella, to say that
urgent official business has prevented him, afther his
return from an official visit to the sister Republic of
Venezuela, from attending this meeting personally.
Minister

158. This is not a question of two nations disputing
a territory over which sovereignty remains to be
determined.
It is clear to all that when Argentina
became independent
more than 170 years ago, the
islands were part of its territory and were united
with it politically,
juridically
and administratively.
They were, however, wrenched from Argentine
sovereignty by an act of force followed by administrative provisions issued by the British Government
and the implantation
of settlers, which leads the
British Government
now to assert that its position
is valid. But it has never been recognized as such
by the majority of nations of the international
community, as has so often been made clear in many
resolutions adopted overwhelmingly
within the United
Nations system. As the representative of Brazil so
aptly put it [236&h lneerilzg],
no arbitral award,
international
legal ruling or treaty has conferred legal
validity
on the occupation,
which has lasted for
149 years.

154. This is not the first time that the delegation of
Peru has spoken in the Council on the crisis over the
Malvinas Islands. On 3 April [2350tl7 rn~efitlg], we
had occasion to set forth the Peruvian position and
we feel it is timely to sum up that position now. Peru
supports the sister Argentine Republic in its claim
regarding a colonial situation which is a throw-back
to former times and a violation of the territorial integrity of a country which for 149 years has been claiming
its sovereign rights and has made innumerable efforts
to bring about a negotiated settlement. Peru, a peaceful and peace-loving country, wants a final solution to
the problem to be found by peaceful means. We regret
that the use of force has already led to the loss of many
lives, and we have worked and are continuing to work
for concerted efforts to bring about a satisfactory
solution to this dispute, which, to everybody’s regret,
has now become an open conflict of major proportions.

159. It cannot, then, be held that Argentine sovereignty has lapsed. Argentine rights and titles are
fully as valid today as they were in 1833. Over the
past I5 years or more, efforts at peaceful negotiation
were exhausted. What followed was an act of lawful
recovery of land that had always belonged to Argentina.

155. It is not necessary to give an account of the
facts that have led to the present critical situation. It
is clear to Peru, as indeed it is clear to the great majority of the Members of the United Nations, that this
problem did not suddenly occur on 2 April. It dates
back to the first half of the last century, when some
European Powers considered that their interests could
be extended by deploying their fleets. In 1833, the
Argentine authorities and people were expelled from
the Malvinas Islands by force. With independence,
the Argentine Republic had inherited possession of
and sovereignty over the islands and peace had been
maintained there until the British occupation. If there
had been a Security Council at that time it would have
demanded the withdrawal of the British forces.

160. How can that lawful act of recovery by Argentina be held to be more serious than the act of force
by Britain which is the origin of this colonial problem,
a problem which would never have existed if the territory of a nation of the Americas had not been thus
dismembered at the beginning of the last century?
161. Colleagues have said that Council resolution
502 (1982) is imperfect. That is true. First of all. it
takes a partial approach to the problem, and it does
not recognize the origin of the problem, which has, in
fact, been recognized in resolutions of the General

156. The United Nations is not a mere bystander:
it is an active protagonist in the decolonization
pro14

Assembly on decolonization,
in particular resolutions
IS 14 (XV), 2065 (XX) and 3160 (XXVIII).
Those
resolutions recognize that the situation is essentially
colonial in nature. Council resolution 502 (1982) is
faulty, too, because it has not contributed to the promotion of a peaceful settlement of the dispute, for the
British Government has escalated the war.
162.

Furthermore,
resolution 502 (1982) is at odds
the letter and spirit of the General Assembly
resolutions I have mentioned. It endeavours to maintain the sfmr.s +IO rrrzte, which had been condemned by
the international community precisely because it was
anachronistic and colonial in nature. Nevertheless, in
spite of the fact that resolution 502 (1982) was proposed by the delegation of the United Kingdom, that
country has not abided by it.
with

163. But the situation I have described becomes
even more serious when one realizes that another
permanent member of the Security Council, which by
its vote contributed to the adoption of resolution 502
( 1982), has pledged political and material support to
the United Kingdom.
This position of the United
States is deplorable. In addition to going against the
letter and spirit of paragraph I of resolution 502 (1982),
it has, with its support and co-operation, made it possible for the Government of the United Kingdom to
feel encouraged to carry out and capable of carrying
out wide-scale armed actions against the Argentine
Republic. Yet the majority of international
public
opinion, and even its trading allies in the European
Common Market, have opposed those actions.
164. Not only because of its deep and age-old
bonds with the sister Argentine Republic, but also
because of its deep commitment
to and firm support
for the cause of peace, Peru has viewed the evolution
of this crisis with growing concern. Right from the
start, the constitutional
Government of Peru led by
President Fernando Belatinde Terry involved itself
in the constant search for formulas to avoid, first, the
initiation
of hostilities and a direct confrontation
through the establishment of a 72-hour truce that would
then facilitate the peace efforts undertaken by the
Secretary of State of the United States. With the
failure of Mr. Haig’s efforts, all of Peru’s efforts were
devoted to plans to bring about a cessation of hostilities and to lay the foundation for negotiations between
both sides that would make possible a just and lasting
settlement of the colonial question of the Malvinas
Islands.
165. On 3 April. the Government of Peru set down
its position in a communiquk
that contained three
fundamental points: first, Peru’s support for the Argentine claim to the Malvinas Islands, based on statements
kind resolutions adopted by the United Nations:
secondly, its repeated assertion of commitment
to
the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes
in accordance with and out of respect for treaties in
force; and thirdly. its appeal to the parties to enter

into negotiations
situation.

and seek a peaceful

solution

to the

166. On 12 April, the Government
of Peru furmally proposed to Argentina and the United Kingdom
[S//4%6, trnilc~.r] that, in accordance with paragraph I
of Council resolution 502 (1982), they should establish
a 72-hour truce pending the continuance of the good
offices undertaken by the United States Secretary of
State and accepted by both parties. The purpose of
that Peruvian initiative was to prevent an armed confrontation that was at that time increasing the gravity
of the situation, which already constituted a serious
threat to international
peace and security.
167. That appeal by the Peruvian Government
was
welcomed by the Government
of the Argentine Republic. For its part, the British Government,
through
a telegram dated I3 April from its Secretary of State
for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs to the Foreign
Minister of Peru [S//4974, (rnncs), said that it appreciated the interest shown by the Peruvian Government
in supporting efforts aimed at bringing about a diplomatic solution, and it insisted on its questionable
argument that the armed confrontation
was caused
by Argentine
action in occupying
the Malvinas
Islands. As a concrete response to the Peruvian idea,
the Secretary of State of the United Kingdom said that
the first prerequisite for any solution was for Argentine forces to withdraw from the Malvinas Islands and
their dependencies, after which he was confident that
Peru would persuade the Argentine Government of the
need to comply with its obligations
under international law. In other words, the reply avoided reference to the Peruvian point about a truce.
168. On 14 April, the Foreign Minister
of Peru
repeated the proposal for a 72-hour truce to the British
Government
[S//498/,
~//?I?(J.v]. After pointing
out
that due consideration had been given to the reasons
cited by the British Government,
and taking into
account the dangers of an imminent
conflict, which
was of profound concern to the international
community, the Peruvian Foreign Minister
insisted on
his proposal that there be a truce, arguing that it was
necessary precisely to create the optimum conditions
to permit work to go forward towards a diplomatic
solution by reconciling the positions of both parties.
169. As can be seen, Peru’s intention was to make
it possible for negotiations
to take place in a climate
of peace, in order to make more viable the narrowing
of the respective attitudes and positions.
As subsequent events have shown, once hostilities
were
begun and both parties had inflicted serious damage
and military
losses, the possibility
for negotiation
became much more remote and difficult because of
the natural hardening of attitudes.
170. In an attitude which has already been clearly
indicated, the British Government,
on 14 April. once
again replied [S//4Y#7, (I/~J~(J.\.]that the first condition

that it required to be met was the withdrawal of Argentine forces from the Malvinas Islands and their dependencies, and that until such a withdrawal took pk~~e
there would not exist the necessary conditions for a
negotiated solution to the dispute. For reasons which
] have no need to go into now. the British Government again wanted to return to the sttrtrrs ylro <r/l/r,
which, if Argentina had accepted it, would have
meant that it admitted that there did not exist any
clear-cut change of circumstances
which made it
indispensable to renegotiate the destiny of the Malvinas Islands.

ernments directly involved, which availed themselves
of the good offices offered by Peru.
175. That proposal and its subsequent modificntions did not yield the desired result, due fundamentally to the fact that its final acceptance was imped
by the renewed outbreak of hostilities and, in particular, by the sinking of the Argentine cruiser Grrlc/*rrl
RP/,WIJI~J,36 miles outside the exclusion zone imposed
by the United Kingdom.
176. As hostilities in the conflict were assuming.
proportions which could grow out of the control of the
parties and extend to cover a wider area, thus exacerbating the grave threat to international
peace and
security, and as other peace initiatives,
particularly
those of the Secretary-General,
with the support of the
President of the Council, encountered obstacles which
it has been impossible to overcome so far, the President of the Republic of Peru proposed to the Covernments of Argentina and the United Kingdom,
on
20 May, a new formula to bring about peace in the South
Atlantic. The idea of that formula was that, it being
impossible so far to achieve a formal agreement, the
parties would subscribe separately to the latest psoposal for agreement submitted by them to the Secretary-General,
and that would bring about compliance with those clauses on which there existed
common ground. For example, there could be a ceasefire, the mutual withdrawal of forces and the administration of the islands by the United Nations or by a
contact group made up of several countries, within an
agreed time-frame.

171. Consistent with its repeated endeavours to
promote the search for a formula that would make
possible the acceptance by both parties of such indispensable negotiations, the Government
of Peru, at
the Twentieth Meeting of Consultation of Ministers of
Foreign Affairs of the OAS, which, at the request of
Argentina, took place in Washington between 26 and
28 April, submitted A draft resolution that, with a view
to considering the optimum efficiency of the machinery
for peaceful solution provided for in the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, sought fundamentally to bring about an effective cessation of
hostilities and the establishment of a period of truce
that would make viable a new process of negotiation
between the parties and. at the same time, open the
way to participation by the Secretary-General.
Similarly, the draft resolution repeated the right of Argentina to sovereignty over the Malvinas Islands and
called for the suspension of the economic sanctions
imposed on that Latin American country,

177. Similarly,
the Secretary-General,
or the
contact group accepted by the parties and proposed
by the Secretary-General,
would have the task of
organizing and presiding over negotiations aimed fit
bringing about a permanent solution, at the same time
supervising the immediate evacuation of the zone of
conflict by the forces of both countries,

172. On 28 April, the Twentieth Meeting of Consultation approved, with some modifications,
the resolution proposed by Peru and co-sponsored by Brazil,
Costa Rica and Honduras [S/15008, fln/zc.~I.
173. AS the tireless endeavours of the United States
Secretary of State met with no response and did not
yield the results hoped for by the parties, the Government of Peru, because of its profound concern at the
aggravation of the conflict, considered it indispensable
to continue exploring possible formulas for bringing
the parties together and preventing a further deepening
of the crisis already existing between Argentina and
the United Kingdom. For this reason, the President of
Peru, on I May, made to both Governments a proposal
aimed at establishing a truce, the mutual withdrawal
of the forces of both parties, the immediate opening
of negotiations within the context of the resolutions of
the General Assembly on the Malvinas Islands and the
resolution approved by the Twentieth
Meeting of
Consultation and the temporary
administration
of
the islands by the United Nations, with the support of
an international pence-keeping force.

178. That last Peruvian plan. which was supported
by the Presidents of Colombia and Venezuela, has
already earned the acceptance of the President of the
Argentine Republic and has not been rejected by the
United Kingdom. The Government of Peru therefore
hopes and believes that it is viable and still open. because it preserves those points on which both parties
have indicated agreement. and it is highly desirable
to preserve the many gains that have been achieved
with such difficulty. thanks to the invaluable and tireless work of the Secretary-General.
179. Another reason favouring the viability of the
Pctuvi:m proposal is the recognition hy i\ number rjf
represcntativcs
that the Sccrctiiry-Gcncral
should
continue to conduct. with the skill that IIC has dcmanstr’ntcd so far. the negotiations that hc has undcrtnkcn
and that were so close to bearing fruit. The Govcrnmcnt of Peru thcrcforc ngrccs with alI those countrich
th:lt hilvc soid that the Council should calI for an

174. That Peruvian initiative.
which from the very
beginning earned the acceptance of both parties, W;\S
the subject of intense negotiations between the Gov16

immediate cease-fire and give the Secretary-General
a broad and clear mandate to continue his efforts to
restore peace. because that is ever more necessary,
in that the most recent development of hostilities gives
room for no doubt that we cannot delay a single moment
in the urgent search for a negotiated, peaceful solution
to the conflict, which today is creating such consternation and distress among all peace-loving nations.

maintain, have maintained
and continue to maintain
that the first condition is that Argentina withdraw its
forces from the archipelago of the Malvinas. But that
is not the first condition:
it is the only condition,
because what the United Kingdom
has done is to
present an ultimatum,
as clearly emerges from the
statements that the British Prime Minister
made
publicly on Monday of this week.

180. To conclude, I call on those countries that
bear the high responsibility of membership of the Council to produce as soon as possible, in accordance with
the principles and provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations, a draft resolution setting out actions
which will make possible a just and lasting peace
between those nations which are the protagonists today
in a bloody confrontation in the South Atlantic.

185. The representative
of the United Kingdom
referred to the language used by spokesmen of certain
Latin American countries. I believe that the language
that has been used has been moderate, because no
language can reflect the indignation
and the resentment felt by the Latin American peoples as a result of
the action taken by the United Kingdom and its allies
against the Latin American peoples. British obstinacy
has created a sequence of conflicts, upheavals and
crises, not only of a military nature but also of a Iegal
and psychological
nature, which have caused great
damage to the relations of the peoples of this hemisphere with the European nations and with nations in
other parts of the world which, in a manner that I will
not describe, have sided with the United Kingdom in
this absurd, anachronistic, colonial venture which has
no meaning orjustification
in our day. Lest there be any
doubt of this, let me cite what Mrs. Thatcher said last
Monday. I will quote From the official text: if I am
asked why I say that it is official I shall answer later.
Mrs. Thatcher said in an interview on 17 May on
Independent Radio News:

181. Mr.
ILLUECA
(Panama)
(irzfr,‘prrtcition
fi.om Sprrnish): The events that have occurred in the
past 24 hours are very serious. There has been much
loss of life, the extent of which has not yet been accurately determined, and the conflict has intensified,
because of the colonial presence of an extra-continental Power which has come 8,000 miles from its land
to Latin America to create all sorts of disruptions
in our relations.

182. It is not possible to view this very serious
situation with calm and serenity at a time when the
Argentine nation is suffering from an aggression which
requires that the Council take concrete action in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations. My
delegation believes that it is necessary that the Council take action on this, although, naturally, there is
likely to be an objection and a veto by the United
Kingdom. But this should not be an obstacle to the
Council’s
fulfilling
its responsibilities
under the
Charter.

“We’ve beennegotiating
now for about six weeks.
We’ve looked at six sets of proposals and tried to
put our view on each. They’ve got nowhere.”
186. To a question from the correspondent
Independent Radio News she replied:

“But you know the task force is there; it’s being
very active. You saw the result of that commando
raid, and one just hopes that that will have some
influence on the junta *in Argentina, and perhaps
get a settlement where what had happened before
wouldn’t [happen againI.“*

183. Panama has expressed its confidence in the
Secretary-General
and considers that, if he is given
a mandate to continue his efforts to bring about, by a
decision of the Council, the restoration of peace in the
Latin American continent, that mandate can only be
carried out when there has been a cease-fire and a
separation of forces. Otherwise, this would simply
expose the Secretary-General to an unpleasant situntion, and because of its respect for the United Nations
and for the Secretary-General,
my country does not
wish him to be so exposed.

What the Prime Minister was talking about in that
public statement was a position of force. But that
is not all. She was then asked if this meant that
the United Kingdom had gone as far as it could and that
Argentina must take some action. She answered:

184. Negotiations with the United Kingdom have not
made headway because of the intransigent attitude
of the United Kingdom.
Ambassador Parsons yesterday [22.362/1tl mc~c~ting) made certain statements
which really cannot be allowed to go unanswered.
Ambassador Cnlle y Calle of Peru has just given an
Elccount of the efforts that have been made. I took
note of what Ambassador Calle y Calle said, very
objectively,
to the effect that the United Kingdom
Ind the British Government persistently and inflexibly

“We’ve gone as far as we can . . . If they want
peace they can have it by withdrawing.“:!:
187. That is the plan: that is the outline
the Prime Minister in all talks.
188. But Ict us continue,
there.
“’ tJuoted in English
17

-

of the

followed

by

because it does not stop

by the speaker.

189. Then there is language-which
I will not
repeat-language that is very disrespectful to the GOVer-nment of Argentina-and
I respect the glandular
system of women, because one must always be very
respectful towards women-another
question is put.
She is asked whether she is prepared to sacrifice lives.
She says, referring to the President of Argentina:

196.

“President
Reagan telephoned President Galticri
to say: ‘We hear you are making plans to invade.
JJon’t*’ I*:>
197. Where do you see, in relations between free
and sovereign peoples, the President of a State, no
matter how powerful the State might be. telling
another leader: “No! You can’t do this; you have to do
what I want you to do”? That is simply abandoning
one’s sovereignty. It is humiliating.
It is unworthy,
There is no word for it. I do not know whether this is
the truth or a lie, but the Prime Minister of the United
Kingdom has no right to put President Reagan in a
position which will cause resentment in Latin America. I am not the only one saying this. Today’s issue
of The> NPII’ Yr~rk TimcJs has a prominent report on
page 1, headed as follows:

“Therefore he has to go. and he won’t go by negotiations. He has to leave, and we have to take military action to ensure that he does.““:
190. That is the language, the language advocating
force-and I tell Ambassador Parsons that I am quoting
this textually so that there can be no doubt about it.
I could even give him the document.
19 I,

She is asked:

“Does

that mean we make

him go whatever the

“U.S.

cost?“*

192. I think that yesterday we saw the Vice-Minister of Argentina reply in a very gallant and appropriate manner to the observations put forward by
Ambassador Parsons,

199. The New York Times says in an editorial that
bloodshed has occurred and that it must be stopped.
What we find here is actually put in the months of
officials of the Government
of the United States.
I am going to read some of the paragraphs contained
in that article to make it perfectly clear that indeed
there is profound and growing resentment in Latin
America against the United Kingdom,
against the
United States, because it has taken the United Kingdom’s side, and against the member countries of the
European Community
that have also sided with the
United
Kingdom,
without considering that Latin
America is a continent of peopIes with standing and
who deserve respect.

says:

“It is very difficult to know who you are negotiating
with. You negotiate at the United Nations with a
Mr. Ros.“‘~
194. “A Mr. Ros,”
Ambassador
Ros deserves
great respect. He has won our affection and OUI
admiration, because he is an institution in the United
Nations and in the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries. He is a man deserving of great respect. Yet
this is how “civilized” Governments treat others.

200. The article goes on to say that officials of the
United States Government think that:

The Prime Minister also says:

“But, YOU see, we were already
him back in February.“:‘:

Its Relations

198. This is what one of the most important newspapers in the United States and in the world says.
We are Latin Americans-we
are not from Saturn 01
Mars, not from another planet. It would be disgraceful
for a Latin American member of the Council to ignore
words of such importance without any comment.

“The cost is very much less than of having other
invasions . . , So he has to go.“:‘:

1%.

Sees Setback to its Latin Ties” and

“U.S. Fears the Crisis Is Damaging
With Latin America.“*

And she answers:

193. Further on the Prime Minister

She says, in a reply:

negotiating

with

“American
political leadership in the hemisphert:
has been dealt a serious blow by the decision to side
with Rritain politic~llly and to a limited extent militarily. and that blow may bc irreparable, In the
short term. it may be much more difficult to pain
Lotin backing for projects in Central Americ;t aim4
at countering Cuban ‘influence and subversion.

In other words, the idea that they had talked with
him in February did not make much difference, The11
something more serious is stated, something
that
I’c:~IIY should give cause for thought, because this
disruption. this upheaval, this poisoning
of internationaf relations has unwisely been brought to he1
mM important ally, the Government
of the United
SiilkS.

“The Soviet Union. which has for years been
seeking opportunities
to gain influrncc in South
America. will undoubtedly
bc looked to by many
countries as an altcrnativc sourcc’ofmiliti~ry
supplies
and ;I market for South Americnn exports. ;I trend
that had been under way in recent years anyway.

-18

“Washington’s backing for Britain is already being
regarded in Latin America in racial terms. with the
’ Anglo-American-Europeans’
being seen ;IS contemptuous of ‘Latins , and this could increase hostility toward the United States in the hemisphere.“*
20 I. That is the assessment of United States officials,
according to The N~II* YOI% Tinws. Further on. the
article states:
“It was recognized, an official said recently, that
the United States would pay a price in its relations
with the Latin Americans for siding with Britain
and offering military assistance,
” ‘We were prepared to pay those costs,’ he said.
‘It was our judgment that if you compromised principles, the costs would be far greater.’ “+
202. Those costs are high-politically,
socially,
psychologically
and culturally.
Here it says that a
major effort has to be made to open new markets fat
Latin Americans so that there can be more mature
relations and dialogue can begin.
203. As I said yesterday [i&I.], there is a failure to
appreciate the cultural values of Latin America and
Latin Americans.
204. But this invasion, this loss of life, this aggression against the people of Argentina, which is aggression against Latin America, is taking place in a form
which, although it is being told here-in
this article,
by United States officials-is
not being said publicly;
the truth is that it has been told to the press, and has
leaked out,
205.

According to Tlw NCJII* York Tims

article:

“Aware of the implications
of a pro-British policy, the Administration
has sought to limit its public
support of the British position. Its repeated public
statements have been in favour of a negotiated solution rather than a British victory. And it refuses to
discuss what aid, if any, it will give the British.“+

United States, but we are also pained when they
commit errors. for when friendly relations exist, one
must say what one feels when the other side is not
moving in the right direction and when certain fundamental principles arc being violated. That is what
friendly relations and good-neighbourliness
are really
all about.
207. In that newspaper, T/w Miumi NL’WS, there was
a truly horrifying report. The headline read, “U.S.
Arms Made Ready for Britain”.
This is not a case of
;I feverish lie or something
offhand, because the source
is the New York Times News Service. It says:
“The United States has earmarked arms, including
missiles and radar, for transfer to Britain if forces
get bogged down in a long struggle for the Falkland
Islands, Administration
officials said.“:‘:
It adds that American equipment would be sent directly
to the South Atlantic, and goes on:
“Officials said several KC-135 aerial
already been assigned to Britain.“:‘:

tankers

had

208. It says that the United States has increased its
intelligence
support by furnishing
information
on
weapons sold to Argentina and that this will enable
the British to meet an Argentine threat more cffectively.
209. This is not a question of some romantic notion
of aid, since sanctions were taken and concrete aid
provided, which is a matter of real concern.
210. It is particularly
serious because this means
that there was an understanding even before the attack
to establish the beachhead. The article says that
officers of the United States Navy had discussed this
matter with the Royal Navy.
21 1. The article says:
“United States Marine officers said Royal Marines
with the British task force would probably be able
to gain a beachhead on the Falklands.
But the
Americans suggested Britain might face a long,
costly fight.“:‘;

!06. But can they hide here in the United States
vhat the Government is doing? Yesterday I was in the
vliami airport and I bought a newspaper called T/w
ditrrni N~IIX. I should like to tell the delegation of
he United States that what I am doing here is being
lone with a clear purpose: that it should weigh very
arefully the consequences of a conduct, an attitude,
policy, and realize the effects it has on Latin Amer:a. When friendly relations exist, one must speak
irectly and frankly at any cost, whatever the conseuences. This is especially the case when :I small
ountry such as mine is involved. We have learned
good deal. We certainly respect the values of the

212. This assessment, military
officials said, was
behind a contingency list prepared by United States
and British officers. The equipment
on the list had
been identified for rapid shipment to Ascension Island.
where it would be loaded on to British vessels fat
trans-shipment
to the expeditionary
force. The officials of the Administration--the
Reagan Administration. of course-had
said that the contingency
list
included surface-to-air missiles and land-based radar.
This would make it easier for the British forces to
defend themselves against Argentine plnncs.

8~ (&axl

213. The Council can imagine the reaction in Latin
Amcricel if Argentine plants were shot down us a result

in English

by the speaker.

218.

of technology, plans, technical assistance and equipment furnished by the United States. There must be
a mistake here, although T/XJ NL’II‘ York Tinzcr gives
this information. It is so terrible, so offensive to the
Latin American conscience, that a country with which
a series of treaties exists could not only side with the
aggressor against Argentina and Latin America but
could go even further, to these terrible lengths. Any
human being is bound to be appalled by this. But the
list does not stop there. The Administration
officials
went on to say more. Portable tanks were mentioned,
which could be used to provide fuel for the Harrier
jets should the United Kingdom acquire control of a
landing-strip on the Malvinas Islands. It adds that
other m~rtc;,.iel-engineeritlg
equipment, heaters, generators and munitions-are
also included,

Mrs. Thatcher

says:

“The Falkland
islanders are British citizens”
(she speaks of the Falklands, but for us they are
the Malvinas).
“If they can’t look to their own
country to protect them, what future is there for
anyone in this world’?“:::
219. Well, her country is the United Kingdom. But
how can they talk about the self-determination
of
these colonial employees, who are British citizens?
It is senseless. And how can they unleash a cruel, terrible war with tremendous loss of life and other consequences, simply because the United Kingdom wants
to have a group of its citizens on Argentine territory,
violating the sovereignty and territorial integrity and
independence of Argentina?

214. I believe that this is truly serious, particularly
now that a war of major proportions is going on in
connection with a colonial situation that is terribly
damaging to a fraternal Latin American country and
is seriously injuring relations in the hemisphere.

220. In connection with the United Nations resolutions. the Prime Minister says that there are many
United Nations resotutions which are not binding.
This is conveyed, moreover, in a manner which suggests that the United Nations is not worth all that
much to the United Kingdom and that is why these
acts of force are engaged in. She also says:

215. I am saying ail this because it is essential that
this message reach Washington, reach the international
community; that the African countries, which are anticolonialist although they belong to the Commonwealth.
realize that we too are anti-colonialist,
even though
there may be a Queen or may be a commonwealth
or
may be a country that says it is more civilized than
we are. Very well. let them say that. But colonialism
has been proscribed by the United Nations, and OUI
Arab brothers must hear this, as weIl as our Asian
brothers and our Latin American brothers,

“You see. the fact is that (the) United Nations
resolution on its own won’t get those Argentine
soldiers off those islands. It ought to, but it won’t.
There aren’t many mandatory resolutions in the
Security Councit.“:i:
22 I.

Well, of course there are not. She also says:

“The trouble is that the United Nations has not
the power or authority to act to ensure that they
are adhered to. So, if we can’t get them off by
diplomatic means or by economic means. we’ll have
to get them off by military means.“:‘:

216. Lives are being lost. An entire system of
coexistence and friendship that existed in this hemisphere, in Latin America, is being sacrificed. The
United Kingdom and those countries that side with it
seem to consider that the peoples of Latin America
are second- or third-class peoples and that they can do
what they wish with our fate. But they are wrong.
Latin America has a mission. It is developing.
It is
progressing. It has its own place, one not based on
world affairs. We must recall men like Carlos Sanz
de Santamaria, Mayobre, Prebish, Felipe Herrera, who
in that famous Document of the Four said that Latin
Americans must organize and have their own institutions and unite again.

222. There are no resolutions of the United Nations
which are binding. Why? Because there is the right of
veto, and that is precisely the situation which we are
facing here. I am sure there are some countries that
say to themselves that they will not support a draft
resolution that is going to be vetoed by the United
Kingdom.
So that is inadmissible.
If there is a crisis
in the United Nations, let us face it; let us not deceive
ourselves. Are we going to carry out the responsibility
of the Council or not? If the veto is applied, then at
least there is a possibility
of going into a special
emergency session of the General Assembly. But let
us not confer on the United Kingdom this overwhelming authority which has gone beyond the superPowers. so that it can be the king and lord of the
Security Council. That would be truly inadmissible.

217. More. too, could be said about the things
Prime Minister Thatcher said, but I do not wish to
prolong this meeting. I should however like to stress
the seriousness of the situation and the terrible damage
that is being done to the United Nations system.
I should like to stress that this is truly a crisis in the
inter-American system and that there is a crisis also in
the relations among many peoples and nations that are
Members of the United Nations. We have to put out
cards on the table. Are we or are WC not against
colonialism’? Are United Nations resolutions
worth
anything?

223.

In conclusion,

I quote Mrs. Thatcher again:

‘*Unfortunately.
there arc far too few democracies
in the world . . .“:I:
:I: (luoted

20

in English

hy the spcnkw.

224. One of these is bound to be the United Kingdom.
“Too few”, she said. This applies not only to Latin
America but also to Africa, Asia, Europe, to all the
countries of the world. Well, democracy is a relative
concept. There are some professors here who can
explain it, but we know it is a very relative concept.
Mrs. Thatcher, asked why Ambassador Parsons had
returned, said:

not leave, there will be war.” And that is directed
not ..just against Argentina, but also against the United
Natmns, which in 1965 said to the United Kingdom:
you must sit down and negotiate the decolonization
of the islands. That showed that the British claim to
them was not valid.
229. Decolonization
was called for, but that does
not mean that the formula presented by the United
Kingdom has to be accepted, a formula that is part
of an ultimatum:
Argentina goes back to its territory
400 miles from the Malvinas;
the British fleet goes
1.50 miles away. This-150
miles-is
absurd, because
when the Argentines leave, then the fleet could return
again and the Argentine troops obviously could not
cover the 400 miles in time to resist them. Reference
has been made here to good and bad faith, but we
cannot award a prize for good faith to the United Kingdom in this matter after 17 years of prolonged negotiations, or to any other colonial Power.

“And that’s why our Ambassador has gone back
to the United Nations this week. , . , to see if
we can persuade them to pull back. For people
like us, it’s difficult to see why they don’t pull
back . . . If they don’t decide to withdraw, then
I’m afraid we have to use force to get them out.“:‘:
22s.

And then the correspondent

asked:

“And so that’s the final message from our envoys
to the Argentinians at the United Nations’? Pull
back or face the consequences’?“‘”
And she said:
“Yes, that is the correct message.“:‘:
226. From the same source we learn that at a
meeting of NATO there was a lot of confusion concerning the problem of the Malvinas. Then we are
presented with this conflict. this terrible dilemma,
that pits the United Kingdom against its major ally,
which has to take sides with NATO, thus making the
Inter-American
Treaty of Reciprocal
Assistance
ineffective.
Rather striking words were used to
describe this, as members of NATO said that they
support the United Kingdom. that they know all about
what that country is doing and that this was an operation that was entirely supported by NATO. Why
should Latin America have to bow to these kinds of
actions?
227. I have said what I have said in order to bring
out the seriousness of the problems we are facing
and, at the same time, to underscore the extreme
gravity of the crisis. We, the spokesmen of our countries, are not insensitive. We cannot be indifferent
to the massacre that is going on in the South Atlantic,
on an Argentine insular territory. We must stop that
massacre.
.,
We must say to the United Kingdom,
“You must stop the hostilities. You cannot continue
attacking
the Argentine nation. You must bring
about a cease-fire. YOLI must pull back your forces”,
and when that occurs, give a mandate to the SecrctaryGeneral, not before then, because that would simply
be a farce.

in English

231. 1 conclude by saying that the situation is serious
and that the prestige of the Council is involved, especially the prestige and responsibility
of its permanent
members. We cannot ignore this situation and remain
indifferent to it.
232. The bloodshed will eventually
be a burden
on our own consclence.s-C ,md I do not mean that
rhetoricnlly.
It will be a burden on the conscience of
every country represented here if we fail to face up to
our responsibilities
and allow the crisis to continue
tg worsen and the prestige of the United Nations to
deteriorate.
There must be a categorical,
decent,
honourable action, showing respect for the humiliated
peoples of Latin America and Argentina.
233. The PRESIDENT
(intcll.l~rrtcrtit,n
,fio177
C'hi/~o.QJ): I shall now call upon those members of the
Council who wish to speak in exercise of their right
of reply.
234. Sir Anthony PARSONS
(United
Kingdom):
We have heard this morning a large number of stntements cxpresscd in more or less moderate language.
and I had for a long time been existing under the illusion that I might not have to speak at the end of the
debate in exercise of my right of reply, I regret very
much that I now feel obliged to do so. and I shall not
detain the Council long.

228. If one examines the thinking of the United
Kingdom as expressed in the words of the Prime Minister, one realizes that there are obsessive feelings
there. “If you want peace, you must leave. If you do
:/: Quoted

230. How can we allow the United Kingdom to say
that they will only agree to the Secretary-General’s
going to the Malvinas and establishing an administration with the help of civic legislative councils established by the United Kingdom? That is no true invitation, and it is not the kind of role that we should give
to the Secretary-General.
If there is going to be a
United Nations transition administration,
it has to be
an administration
to put an end to colonialism
in this
region.

by the speaker.

21

235. I shall not allow myself to be carried into the
realm of verbal pyrotechnics which the Foreign Minister of Panama has been inhabiting for the last half
hour or so. I should simply like to make two points.
236. First, I stand by every word that I have said
so far in this debate, both yesterday evening in exercise of my right of reply [ikid.] and the day before in
my main statement on behalf of my Government
[2360tk I77Wting 1.
237. Secondly, I welcome the wide publicity
which
the Foreign Minister of Panama has given to the views
of my Prime Minister. with which, I need hardly say,
I whole-heartedly agree. His presentation was selective and it was introduced by persona1 remarks which
were, to say the least, in poor taste. I should simply
like to choose two further selections, in conclusion,
from my Prime Minister’s statement to the House of
Commons last Thursday. They relate directly to the
negotiations which had been held under the aegis of
the Secretary-General. My Prime Minister said:

“The Government believes that they”--that
is to
say, our final proposals-“represent
a truly responsible effort to find a peaceful solution which both
preserves the fundamental principles of our position
and offers the opportunity to stop further loss of life
in the South Atlantic,”
At a later stage in her statement, she said the following:
“Although this interim agreement does not restore
things fully to what they were before the Argentinian
invasion, it is faithful to the fundamental principles

I outlined earlier [in my statementi. Had the Argcntinians accepted OLW proposals, we should have
achieved the great prize of preventing further loss of
life, It was with this in mind that we were prepared
to make practical changes that were reasonable but
we were not prepared to compromise
on principles.”
238. Mr. ILLUECA
(Panama) (it7tr~,‘pruJtr,tion .frunl
Sp(rni,sk): I should like to speak very briefly in exercise of my right of reply. I would not have done this
had it not been for the fact that the representative of
the United Kingdom
said that certain of my comments were in poor taste. So I would formally ask the
Council to clarify something which appears in the
records of the Council and which is in rather poor
taste. There are 15 members of the Security Council,
and in the Council’s records we find “Mister”
before
the name of each one except the representative of the
United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland. He-and
this is in very poor taste-appears
as “Sir Anthony Parsons”. I think it should simply’
be “Mr. Parsons”. In the United Nations, we do not
have any monarchical system: we do not have a system
of privileges and titles. I make this request formally.
